Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:
1.04         Code Adoption
1.08         General Provisions
1.12         General Penalty
1.16         Citation Procedure
1.20         Appeals Procedure
1.24         Administrative Code Enforcement Procedures

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

Chapter 1.04 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:
1.04.010     Short title.
1.04.020     Codification authority.
1.04.030     Effective date.
1.04.040     Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
1.04.050     Reference to specific ordinances.
1.04.060     Validity of code.
1.04.070     Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
1.04.080     Distribution of code.
1.04.090     Notation of amendments.
1.04.100     Printing amendments.

1.04.010 Short title.
This code shall be known as the “San Luis Obispo Municipal Code,” and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provisions thereof. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending or repealing the code, or portions thereof, as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of, the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code, or a portion thereof. (Prior code § 1100)

1.04.020 Codification authority.
This code consists of all of the regulatory and penal and of certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of San Luis Obispo, codified pursuant to the Government Code of the State of California. (Prior code § 1101)

1.04.030 Effective date.
This code takes effect upon the effective date of the ordinances of the council whereby this code is adopted by reference. (Prior code § 1102)

1.04.040 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of this city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.
The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinance provisions previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations, and not as new enactments. (Prior code § 1103)

1.04.050 Reference to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Prior code § 1104)

1.04.060 Validity of code.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have adopted this code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Prior code § 1105)

1.04.070 Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
All ordinances or portions of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this code are hereby repealed. (Prior code § 1106)

1.04.080 Distribution of code.
In accordance with the provisions of the Government Code of the state, not less than three copies of this code shall be filed for the use and examination of the public in the office of the city clerk. At least three copies, duly certified to by the city clerk, shall be permanently bound and maintained on file in his or her office. Additional copies shall be prepared in loose-leaf form and shall be mounted to withstand heavy usage in such binders as the city clerk may prescribe. Copies thereof shall be distributed to the departments and divisions of the city as shall be prescribed by the council. (Prior code § 1107)

1.04.090 Notation of amendments.
Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to the code, or upon the repeal of any of its provisions, the city clerk shall certify thereto and shall make an appropriate notation in the bound volumes of the code of the taking of such action, noting thereon the number of the ordinances pursuant to which such action is taken. Duly certified copies of every ordinance making changes in such code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed for ready reference. (Prior code § 1108)

1.04.100 Printing amendments.
The city clerk shall prepare printed copies of such changes in the code for insertion in the loose-leaf copies thereof and for distribution in accordance with the instructions of the council. Every section of the code so changed shall have printed thereon a notation of the ordinance number pursuant to which such change is adopted.
At least twice yearly, the city shall cause the loose-leaf pages of the code in which changes have been made to be reprinted, including the notation as to the ordinance number pursuant to which such change is adopted, in order that at least twice yearly the loose-leaf copies of such code prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the city and the general public may be brought up to date. (Prior code § 1109)

Chapter 1.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
1.08.010     Rules of construction—Interpretation of language.
1.08.020     Definitions.
1.08.030     Grammatical interpretation.
1.08.040     Title, chapter and section headings.
1.08.050     Reference to acts or omissions within this city.
1.08.060     Prohibited acts include causing, permitting or suffering.
1.08.070     Acts by deputy.
1.08.080     Title of office.
1.08.090     Reference applies to amendments.
1.08.100     Notices—Service.
1.08.110     Notices—Proof of giving.
1.08.120     Legal, equitable and summary remedies retained.
1.08.130     Criminal and civil liabilities enforcement.
1.08.140     Procedures for filing claims for refunds.
1.08.150     Payment of taxes prior to refund or judicial relief.

1.08.010 Rules of construction—Interpretation of language.
Unless the provisions of the context otherwise require, the general provisions, rules of construction and definitions set out in this chapter shall govern the construction of this code. The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. (Prior code § 1300)

1.08.020 Definitions.
The following words shall have the following meanings:
A. “City” means the city of San Luis Obispo, California.
B. “Council” means the council of the city of San Luis Obispo, California.
C. “County” means the county of San Luis Obispo.
D. “Goods” means and includes wares or merchandise.
E. “Health officer,” “health department,” “city health officer” or “city health department” means and includes the health department of the county of San Luis Obispo, the county health officer and representatives and deputies of the county health department.
F. “Oath” means and includes affirmation.
G. “Operate” means and includes carry-on, keep, conduct or maintain.
H. “Owner” applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant, of the whole or a part of such building or land.
I. “Person” means and includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, company or corporation.
J. “Sale” means and includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.
K. “State” means the state of California.
L. “Street” means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, sidewalks, parkways, curbs or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.
M. “Tenant” or “occupant” applied to a building or land means and includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
N. “Writing” means and includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise. (Prior code §§ 1305, 1313 – 1317, 1319, 1321 – 1326 and 1329)

1.08.030 Grammatical interpretation.
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:
A. Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
B. Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
C. “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.
D. Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the present. (Prior code §§ 1309 – 1312)

1.08.040 Title, chapter and section headings.
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Prior code § 1301)

1.08.050 Reference to acts or omissions within this city.
This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. (Prior code § 1302)

1.08.060 Prohibited acts include causing, permitting or suffering.
Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing such act or omission. (Prior code § 1303)

1.08.070 Acts by deputy.
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer, or employee, the power may be exercised, or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. (Prior code § 1304)

1.08.080 Title of office.
The use of the title of any officer, employee, office or ordinance shall mean such officer, employee, office or ordinance of the city of San Luis Obispo. (Prior code § 1318)

1.08.090 Reference applies to amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinance of this city, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. (Prior code § 1306)

1.08.100 Notices—Service.
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States Mail, in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his or her last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. (Prior code § 1307)

1.08.110 Notices—Proof of giving.
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city, or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen years, which shows service in conformity with this code, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. (Prior code § 1308)

1.08.120 Legal, equitable and summary remedies retained.
Nothing contained in this code shall be deemed to bar any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to which the city or other political subdivision, or any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or copartnership, may otherwise be entitled. (Prior code § 1327)

1.08.130 Criminal and civil liabilities enforcement.
All criminal and all civil liabilities arising under the terms of this code may be enforced either separately or concurrently. The conviction and punishment of any person for violation of the terms of this code shall not in any manner preclude the institution or maintenance of civil proceedings for the enforcement of the provisions of this code or the abatement of the nuisance herein declared. (Prior code § 1328)

1.08.140 Procedures for filing claims for refunds.
A. Authority. These procedures are enacted pursuant to Section 935 of the California Government Code.
B. Claims Required. All claims against the city for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Government Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this section, “claims”) shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this section.
C. Form of Claim. All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910.
D. Refunds. All refunds shall be limited to one year from receipt of written claim.
E. Claim Prerequisite to Suit. In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the city prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of subsection (B) of this section.
F. Suit. Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940—949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the city shall conform with the requirements of Sections 950—951 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 1499 § 1, 2006)

1.08.150 Payment of taxes prior to refund or judicial relief.
No legal or equitable process shall be issued in any proceeding in any court against the city or any officer to prevent or enjoin the collection of any tax. After payment of a tax claimed to be illegal, not due and/or owing, and/or incorrectly calculated, an action may be maintained to recover the tax paid; provided, that prior to any judicial action all administrative remedies shall be exhausted. (Ord. 1549 § 1, 2010)

Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY

Sections:
1.12.010     Violations prohibited.
1.12.020     Violations as misdemeanors or infractions.
1.12.030     Punishment for misdemeanor.
1.12.040     Punishment for infraction.
1.12.050     Nature of violations.
1.12.060     Designation of infractions.
1.12.070     Public nuisances.
1.12.080     Continuing violations.
1.12.090     Alternate civil remedies.
1.12.095     Civil penalty.
1.12.100     Prohibited acts.
1.12.110     Determination of punishment.
1.12.120     Fees, charges, licenses and taxes made a civil debt.
1.12.130     Liability for attorneys’ fees.

1.12.010 Violations prohibited.
No person shall violate, or fail to comply with, any provision or requirement of this code. (Prior code § 1200)

1.12.020 Violations as misdemeanors or infractions.
The violation of any provision of this code, of any ordinance of the city, or of any code adopted by reference in this code, by any person is unlawful, and is punishable either by fine as an infraction, or by fine or imprisonment, or both, as a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 1201)

1.12.030 Punishment for misdemeanor.
Any person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not exceeding one year, or by both such fine or imprisonment. (Prior code § 1202)

1.12.040 Punishment for infraction.
Any person convicted of an infraction shall be punishable for a first conviction by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars; for a second conviction within a period of one year, by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars; and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars. (Ord. 1166 § 1, 1990: prior code § 1203)

1.12.050 Nature of violations.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision or requirement of this code, any ordinance adopted by the city, or any code adopted by reference by this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless such provision is specifically designated as constituting an infraction as provided in Sections 16, 17, and 19.8 of the Penal Code of the state, Section 36900 of the Government Code of the state, or Section 40000.1 of the Vehicle Code of the state, and as expressly specified in Section 1.12.060 of this chapter.
Any provision or requirement of this code designated as an infraction shall be prosecutable as a misdemeanor upon a third violation and each violation thereafter of the same provision by the same individual. In addition, any such provision or requirement may be prosecuted originally as a misdemeanor in the discretion of the city attorney upon a showing by the enforcing agency of the seriousness of the particular alleged violation. (Ord. 1484 § 2, 2005: prior code § 1204)

1.12.060 Designation of infractions.
A. Wherever this code so specifies, a violation of this code shall constitute an infraction rather than a misdemeanor.
B. In addition, a violation of any of the following provisions shall constitute an infraction, and not a misdemeanor:
Chapters 3.04 and 3.08 – Tax Procedure;
Chapters 10.04 to 10.76 and 10.84 – Traffic Regulations;
Title 6 – Animal Regulations;
Chapter 12.24 – Tree Regulations;
Chapter 3.01 – Business Tax;
Chapter 3.12 – Uniform Sales and Use Tax;
Chapters 12.04 to 12.16 – Street Excavations;
Chapter 13.04 – Public Utilities and Rates;
Chapter 12.20 – Park Regulations;
Chapter 12.22 – Open Space Regulations. (Ord. 1484 § 3 (part), 2005; Ord. 1410 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1202 § 22, 1991; Ord. 1159 § 1, 1990: prior code § 1205)

1.12.070 Public nuisances.
In addition to other penalties provided by law, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such by the city, and each day such condition continues shall constitute a new and separate offense. (Prior code § 1206)

1.12.080 Continuing violations.
It shall constitute a new and separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision or requirement of this code is committed, continued or permitted by any person and shall be punished accordingly. (Prior code § 1207)

1.12.090 Alternate civil remedies.
In addition to the penal provisions provided in this chapter, and completely separate therefrom and cumulative thereto at the sole discretion of the city, the city may institute appropriate civil actions or proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the abatement, removal and enjoinment of any condition or activity declared by this code to be a public nuisance or found and declared by the council to be a public nuisance after a duly noticed hearing. (Prior code § 1208)

1.12.095 Civil penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this code may be liable to the city for a civil penalty not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars for each day or part thereof that said violation occurs. The city attorney is authorized to bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover such civil penalties for the city. (Ord. 1424 § 1, 2002)

1.12.100 Prohibited acts.
Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Prior code § 1209)

1.12.110 Determination of punishment.
Whenever in this code the punishment for a crime is left undetermined between certain limits, the punishment to be inflicted in a particular case shall be determined by the court to pass sentence, within such limits as may be prescribed by this code. (Prior code § 1210)

1.12.120 Fees, charges, licenses and taxes made a civil debt.
The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license or tax of any nature whatsoever, imposed by any provision of this code, shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license or tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this code. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this code or by law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions thereof. (Prior code § 1211)

1.12.130 Liability for attorneys’ fees.
The prevailing party in any civil action or administrative proceeding filed to abate a public nuisance and violation of any provision of this code may recover its attorneys’ fees. The recovery of attorneys’ fees by a prevailing party is limited to only those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. In no action shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. (Ord. 1425 § 1, 2002)

Chapter 1.16 CITATION PROCEDURE

Sections:
1.16.010     Notice to appear.
1.16.020     Bail—Deposit and forfeiture.
1.16.030     Warrant issuance—When.
1.16.040     Violation of written promise to appear—Deemed misdemeanor.
1.16.050     Violation of written promise to appear—Warrant issuance when.
1.16.060     Code enforcement officer designation authority.

1.16.010 Notice to appear.
If any person is arrested for the violation of any ordinance of the city as set forth in this code, and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate, as is more fully set forth in the Penal Code of the state, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate, a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged and the time and place when such person shall appear in court.
A. Time. The time specified in the notice to appear shall be not less than ten days after such arrest, or thirty days if filed with the city attorney.
B. Place. The place specified in the notice to appear shall be either the court of the magistrate before whom the person would be taken if the requirement of taking an arrested person before a magistrate were complied with, or an officer authorized by such court to receive a deposit of bail.
C. Written Promise. The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person and the arrested person, in order to secure a release, must give his or her written promise so to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice, which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. (Ord. 957 § 1, 1983: prior code § 1250)

1.16.020 Bail—Deposit and forfeiture.
The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file a duplicate notice with the magistrate or city attorney, as specified in such notice. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he or she promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail set by such magistrate. Therefore, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant does not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and may at his or her discretion order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the city treasury. (Ord. 957 § 2, 1983: prior code § 1251)

1.16.030 Warrant issuance—When.
A warrant shall not be issued on such charge for the arrest of a person who pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has given such written promise to appear in court, unless and until he or she has violated such promise, or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgement, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment as required by law. (Prior code § 1252)

1.16.040 Violation of written promise to appear—Deemed misdemeanor.
Every person wilfully violating his or her written promise to appear is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested and shall be punishable in accordance with Section 1.12.020. (Prior code § 1253)

1.16.050 Violation of written promise to appear—Warrant issuance when.
When a person who signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear has not posted bail as provided in Section 1.16.020, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his or her arrest within twenty days after his or her failure to appear as promised. If a person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he or she promised to appear, then within twenty days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense, such magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his or her arrest. When such person violates his or her promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. (Prior code § 1254)

1.16.060 Code enforcement officer designation authority.
The city administrative officer is empowered to designate public officers or employees of the city to exercise the powers authorized by Section 836.5(a) of the California Penal Code, including the issuance of citations for violation of the provisions of the municipal code pursuant to Sections 853.5 and 853.6 of the California Penal Code. The zoning enforcement officer and the chief building official shall be two of those employees so authorized. (Prior code § 1255)

Chapter 1.20 APPEALS PROCEDURE

Sections:
1.20.010     Title.
1.20.020     Right to appeal.
1.20.030     Time within which to file an appeal.
1.20.040     Hearing—Notice.
1.20.050     Hearing—Appellant to show cause—Council’s determination final.
1.20.060     Prompt judicial review.

1.20.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Appeals Procedure” for the city. (Prior code § 1400)

1.20.020 Right to appeal.
A. Except where an appeals procedure is otherwise specifically set forth in this code, any person objecting to the approval, denial, suspension or revocation of a license, permit or entitlement of any nature, the determination or issuance of which is under any of the provisions of this code, or to any administrative decision made by any city official, if the approval, denial, suspension or revocation of such license, permit or entitlement or the determination of such administrative decision involves the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised under any of the provisions of this code, may appeal in writing to the council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of such appeal, stating the specific grounds for the appeal.
B. No appeal may be taken to any such administrative decision made by a city official under the provisions of this chapter unless such decision to appeal has been first taken up with the department head concerned, and where an appeals board is empowered to consider interpretation and enforcement questions, unless such decision to appeal has been considered by such appeals board.
C. No right of appeal to the council from any administrative decision made by a city official under any of the provisions of this code shall exist when such decision is ministerial and thus does not involve the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised under any of the provisions of this code, whether the administrative decision involves the approval, denial, suspension or revocation of a license, permit, entitlement or any other administrative decision.
D. No right of appeal to the council from any administrative decision made by a city official under the provisions of Chapter 1.24 relating to administrative citations and review of administrative citations shall exist. (Ord. 1625 § 2, 2015; Ord. 1044 § 1, 1985: prior code § 1401)

1.20.030 Time within which to file an appeal.
The appellant shall file a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten calendar days after the date upon which the administrative decision appealed from is made. In the event the last day of the filing period falls on a nonbusiness day, the appeal period shall be extended to include the next business day, and this rule shall apply whenever an appeal procedure is specifically set forth elsewhere in this code. (Prior code § 1402)

1.20.040 Hearing—Notice.
Upon receipt of the filing of the notice of appeal in its proper form, the city clerk shall place the matter on the council agenda. Except in cases of emergency, when the council may determine the matter immediately, or where state law prescribes a different appeal process, the clerk shall set the matter for hearing at the next reasonably available council meeting, but in no event later than forty-five calendar days after the date of the filing of such notice of appeal with the city clerk. The city clerk shall cause written notice of such hearing to be given to the applicant not less than five business days prior to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the applicant. (Ord. 1252 § 1, 1994: prior code § 1403)

1.20.050 Hearing—Appellant to show cause—Council’s determination final.
At such hearing the appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why the action appealed from should not be approved. The council may continue the hearing from time to time, and its findings on the appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter. (Prior code § 1404)

1.20.060 Prompt judicial review.
Any interested party may seek judicial review of a final city decision regarding the issuance, revocation, suspension, or denial of a permit or license for an activity protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution in accordance with the terms and procedures provided by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 1415 § 1, 2002)

Chapter 1.24 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES

Sections:
1.24.010     Purpose—Adoption of civil administrative fines and administrative guidelines and appeal procedures.
1.24.020     Applicability.
1.24.030     Definitions.
1.24.040     Maintaining public nuisances prohibited.
1.24.050     Abatement of unlawful conditions—Notice.
1.24.060     Extensions of time.
1.24.070     Amount of civil fines.
1.24.080     Manner of payment—Civil fines.
1.24.090     Director review of notices—Consolidation with other enforcement matter.
1.24.100     Appeal of administrative citations.
1.24.110     Hearing procedures for appeals of administrative citations.
1.24.120     Decision by hearing officer.
1.24.130     Decision by administrative review board or construction board of appeals.
1.24.140     No appeal to city council—Right to judicial review.
1.24.150     Collection of unpaid fines.
1.24.160     Issuance and recordation of notices of violation.
1.24.170     Procedures for recordation.
1.24.180     Service of recorded notice of violation.
1.24.190     Notice of compliance—Procedures.
1.24.200     Prohibition against issuance of permits.

1.24.010 Purpose—Adoption of civil administrative fines and administrative guidelines and appeal procedures.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to enable the city, acting as a charter city pursuant to Article XI, Sections 5 and 7 of the State Constitution, to impose and collect civil administrative fines in conjunction with the enforcement of provisions of this code. Notwithstanding the provisions herein, the city has and shall continue to employ the philosophy of voluntary compliance when seeking compliance with this code as may be required by law.
B. Administrative Guidelines Approved by the City Council. The city shall prepare, promulgate, and update, as necessary, administrative citation and appeals guidelines which shall, among other things, establish policies for providing appropriate and adequate warnings with respect to possible municipal code violations to those persons who may receive an administrative citation, to provide direction to city staff for the correct process of issuing an administrative citation, and to establish the proper format of the administrative citation, and for service of that administrative citation in a manner consistent with the requirements of this chapter, due process and any other applicable law (hereinafter referred to as the “administrative citation guidelines”). Such administrative citation guidelines shall be expressly approved by a resolution of the city council prior to their adoption.
C. Effect on Title 15 Violations. The hearing requirements and procedures set forth in this chapter, as they relate to the administrative review of administrative citations, shall supersede any conflicting provisions within the municipal code or any of the codes adopted by Section 15.02.010 and amended by Section 15.04.010 and following. (Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.020 Applicability.
A. Enforcement of the Municipal Code. This chapter makes any violation of the provisions of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code, including but not limited to all construction, fire safety and property maintenance codes adopted by reference and as amended pursuant to Title 15, subject to administrative fines.
B. Administrative Authority. This chapter establishes the procedures for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and review of civil administrative fines pursuant to State Government Code Section 53069.4 and pursuant to the city’s plenary police powers as a charter city.
C. Remedies Not Exclusive. The use of the administrative enforcement remedies provided by this chapter is solely at the city’s discretion. By adopting this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its discretion to choose the use of any other remedy, civil or criminal, or other administrative procedures, for the abatement of such violations that the city may select in a particular case, including procedures for the imposition of civil or criminal penalties.
D. Strict Liability of the Owner. Because serious code violations may impact public health, welfare, and safety and the adequacy and safety of housing, this chapter is intended to impose strict civil liability upon the owners of real property (or the owner of a business where the violation is caused by or relates to the operation of a business) for all violations of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code which may occur in the city of San Luis Obispo regardless of the existence of specific or general intent or prior knowledge of such violations and, further, regardless of any intent (or lack thereof) to violate the code. (Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.030 Definitions.
The following definitions apply to the use of these terms for the purposes of this chapter:
A. Administrative Citation. Document issued by the director levying or assessing a civil fine as set by city council resolution as a penalty for a code violation.
B. Administrative Review Board. Adjudicatory body appointed by the city council responsible for conducting administrative hearings of appeals of administrative citations issued for municipal code violations, excluding those issued for violations of Title 15 and for non-Title 15 violations issued in conjunction with a citation for a Title 15 violation, where the decision may be challenged by writ to the superior court. Members of this board may serve simultaneously on another advisory body pursuant to San Luis Obispo Council Policies and Procedures Section 6.7.2.5.
C. Code Violation. Any violation of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code or any code adopted by reference therein.
D. Construction Board of Appeals. Adjudicatory body appointed by city council responsible for conducting administrative review of appeals of administrative citations issued for all violations of Title 15, as well as appeals of administrative citations for non-Title 15 code violations issued in conjunction with the Title 15 violation(s).
E. Director. The city manager or department head, or his or her designee, responsible for enforcing the municipal code with respect to his or her department on behalf of the city.
F. Effective Date of Administrative Citation. The date specified in the administrative citation as the effective date. Generally the effective date will be the date the administrative citation is issued. However, for code violations of building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning regulations that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the effective date will be as specified in the notice to correct, which date shall not be less than ten days after the notice to correct or notice of violation is issued.
G. Fine Payment Due Date. The date the administrative citation fine is due. It shall be at least ten days after the effective date of the administrative citation.
H. Hearing Officer. The person appointed by the city attorney, or his or her designee, to serve as the hearing officer for conducting administrative hearings of appeals of administrative citations issued for municipal code violations, excepting those issued for violations of Title 15 and for non-Title 15 violations issued in conjunction with a citation for a Title 15 violation, where the decision may be appealed directly to the superior court pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4 for a de novo hearing.
I. Issued. Giving, mailing, personally serving or posting a notice to correct, notice of violation and/or an administrative citation to a person. The notice or administrative citation shall be deemed issued on the earliest of the date on which the notice and/or administrative citation is personally served on a person, the date it is mailed to a person by posting in the regular United States mail, or the date it is physically posted on real property where a property related code violation is occurring. If the property is physically posted, notice shall also be given by mail as soon as possible.
J. Notice to Correct. A notice of code violation that pertains to continuing building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning violations that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety. The notice to correct usually serves as a courtesy notice and opportunity to correct or consult with staff regarding the alleged code violation, and does not serve as a final order, decision or determination made by the chief building official or fire official. The notice to correct may be served concurrently with a notice of violation and/or administrative citation; provided, the administrative citation shall have an effective date at least ten days after the date the notice to correct is issued.
K. Notice of Violation. A written notice issued to a person(s) advising them that they are in violation of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code with respect to certain real property or the operation of a certain business, or individual behavior, which is served concurrently with an administrative citation assessing a civil fine as set by city council resolution as a penalty for a municipal code violation. Subsequent notices regarding the same type of violation, within any twelve-month period, may be cause for imposing additional administrative fines without warning. The notice of violation must be issued at least ten days prior to the effective date of an administrative citation if it pertains to building, plumbing, electrical, structural, zoning, storm water or other violation that does not create an immediate danger to health or safety.
L. Person. Any of the following:
    1. An individual who causes a code violation to occur.
    2. An individual who maintains or allows a code violation to continue, by his or her action or failure to act in a lawful manner.
    3. An individual whose agent, employee, or independent contractor causes a code violation by its action or failure to act in a lawful manner.
    4. An individual who is an owner of real property where a property related code violation occurs.
    5. An individual who is an owner of a business or who is the on-site manager of a business and who normally works at the site when the business is open and is responsible for the activities at such premises. For purposes of this subsection, “person” includes a natural person or a legal entity including, but not limited to, the owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustees, and general partners of a legal entity. There shall be a legally rebuttable presumption that the record owner of a parcel as listed on the county’s latest equalized property tax assessment rolls is the person responsible for a code violation on such parcel. In addition, where applicable, a commercial lessee, sublessee, or operator of a business on a parcel shall be presumed responsible for code violations relating to the operation of the business (for example, sign ordinance violations) on that parcel.
    6. An individual who is an owner of real property where a violation of the city’s noise or unruly gathering ordinance(s) occurs after notification of a previous violation, in accordance with Chapters 9.12 and 9.13. (Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.040 Maintaining public nuisances prohibited.
Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Section 38771 and Sections 1.12.070 and 1.12.080, any continuing violation of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code constitutes a public nuisance. Therefore, any person owning or having possession of any real property in the city of San Luis Obispo who is in violation of any provision of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code may be determined to be maintaining a public nuisance; provided, however, that it shall not be the intent of the city that this chapter preempt any private nuisance right of action or any and all other legal remedies available to private parties to abate such nuisances. (Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.050 Abatement of unlawful conditions—Notice.
A. Inspections. Whenever city staff has inspected a property and finds that conditions constituting a violation of the municipal code exist thereon, the director may use the procedures set forth in this chapter to abate such nuisance as authorized by law.
B. Notice of Violation and Administrative Citation Issuance. The director may issue a notice of violation, notice to correct and/or administrative citation for a violation to any person or persons if the director has determined, through investigation, a violation exists. A person to whom an administrative citation is issued shall be liable for and shall pay to the city the administrative fine or fines described in the citation when due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
C. Development Review Conditions. Every person who applies for and receives a permit, license, or any type of land use approval (such as, but not limited to, a development review approval, a subdivision map approval, a conditional or special use permit, a zoning requirement modification, a variance, or other discretionary approval) shall comply with all mandatory approval conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit, license, or other such approval. If a person violates any condition of such permit, license, or similar land use approval, that person may be issued a notice of violation, notice to correct, and/or administrative citation and may be held responsible for administrative fines under the provisions of this chapter.
D. Continuing Violations. Except as provided elsewhere in the municipal code, each day a violation of this code exists shall be a separate and distinct violation and may be subject to a separate administrative fine. Certain provisions of this code, including but not limited to those relating to noise and unruly gatherings, provide that each hour that a violation exists shall be a separate and distinct violation. An administrative citation may charge a violation for one or more days or hours, as applicable, on which a violation exists and for violation of one or more applicable code sections.
E. Prior and Repeat Violations. The city may take into consideration the fact that a person has been previously issued an uncorrected notice of violation and/or a sustained administrative citation when the city is determining whether to accept an application or to grant any permit, license or any similar type of land use approval for that person and such notice of violation and/or administrative citation may be used as evidence that the person has committed acts that are not compatible with the health, safety, and general welfare of other persons and businesses within the city. Repeated violations by the same person or the same property of the same code provision within any twelve-month period may result in the issuance of an administrative citation(s) imposing additional administrative fines without a notice of violation and/or notice to correct preceding the citation.
F. Contents of Notice of Violation, Notice to Correct and/or Administrative Citation. The director shall generally issue a notice of violation, notice to correct and/or administrative citation to person(s) responsible for a code violation as set forth in Section 1.24.030(L). The administrative citation guidelines as approved by the city council pursuant to Section 1.24.010 shall, among other things, identify those items of information which must be contained in the notice of violation and/or administrative citation issued to persons and alleging a violation of the municipal code, but must, at a minimum, inform the responsible person of the nature of the violation charged, any right to correct the violation, and/or the right to appeal any citation, as well as the process by which to verify to the city the correction of violation(s) and/or the process to appeal citations.
G. Service. The notice of violation, notice to correct and/or administrative citation and any amended notice of violation and/or administrative citation shall be served by mail or personal service or posted on the property where the code violation is occurring in the manner provided for in the approved administrative citation guidelines.
H. Proof of Service. Proof of personal service of the notice of violation and/or administrative citation shall be documented as provided for in the approved administrative citation guidelines. (Ord. 1648 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.060 Extensions of time.
The director may grant an extension of any fine due date and abatement deadline if the director determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate an imminent danger to the public health and safety. The director shall have the authority to place reasonable conditions on such an extension. (Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.070 Amount of civil fines.
A. Fine Schedule. The amount of fines for violating particular provisions of the code shall be set in a schedule of fines adopted by resolution by the city council. The schedule may include escalating fine amounts for repeat code violations occurring within specified periods of time.
B. Due Date for Fines. Fines are due as specified in the administrative citation or, in the event of an unsuccessful appeal, as determined by the hearing officer, administrative review board, or construction board of appeals.
C. Late Payment Charges. Any person who fails to pay to the city any fine imposed pursuant to this chapter on or before the date that fine is due also shall be liable for interest accrued at a rate of eight percent per month until paid. (Ord. 1648 § 2, 2018; Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.080 Manner of payment—Civil fines.
A. Paid by Mail. Fines shall be paid to the city on or before the due date. Payment shall be made by check or money order. The director, for purposes of convenience and ease of processing, may authorize payment to be made in accordance with any other method, including designating a location within the city for such payments.
B. Further Violations. Payment of an administrative fine shall not excuse the person from correcting the code violation. The issuance of an administrative citation or the payment of a fine does not preclude the city from taking any other enforcement or legal action regarding a code violation that is not corrected, including issuing additional administrative citations or the initiation of criminal or civil abatement proceedings. (Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.090 Director review of notices—Consolidation with other enforcement matter.
A. Within five days of issuance of a notice to correct/notice of violation for a continuing building, plumbing, electrical or other structural or zoning violation that does not create an immediate danger to health or safety, a person receiving such notice(s) and citation may request in writing that the director review a contested notice to correct and/or notice of violation. The director, or his or her designee, shall review all contested notices prior to the effective date of an administrative citation. The director shall have the authority to modify or rescind any contested notice that he or she finds was issued in error based on the code section noticed or other information provided by the noticed person. If the director does not modify or rescind any contested notice or fails to take any action by the effective date of the administrative citation, the notice and citation, and deadlines stated in each, remain in full force. There is no separate right to appeal from the director’s review or determination on a notice of correction or violation, but any assertions of error or challenges to the director’s review or determination may be raised as part of any appeal from an administrative citation pursuant to Section 1.24.100.
B. If an administrative citation is issued in conjunction with a related city enforcement action and the other action requires review by another advisory body (i.e., the planning commission) or city council, the city manager, or city manager’s designee, in his or her sole discretion, may consolidate review of the administrative citation with the review of the other related action(s), and refer review of all related matters to the body with jurisdiction over the violation requiring the highest level of review. (Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.100 Appeal of administrative citations.
A. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the action of the director in issuing an administrative citation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal such citation. To appeal an administrative citation, the appellant shall file a signed written appeal that must be received by the city clerk within ten days of the effective date of the administrative citation. The request for appeal shall be deemed filed on the date received by the city clerk. If no appeal is filed within ten days of the effective date of the administrative citation, the administrative citation shall be deemed final.
B. Appeal Process. 
    1. Title 15 Violations (Building, Plumbing, Housing, Fire Code, Etc.). For administrative citations for violations of Title 15 and all non-Title 15 violations issued in conjunction with violations of Title 15, the appeal shall be to the construction board of appeals, with a right to appeal either directly to the superior court pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4 or to petition for a writ to the superior court.
    2. Election of Appeal Process for Non-Title 15 Violations. For all other administrative citations not eligible for appeal to the construction board of appeals, an appellant may elect either of the following:
        a. Where an appellant does not wish to challenge the administrative citation or any final city action related to the citation in court by any writ action, an appellant may elect an expedited appeal process to a city hearing officer, whose final decision may be appealed directly to the superior court for de novo review pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4.
        b. Where an appellant wishes to challenge the administrative citation or any final city action related to the citation in court by any writ action, such appeal shall be made to the administrative review board to ensure preparation of an adequate administrative record. The decision of the hearing body may be appealed either directly to superior court for de novo review pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4 or the appellant may file a petition for a writ to the superior court. For purposes of writ review, the decision of the administrative review board shall be final and the completed appeal to the administrative review board shall satisfy administrative exhaustion requirements of the city.
        c. Only one appeal process may be chosen, and once chosen, the election is final.
C. Contents of Appeal. The written appeal shall state the following information:
    1. A caption setting forth the names, addresses, phone numbers and other contact information appellants wish city to have, of all appellants participating in the appeal.
    2. A brief statement setting forth the interest of each of the appellants, either as the recipient of the notice of violation and administrative citation, or the legal interest of each in the building or property that is the subject of the notice of violation and administrative citation.
    3. A brief statement describing: (a) the specific notice(s) of violation and administrative citation(s) appealed, by date of notice of violation and administrative citation, address of property cited or location where an individual was cited, and municipal code violations cited, (b) whether all or only specified code violations are being appealed, (c) why the appellant is appealing the notice of violation and administrative citation, and why the notice of violation and administrative citation should be revoked, modified or otherwise set aside.
    4. For non-Title 15 code violations, pursuant to subsection B of this section, a statement whether the appellant elects either to proceed with a hearing officer (if no writ will be sought) or to the administrative review board (if the appellant intends to challenge city action by writ).
    For Title 15 violations, and non-Title 15 violations issued in conjunction with a Title 15 violation, the appeal shall be scheduled by staff to be heard by the construction board of appeals.
    Failure to request hearing before the construction board of appeals or administrative review board within the time for the filing of an appeal will constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies for purposes of any subsequently filed writ action.
    5. A statement that all of the matters alleged in the appeal are true, followed by the signature(s) of each appellant(s), and one official mailing address for the appellant(s) to receive further notices from city relating to the appeal. (Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.110 Hearing procedures for appeals of administrative citations.
A. Applicable Hearing Officer or Board. In accordance with the procedures set forth below, after receipt of a timely filed appeal, the following shall hear the appeal:
    1. For appeals of administrative citations issued for violations of Title 15, and non-Title 15 violations issued in conjunction with a Title 15 violation, the construction board of appeals shall hear the appeal.
    2. For appeals of administrative citations outside the jurisdiction of the construction board of appeals in subsection (A)(1) of this section, where the person elects to have the right of appeal for a de novo hearing in the superior court under Government Code Section 53069.4, the hearing officer shall hear the appeal. The hearing officer shall be the person designated by the city attorney to serve as the hearing officer.
    3. For appeals of administrative citations outside the jurisdiction of the construction board of appeals in subsection (A)(1) of this section, where the appellant may wish to challenge city action by writ, and timely elects to appeal to the administrative review board, the administrative review board shall hear the appeal.
    4. For appeals of administrative citations outside the jurisdiction of the construction board of appeals in subsection (A)(1) of this section, if the person fails to elect an appeal process for non-Title 15 violations, the hearing officer shall hear the appeal.
B. Time and Place of Hearings—Challenge of Hearing Officer and Board Member for Cause. Hearings shall be conducted by a hearing officer, the administrative review board or construction board of appeals, as applicable, on the date, time and place specified in writing by the city and delivered to the appellant in a hearing notice. Such date shall not be less than ten days or more than sixty days from the date the appeal was filed with the city clerk.
In the hearing notice, the city shall identify the hearing officer or members of the administrative review board or construction board of appeals hearing the appeal. An appellant may challenge a hearing officer or member(s) of the administrative review board or construction board of appeals from hearing their appeal, but only for good cause, and the reasons shall be specified in writing received by the director within ten days after the date of mailing of the notice. The fact that a hearing officer or member of the administrative review board or construction board of appeals has conducted a previous appeal hearing involving the person shall not constitute good cause. The director shall notify the challenged hearing officer or member(s) of the applicable board and give the challenged officer the opportunity to disqualify himself or herself. If he or she chooses not to disqualify, he or she shall do so in writing documenting the reasons why disqualification is not required. The appellant shall be notified of the challenged officer’s decision, and the hearing shall proceed as scheduled. The person’s challenge and the decision not to disqualify shall become part of the administrative record. If the hearing officer disqualifies himself or herself, the city attorney shall appoint another hearing officer. If a member or members of a board disqualifies(y) himself or herself, the hearing shall proceed with the remaining member(s) and a hearing officer(s) appointed by the city attorney to replace each disqualified member.
C. Appeal of Records. The director shall ensure that the administrative citation and any supporting documentation are delivered to the applicable hearing officer or board in sufficient time prior to the appeal hearing.
D. Presentation of Evidence. The appellant shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence relevant to the code violation specified in the administrative citation.
E. Use of Reports as Evidence. The administrative citation and any documents, exhibits, reports or other materials prepared by city staff or by the director concerning a code violation or an attempted correction of a code violation that are provided to the applicable hearing officer or board shall be accepted by the hearing officer or board as prima facie evidence of the code violation and of the facts stated in such documents.
F. Witnesses—Additional Evidence—Submission of Written Evidence by Appellant Who Does Not Appear. Neither city staff nor any other representative of the city shall be required to attend the appeal hearing, nor shall the hearing officer nor applicable board require that there be submitted any evidence, other than the administrative citation and documentation relating to the citation that city relied on in issuing the citation, that may exist among the public records of the city with respect to the violation. However, any such appearance or submission may be made at the discretion of the director.
If the appellant has communicated that he or she does not intend to appear at the scheduled hearing, but submits written evidence to the hearing officer or board and the director at least ten days prior to the hearing, the hearing officer or board may consider that evidence. Any additional evidence prepared by city staff may also be considered by the hearing officer or board; provided, that it has been issued to the appellant, by certified mail, at least five days prior to the hearing.
G. Continuances. The applicable hearing officer or board may continue an appeal hearing if a request is made showing good cause by the appellant or the director. Except in case of medical or other emergency, all continuance requests shall be made by a written request received by the applicable hearing officer or board from the director or the appellant within five days of the date of the written notice advising of the time, date and place of hearing. If the continuance is granted, a new hearing date shall be set within thirty days. If the continuance is denied, the hearing shall proceed then and there as scheduled, and if the appellant is not present, and the appellant has not presented any written evidence pursuant to subsection F of this section, the request(s) shall be deemed abandoned in accordance with subsection J of this section.
H. Rules of Evidence. The appeal hearing shall be conducted informally and the legal or formal rules of evidence need not be followed.
I. No Subpoena Power. The hearing officer, the administrative review board and/or the construction board of appeals do not have the authority to issue a subpoena.
J. Failure to Appear. The failure of the appellant to appear at the hearing, unless the hearing was continued per subsection G of this section, or unless the appellant has submitted written evidence per subsection F of this section, shall constitute an abandonment of the appeal, and shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies concerning the violations set forth in the administrative citation.
K. Recordation of Board Hearings. The audio portion of every hearing before the construction board of appeals or the administrative review board shall be recorded. Any party to the hearing may, at their own expense, also record such hearings by court or other reporter or video recording, or other means, provided the recording method does not interfere with the conduct of the hearing. Any party recording the hearing by any means shall make a copy available to any other party upon request and payment of reasonable duplication cost.
L. Additional Hearing Procedural Requirements. Any additional procedural requirements for hearings may be specified in the administrative citation and appeals guidelines. (Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.120 Decision by hearing officer.
A. Decision by Hearing Officer. After considering all the evidence and testimony submitted at an appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision within ten business days to either uphold or revoke the administrative citation based upon a conclusion of whether the violation occurred. If an administrative citation charges two or more code violations, the hearing officer may uphold all violations, or uphold some violations but not all violations, or dismiss some or all violations. The hearing officer does not have the authority to reduce or modify a fine for a violation that is upheld on appeal. If a violation is not upheld, the administrative citation shall be revoked. The notice of decision shall be mailed by first class and certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the appellant or their designated representative. The failure by the appellant to appear at the appeal hearing shall be noted on the notice of decision by the hearing officer. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.
B. Payment of Fine After Appeal Decision. The filing of an appeal from a decision by the hearing officer shall suspend any fine assessed in the administrative citation. In the event that the administrative citation is revoked, no payment of the fine is due. In the event that the administrative citation is upheld, a new compliance deadline and fine due date shall be established by the hearing officer and indicated on the decision for the appeal, which shall not be less than ten days nor more than thirty days after the date the decision is mailed.
C. Effect of Revocation of Citation. Revocation of the administrative citation by the hearing officer shall void the administrative citation fine. (Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.130 Decision by administrative review board or construction board of appeals.
A. Decision by Board. After considering all the evidence and testimony submitted at an appeal hearing, the administrative review board or construction board of appeals, as applicable, shall issue a decision, as further described in the administrative citation and appeals guidelines, within thirty calendar days to either uphold or revoke the administrative citation based upon a conclusion of whether the violation occurred. A decision must be supported by a majority of the applicable board. A member shall not vote if he or she did not hear all the evidence or listen to or read the entire hearing record. If an administrative citation charges two or more code violations, the applicable board may uphold all violations, or uphold some violations but not all violations, or dismiss some or all violations. The written decision shall also summarize the evidence, and shall be supported by written findings of fact. The administrative review board and the construction board of appeals do not have the authority to reduce or modify a fine of a violation that is upheld on appeal. If a violation is not upheld, the administrative citation shall be revoked. The notice of decision shall be mailed by first class and certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the appellant or their designated representative. The failure by the appellant to appear at the appeal hearing shall be noted on the notice of decision. The decision of the administrative review board or construction board of appeals shall be final.
The written decision may be, but is not required to be, adopted by resolution and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
    1. Name of appellant;
    2. Date of administrative citation, municipal code violations charged, location of subject property (if applicable);
    3. Date, time, and place of appeal hearing, and the identity of board members;
    4. The names of all people participating in the hearing and their capacity, either as appellant, representative of appellant, witness for or against appellant, city staff or otherwise;
    5. A statement that the hearing was recorded, the method of recordation, and that recording is in the custody of the city clerk;
    6. A statement whether the appellant or designated representative was present or failed to appear;
    7. If no one appeared on behalf of appellant, a statement whether appellant submitted any written or other evidence;
    8. A statement that the board received the administrative citation and supporting information as prima facie evidence;
    9. A brief summary of all credible relevant testimony and the identity of the witness giving it;
    10. A list of all physical evidence, including, but not limited to photographs, maps, drawings, and documents;
    11. A statement whether the board upholds, revokes or modifies the administrative citation(s), as to each municipal code violation charged;
    12. A statement as to which oral or physical evidence the board found credible in support of the decision;
    13. If the decision upholds the administrative citation, in whole or in part, the decision shall specify the due date for payment of the fine, which shall not be less than ten days nor more than thirty days after the date the decision is mailed;
    14. The names and votes of members of the board, showing that a majority of the members of the board supported the decision;
    15. The signature of the chairman of the board or his or her designee, and the date of signature.
B. Payment of Fine After Appeal Decision. The filing of an appeal from a decision by the administrative review board or the construction board of appeals, or a petition for writ, shall suspend any fine assessed in the administrative citation. In the event that the administrative citation is revoked, no payment of the fine is due. In the event that the administrative citation is upheld, a new compliance deadline and fine due date shall be established by the applicable board and indicated on the notice of decision for the appeal.
C. Effect of Revocation of Citation. Revocation of the administrative citation by the administrative review board or construction board of appeals shall void the administrative citation fine. (Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.140 No appeal to city council—Right to judicial review.
A. Notice of Decision Is Final. The notice of the decision by either the hearing officer or administrative review board or construction board of appeals is final, and is not subject to appeal to the city council pursuant to Chapter 1.20.
B. Judicial Review After Any Hearing—Applicability of Government Code Section 53069.4. 
    1. The appellant may seek judicial review of any decision by the hearing officer or applicable board, by filing a further appeal with the San Luis Obispo superior court within twenty calendar days after service of the decision, in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 53069.4. The appeal filed with the court must also contain a proof of service showing a copy of the appeal was served upon the city clerk for the city of San Luis Obispo. The appellant must pay to the superior court the appropriate court filing fee when the appeal is filed. An appellant who elected to have the appeal heard by a hearing officer cannot seek judicial review by petition for writ.
    2. Failure to Exhaust Administrative Appeal. No appeal is permitted from a decision where the appellant is deemed to have abandoned the contest of the administrative citation by an unexcused failure to appear at the appeal hearing or by the failure to request an administrative appeal hearing before the hearing officer or applicable board.
    3. Forwarding of Records to Superior Court. The city attorney or the city attorney’s designee shall forward to the superior court within fifteen days of the court’s request the pertinent administrative citation documents for any case appealed to that court. If the superior court revokes any administrative citation, the city will refund to the appellant the superior court filing fee paid by the appellant.
C. Judicial Review After Hearing by Administrative Review Board or Construction Board of Appeals—Petition for Writ. 
    1. The appellant may seek judicial review of the administrative review board’s or construction board of appeals’ decision by filing a petition for writ with the San Luis Obispo superior court. The time within which the petition must be filed and the applicable requirements are governed by the California Code of Civil Procedure. The petition for writ filed with the court must also contain a proof of service showing a copy of the petition for writ was served upon the city clerk. The petitioner must pay to the superior court the appropriate court filing fee when the petition is filed.
    2. Failure to Exhaust Administrative Appeal. No petition for writ is permitted from a decision where the appellant is deemed to have abandoned the contest of the administrative citation by an unexcused failure to appear at the appeal hearing or by the failure to request an administrative appeal hearing before the administrative review board or construction board of appeals.
    3. Preparation of Administrative Record. Upon request of the superior court, and petitioner’s payment to city of the costs of preparing the administrative record, the city attorney or city attorney’s designee shall have the administrative record prepared and forwarded to the superior court. (Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.150 Collection of unpaid fines.
A. City Remedies. The city, at its discretion, may pursue any and all legal, equitable, and administrative remedies for the collection of unpaid civil administrative fines. A civil administrative fine shall be deemed unpaid the day after the due date set by the administrative citation, or if appealed, the day after the due date set by the hearing officer or applicable board in its decision. If the decision of the hearing officer or applicable board is appealed to, or petition for writ filed with, the superior court, the civil administrative fine shall be deemed unpaid the day after the due date set by the superior court. If the superior court upholds the administrative citation, but fails to set a due date, the fine shall be deemed unpaid on the eleventh day after the superior court decision is mailed.
    1. Remedies Cumulative. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies.
    2. Refusal to Issue Permits. A city department may refuse to accept an application for a city permit or license or refuse to issue, extend, or renew to any person who has unpaid delinquent fines, liens, or assessments any city permit, license, or other city approval pertaining to the property that is the subject of unpaid delinquent fines, liens or assessments.
    3. Suspension of Issued Permits. Notwithstanding any other provision of the code, any permit, license, or any type of land use approval issued by the city to a person who has unpaid administrative citations totaling five hundred dollars or more which remain delinquent for thirty days or longer may be suspended by the department which issued the permit or other entitlement. The suspension becomes effective ten days after the date the notice of the suspension is placed by the issuing department in the United States mail postage prepaid, addressed to the person, and continues until the administrative delinquency is paid in full. The person may request an appeal or review hearing pursuant to the specific permit, license, or other city approval procedures or ordinance if such a request is filed before the ten-day period ends.
    4. Criminal Remedies. The city attorney, at his or her discretion, may also issue a criminal citation or complaint (infraction or misdemeanor) to any person for a code violation.
B. Violations Constitute a Public Nuisance. The director may pursue the remedies described in this section whether or not the city is pursuing any other action to terminate an ongoing code violation that was the basis for an administrative citation or to otherwise abate the violation or sanction the property owner. To compel code compliance, the city may also seek to collect assessed fines by means of a nuisance abatement lien or special assessment against the property where a property related violation occurred in accordance with the procedures in Government Code Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5.
C. Lien Conditions. To recover any delinquent administrative fines as a lien or special assessment on real property, the following conditions must be met:
    1. The director must submit to and receive approval from the city council for a resolution certifying the amounts of the liens and special assessments sought to be collected from each property owner; and
    2. The total amount of the delinquent fine against the property owner must be delinquent for sixty days or more.
D. Lien Collections. The director is authorized to take any steps necessary to enforce collection of the lien or special assessment, including but not limited to the following:
    1. Request the county recorder to record a notice of any lien or special assessment certified by resolution of the city council.
    2. Request the county tax collector on behalf of the city to collect any special assessments certified by resolution of the city council.
E. Notice of Lien Collection Procedures. All administrative citations shall contain a notice that unpaid fines are subject to the assessment and lien collection procedures of this chapter. This notice shall satisfy the notice requirements of Government Code Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5 when an administrative citation is served on the person. In addition, the director shall by first class mail send notice to each property owner at least ten days before the city council considers the resolution to certify the amounts of the liens and special assessments stating the date, time, and location of the meeting. The lien or special assessment shall be imposed on the date the administrative citation for the code violation is issued to the responsible person and shall become effective upon the recording of a notice of lien or special assessment by the county recorder.
F. Contesting Certification of a Lien. A person may contest the amount or the validity of any lien or special assessment for a civil fine at the public hearing when the city council considers the resolution to certify the liens or assessments. Such contests shall be limited to the issue of the amount or validity of the lien or assessment and may not consider whether the underlying code violation occurred. Pursuit of such a contest by a person is necessary to exhaust the administrative remedies concerning a legal challenge to the validity of any such lien or special assessment. (Ord. 1625 § 1 (part), 2015)

1.24.160 Issuance and recordation of notices of violation.
This chapter shall govern the procedures relating to the recordation of administrative notices of violation. (Ord. 1648 § 3 (part), 2018)

1.24.170 Procedures for recordation.
A. Once the director has issued a notice of violation to a responsible person and the property remains in violation after the deadline established in the notice of violation, the director may record a notice of violation with the recorder’s office of San Luis Obispo County.
B. Before recordation, the director shall provide to the responsible person a letter of intent to record a notice of violation unless a written appeal is filed pursuant to the procedures outlined in this chapter. The letter shall be served pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in this chapter. The director may also send a courtesy copy of the letter to any financial institution with a legal interest in the real property.
C. If a written appeal is not filed pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter, the director may record the notice of violation if the violation has not been corrected.
D. The recorded notice of violation shall include the name of the property owner, the property’s assessor’s parcel number, the parcel’s legal description, and a copy of the notice of violation. (Ord. 1648 § 3 (part), 2018)

1.24.180 Service of recorded notice of violation.
A copy of the recorded notice of violation shall be served on the responsible person and property owner pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1648 § 3 (part), 2018)

1.24.190 Notice of compliance—Procedures.
A. After a notice of violation has been recorded, and after the violations listed on the notice of violation have been corrected, the responsible person or property owner may file with the director a written request for a reinspection of the property to determine compliance with the municipal code and applicable state codes listed in the recorded notice of violation, and for the issuance of a notice of compliance on a form provided by the city.
B. Once the director receives this request, the director shall reinspect the property to determine whether the violations listed in the notice of violation have been corrected and whether all necessary permits have been issued and final inspections have been performed.
C. The director shall serve a notice of compliance to the responsible person or property owner in the manner provided in this chapter if the director determines that:
    1. All violations listed in the recorded notice of violation have been corrected; and
    2. All necessary permits have been issued and finalized; and
    3. All civil penalties assessed against the property have been paid; and
    4. The party requesting the notice of compliance has paid an administrative fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for all administrative costs related to the request for a notice of compliance.
Upon finding that the conditions above have been satisfied, the director shall record the notice of compliance with the county recorder’s office. The recordation of the notice of compliance shall have the effect of canceling the recorded notice of violation.
D. If the director denies a request to issue a notice of compliance, the director shall serve the responsible person or property owner with a written explanation setting forth the reasons for the denial. The written explanation shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in this chapter.
E. The director’s decision denying a request to issue a notice of compliance shall be final and nonappealable. (Ord. 1648 § 3 (part), 2018)

1.24.200 Prohibition against issuance of permits.
Subject to the exception set forth herein, the city may withhold any permit for any alteration, repair or construction pertaining to any existing or new structures or signs on a property where a notice of violation is recorded, or any permits pertaining to the use and development of the real property or the structure. The city may thereafter withhold permits until a notice of compliance has been issued by the director. The city may not withhold permits which are necessary to obtain a notice of compliance or which are necessary to correct serious health and safety violations. (Ord. 1648 § 3 (part), 2018)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:
2.04         Council Meetings
2.08         Deputy City Clerk
2.12         Planning Commission
2.14         Revenue Enhancement Oversight Commission
2.16         Park and Recreation Commission
2.20         Mass Transportation Committee
2.24         Emergency Services
2.28         Eligibility for City Employment
2.30         Administrative Review Board
2.32         Retirement System
2.36         Personnel Rules and Regulations
2.40         Election Campaign Regulations
2.42         Mailed Ballot Elections
2.44         Development Impact Review Procedures
2.48         Architectural Review Commission
2.52         Repealed
2.56         Human Relations Commission
2.60         Peace Officer Standards and Training
2.64         Municipal Advocates

Chapter 2.04 COUNCIL MEETINGS

Sections:
2.04.010     Time—Place.
2.04.020     Special meetings—Notice requirements.

2.04.010 Time—Place.
The regular business meetings of the council shall be held at City Hall, 990 Palm Street, in the city, on the first and third Tuesday of each month at the hour of six p.m. or at such other time or date as may be designated on the agenda giving notice of the business meeting and posted at the same time and in the same manner as required by state law for regular meetings. Regular closed session meetings of the council shall be held at City Hall, 990 Palm Street, in the city, on the first and third Tuesday of each month at the hour of five p.m. or at such other time or date as may be designated on the same agenda giving notice of the business meeting. In the event that a regular meeting of the council falls on a legal holiday, then the regular meeting shall be held at the same place and time on the next succeeding working day. (Ord. 1623 § 1, 2015: Ord. 1601 § 1, 2014: Ord. 1580 § 1, 2012: Ord. 1573 § 1, 2012: prior code § 2100)

2.04.020 Special meetings—Notice requirements.
Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor or three or more council members. Notice requirements shall be as required by the California Government Code. (Ord. 959 § 1, 1983: prior code § 2100.1)

Chapter 2.08 DEPUTY CITY CLERK

Sections:
2.08.010     Office created.
2.08.020     Duties.

2.08.010 Office created.
There is created the office of deputy city clerk of the city. Such officer shall be appointed by the council shall hold office at the pleasure of the council, and shall receive such salary as may be determined by the council. (Prior code § 2320)

2.08.020 Duties.
The deputy city clerk shall perform such duties relating to the office of city clerk as may be assigned by the latter official. During the absence or disability of the city clerk the deputy clerk shall perform any and all duties required by law to be performed by the city clerk. (Prior code § 2320.1)

Chapter 2.12 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:
2.12.010     Created.
2.12.020     Membership.
2.12.030     Term of office.
2.12.040     Functions, powers and duties.

2.12.010 Created.
There is established the planning commission of the city. (Prior code § 2410)

2.12.020 Membership.
The planning commission shall consist of seven members. (Ord. 917 § 1, 1982: prior code § 2410.1)

2.12.030 Term of office.
A. Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of four years which shall commence immediately upon appointment by the council. Commissioners shall serve at the pleasure of the council and may be reappointed; provided, that no appointee shall serve more than two consecutive full terms (eight years). Appointment to a partial term of office following an unscheduled vacancy shall not preclude the appointee from serving two consecutive full terms following completion of a partial term, provided the partial term is less than two years. Commissioners who have served for four or more consecutive years at the time the ordinance codified in this section becomes effective shall be eligible for reappointment to not more than one additional term.
B. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms.
C. All of the procedures and requirements contained in the council adopted “Handbook for Advisory Bodies” shall be incorporated in this section by reference. (Ord. 1139 § 1, 1989: prior code § 2410.2)

2.12.040 Functions, powers and duties.
The planning commission’s basic responsibility is to make recommendations to the city council for the city’s development. To carry out this responsibility the commission will:
A. Prepare and recommend a general plan and appropriate attachments;
B. Prepare and recommend appropriate specific plans;
C. Review the city’s capital improvement program annually;
D. Perform authorized duties related to development review;
E. Perform such other duties required by the council or by state or city laws. (Prior code § 2410.3)

Chapter 2.14 REVENUE ENHANCEMENT OVERSIGHT COMMISSION

Sections:
2.14.010     Commission established and purpose.
2.14.020     Membership and appointment.
2.14.030     Term of office and compensation.
2.14.040     Powers and duties.

2.14.010 Commission established and purpose.
The revenue enhancement oversight commission (REOC) is hereby established to review, report, and make recommendations regarding the use of revenues collected through the city’s voter-approved general purpose, half-percent sales tax authorized by Chapter 3.15. The REOC is authorized to review these tax revenues and expenditures, report on the city’s stewardship of this general purpose tax, and provide recommendations directly to the city council regarding expenditures of these tax revenues as an integral part of the budget process. The establishment of the REOC shall be effective upon voter approval of a revenue enhancement measure to be proposed in November 2014 and shall continue in existence as long as Chapter 3.15, adopted by such measure, is in effect. (Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2014)

2.14.020 Membership and appointment.
The REOC shall consist of five members who are residents of the city. Members shall be appointed by the whole city council through a public application and appointment process. When recruiting members, the city will seek members that have experience with finance, budgeting, or municipal accounting. (Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2014)

2.14.030 Term of office and compensation.
A. Terms. Of the members first appointed, three shall be appointed for the term of three years, and two shall be appointed for two-year terms. Subsequent appointments to the REOC shall be for three years. Vacancies during the term shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired portion of the term. Members may be removed by the city council with or without cause by a majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2015: Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2014)

2.14.040 Powers and duties.
The REOC shall meet a minimum of four times per year to perform its duties, as follows:
A. Generally. The REOC shall have the authority to conduct public hearings as directed by the city council or city policy. The REOC shall exercise the duties conferred upon it by this chapter, and as necessary to achieve its purpose.
B. Annual Community Report. The REOC shall conduct a public hearing annually to review and take public testimony on the essential services measure annual report.
C. Annual Audit. The REOC shall meet annually to review the audited financial statements contained in the comprehensive annual financial report for the essential services measure.
D. Annual Citizen Oversight Meeting. The REOC shall hold an annual essential services measure community forum for the purpose of taking input from residents and community members on preferences for the use of the revenues generated by the essential services tax.
E. Budget Recommendations. The REOC shall meet for the purpose of making recommendations to the city council regarding the uses of revenue generated by the essential services measure. The REOC shall take into consideration the input provided by residents and community members during the annual citizen oversight meeting, the purpose of the essential services measure, the major city goals established by the city council, and the amount of revenue available from past fiscal years, and projected to be available during the next fiscal year, in making its budget recommendations to the council.
F. Outreach and Education. The REOC shall be authorized to perform outreach and educational activities so that residents and community members are informed about the costs and benefits associated with the collection and use of revenue generated by the essential services measure. (Ord. 1605 § 1 (part), 2014)

Chapter 2.16 PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION

Sections:
2.16.010     Powers and duties—Membership—Terms.
2.16.020     Meetings.

2.16.010 Powers and duties—Membership—Terms.
A. The park and recreation commission of the City Hall shall be hereinafter designated as the “commission.”
B. The commission shall have the power and it shall be the duty of the commission, in an advisory capacity, to make recommendations to the council and to advise the council in matters pertaining to the creation, operation, maintenance, management and control of the park, playground and recreation activities of the city.
C. The commission shall consist of seven members.
D. Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of four years which shall commence immediately upon appointment by the council. Commissioners shall serve at the pleasure of the council and may be reappointed; provided, that no appointee shall serve more than two consecutive full terms (eight years). Appointment to a partial term of office following an unscheduled vacancy shall not preclude the appointee from serving two consecutive full terms following completion of the partial term, provided the term is less than two years. Commissioners who have served for four or more consecutive years at the time the ordinance codified in this section becomes effective shall be eligible for reappointment to not more than one additional term.
E. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms.
F. All of the procedures and requirements contained in the council adopted “Handbook for Advisory Bodies” shall be incorporated in this section by reference. (Ord. 1137 § 1, 1989; Ord. 958 § 1, 1983: prior code § 2420)

2.16.020 Meetings.
The commission shall hold regular meetings at least once each month, and may hold such additional meetings as may be deemed necessary or expedient. A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting the business of the commission. (Ord. 958 § 2, 1983: prior code § 2420.1)

Chapter 2.20 MASS TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE

Sections:
2.20.010     Established.
2.20.020     Membership.
2.20.030     Terms of office.
2.20.040     Officers.

2.20.010 Established.
There is established the mass transportation committee of the city. (Prior code § 2450)

2.20.020 Membership.
The city council shall establish the membership of the mass transportation committee by resolution.
Prior legislation: prior code § 2450.1; Ords. 985 § 1, 1112 § 1, 1207 § 1, 1377.

2.20.030 Terms of office.
A. Terms of office shall be four years. A member may serve for no more than two consecutive full terms (eight years) with the exception of the member from California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, whose term is exempt from the term limitation. Terms shall be staggered and shall commence on April 1st.
B. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for unexpired terms. (Ord. 1207 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1140 § 1, 1989: Ord. 985 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 2450.2)

2.20.040 Officers.
At its first regular meeting after April 1st each year, the committee shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson whose terms shall be one year, commencing on election. No person shall serve in the office of chairperson or vice chairperson for more than two consecutive terms. (Ord. 1207 § 1, 1992: Ord. 985 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 2450.3)

Chapter 2.24 EMERGENCY SERVICES

Sections:
2.24.010     Purpose.
2.24.020     Emergency defined.
2.24.030     Disaster council—Membership.
2.24.040     Disaster council—Powers and duties.
2.24.050     Officers—Offices created.
2.24.060     Officers—Powers and duties.
2.24.070     Emergency organization—Membership.
2.24.080     Emergency operations plan.
2.24.090     Expenditures.
2.24.100     Violation—Penalty.

2.24.010 Purpose.
The declared purposes of the ordinance codified in this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Prior code § 2430)

2.24.020 Emergency defined.
As used in this chapter, “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, hazardous materials incident, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestations or disease, epidemic, riot, nuclear emergency, earthquake or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war, terrorist acts or imminent threat of war, which conditions are, or are likely to be, beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 1560 § 1, 2011: prior code § 2430.1)

2.24.030 Disaster council—Membership.
The San Luis Obispo disaster council is created and shall consist of the following:
A. The mayor, who shall be the chair of the disaster council;
B. The vice mayor, who shall be vice chair;
C. All other members of the city council. (Ord. 1560 § 2, 2011: prior code § 2430.1A)

2.24.040 Disaster council—Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the disaster council, and it is empowered, to review and approve the emergency operations plan and mutual-aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the emergency services director or, in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the deputy emergency services director. (Ord. 1560 § 3, 2011: prior code § 2430.2)

2.24.050 Officers—Offices created.
A. There is created the office of emergency services director. The city manager shall be the emergency services director.
B. There is created the office of deputy emergency services director. The assistant city manager shall be the deputy emergency services director.
C. There is created the office of emergency operations center director, who shall be appointed by the emergency services director.
D. There is created the office of city disaster preparedness officer. The fire chief shall be the city disaster preparedness officer. (Ord. 1560 § 4, 2011: prior code § 2430.3)

2.24.060 Officers—Powers and duties.
A. The emergency services director is empowered to:
    1. Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the emergency services director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;
    2. Request the governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the emergency services director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;
    3. Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of the ordinance codified in this chapter;
    4. Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;
    5. Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter;
    6. In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as provided in this subsection, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the Director of the California Emergency Management Agency, a “federal declaration of emergency” or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the emergency services director is empowered:
        a. To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council;
        b. To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;
        c. To require emergency services of any city officer or city employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county in which this city is located, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers;
        d. To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; and
        e. To execute all of his or her ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, and all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority.
B. The emergency services director shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council.
C. The deputy emergency services director shall assist the emergency services director in all respects, particularly in coordinating the activities of city staff members and volunteer members of the emergency organization.
D. The emergency operations center director shall, under the supervision of the emergency services director, manage the city’s emergency operations center when activated to respond to and recover from an emergency or disaster. The emergency operations center director with the assistance of other city staff and volunteers shall develop emergency action plans to control and manage any emergency or disaster in this city. (Ord. 1560 § 5, 2011: prior code § 2430.4)

2.24.070 Emergency organization—Membership.
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid the emergency organization during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.24.060(A)(6)(c), be charged with duties pertaining to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. All above mentioned members of the emergency organization, without exception, will be considered disaster service workers giving them protection under California Senate Bill 39—Personal liability immunity: “disaster service workers” (State of California Civil Code Section 1714.5), or as that section subsequently may be amended. (Ord. 1560 § 6, 2011: prior code § 2430.5)

2.24.080 Emergency operations plan.
The emergency services director, the disaster preparedness officer and other city department heads shall be responsible for the development of and updates to the city emergency operations plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1560 § 7, 2011: prior code § 2430.6)

2.24.090 Expenditures.
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual-aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Prior code § 2430.6(a))

2.24.100 Violation—Penalty.
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not in excess of five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to:
A. Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter;
B. Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;
C. Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Prior code § 2430.7)

Chapter 2.28 ELIGIBILITY FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT

Sections:
2.28.010     Criminal conduct—Ineligibility for employment.
2.28.020     Disqualification of applicant—Notice—Appeal.

2.28.010 Criminal conduct—Ineligibility for employment.
No person convicted (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere) of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude shall be eligible for employment by any department of the city; provided, however, that the appointing authority may disregard such conviction if it is found and determined by such appointing authority that mitigating circumstances exist, such as, but not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, length of time elapsed since such conviction, the age of such person at the time of conviction, or the fact that the classification applied for is unrelated to such conviction. (Prior code § 2330)

2.28.020 Disqualification of applicant—Notice—Appeal.
A. The appointing authority shall give notice of disqualification to an applicant disqualified under Section 2.28.010. Notice shall be in writing and shall be delivered personally or mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application for employment.
B. An applicant who is disqualified for employment under Section 2.28.010 may appeal such determination of disqualification. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the personnel director within ten days of the date of the notice of disqualification. The personnel director shall hear and determine the appeal within ninety days after it is filed. The determination of the personnel director on the appeal shall be final.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an applicant for a peace officer position shall be disqualified, without right of appeal, from employment, if the applicant shall have been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
D. Pursuant to Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the state, the following officers of the city are authorized to have access to and to utilize State Summary Criminal History Information when it is needed to assist them in fulfilling employment duties set forth in this section:
    1. City administrative officer,
    2. City attorney;
    3. Chief of police;
    4. Personnel director. (Prior code § 2330.1)

Chapter 2.30 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW BOARD

Sections:
2.30.010     Board created.
2.30.020     Membership.
2.30.030     Term of office.
2.30.040     Functions, powers and duties.
2.30.050     Meetings.

2.30.010 Board created.
There is established the administrative review board of the city. (Ord. 1625 § 4 (part), 2015)

2.30.020 Membership.
The administrative review board shall consist of three members appointed by the city council to serve in an adjudicatory capacity. Members of the administrative review board may simultaneously serve on other city advisory bodies requiring technical expertise, including the construction board of appeals, pursuant to San Luis Obispo Council Policies and Procedures Section 6.7.2.5. Two council members shall serve as liaison to this board. (Ord. 1625 § 4 (part), 2015)

2.30.030 Term of office.
A. Members shall be appointed for terms of two years which shall commence immediately upon appointment by the council. Commissioners shall serve at the pleasure of the council and may be reappointed; provided, that no appointee shall serve more than two consecutive full terms (four years). Appointment to a partial term of office following an unscheduled vacancy shall not preclude the appointee from serving two consecutive full terms following completion of a partial term; provided, the partial term is less than one year.
B. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms.
C. All of the applicable procedures and requirements contained in the council adopted “Handbook for Advisory Bodies” shall be incorporated in this section by reference. (Ord. 1625 § 4 (part), 2015)

2.30.040 Functions, powers and duties.
The administrative review board’s basic responsibility is to decide the validity of administrative citations which are appealed to the board pursuant to Chapter 1.24. To carry out this responsibility, the commission will:
A. Conduct hearings;
B. Evaluate evidence;
C. Prepare written decisions supported by written findings of fact as to whether the administrative decision should be upheld or revoked, in whole or in part;
D. Perform such other duties required by the council or by state or city laws. (Ord. 1625 § 4 (part), 2015)

2.30.050 Meetings.
All regular meetings shall be held at the established time and place set for that body as set forth within the administrative review board bylaws. (Ord. 1625 § 4 (part), 2015)

Chapter 2.32 RETIREMENT SYSTEM

Sections:
2.32.010     Contract authorized—Copy kept on file.
2.32.020     Contract execution authority.

2.32.010 Contract authorized—Copy kept on file.
A contract is authorized the council and the Board of Administration, California State Employees’ Retirement System, a copy of which contract is on file in the office of the city clerk, and is hereby referred to and by such reference made a part of this section as though set forth in full. (Prior code § 2310)

2.32.020 Contract execution authority.
The mayor is authorized, empowered and directed to execute the contract for and on behalf of the agency. (Prior code § 2310.1)

Chapter 2.36 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS

Sections:
2.36.010     Title.
2.36.020     Purpose.
2.36.030     Personnel department created.
2.36.040     Personnel director—Duties.
2.36.050     Unclassified service.
2.36.060     Classified Applicability of provisions.
2.36.070     Equal opportunity employment.
2.36.080     Employment of relatives.
2.36.090     Definitions.
2.36.100     Classification plan—Purpose.
2.36.110     Classification plan—Summary.
2.36.120     Classification plan—Maintenance.
2.36.130     Compensation plan—Purpose.
2.36.140     Compensation plan—Adoption—Rules governing step increases for line-item employees.
2.36.150     Staffing—Generally.
2.36.160     Staffing—Recruitment.
2.36.170     Staffing—Examinations.
2.36.180     Staffing—Eligible lists.
2.36.190     Staffing—Certification and appointment.
2.36.200     Staffing—Probationary period.
2.36.210     Staffing—Medical examination.
2.36.220     Staffing—Fingerprints.
2.36.230     Staffing—Performance evaluation.
2.36.240     Staffing—Transfer, promotion, demotion, temporary assignment.
2.36.250     Separation—Generally.
2.36.260     Separation—Resignation.
2.36.270     Separation—Termination of probationers.
2.36.280     Separation—Layoff.
2.36.290     Separation—Removal.
2.36.300     Separation—Retirement.
2.36.310     Separation—Medical.
2.36.320     Disciplinary action—Authority.
2.36.330     Disciplinary action—Charges, response, final action.
2.36.340     Disciplinary action—Right of appeal.
2.36.350     Disciplinary action—Hearings.
2.36.360     Grievance procedure.
2.36.370     Employee responsibilities and benefits—Generally.
2.36.380     Employee responsibilities benefits—Code of ethics.
2.36.390     Employee responsibilities and benefits—Outside employment.
2.36.400     Employee and benefits—Safety.
2.36.410     Employee responsibilities and benefits—Training.
2.36.420     Employee responsibilities and benefits—Sick leave.
2.36.430     Employee responsibilities and Benefits—Worker’s compensation.
2.36.440     Employee responsibilities and benefits—Vacation leave.
2.36.450     Employee responsibilities and benefits—Retirement.
2.36.460     Employee responsibilities and benefits—Leave of absence without pay.
2.36.470     Employee responsibilities and benefits—Military leave.
2.36.480     Employee responsibilities and benefits—Jury duty.
2.36.490     Reports and records required.
2.36.500     Departmental rules.
2.36.540     Personnel board—Established—Membership—Term of office—Duties.

2.36.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Personnel Regulations” of the city. (Prior code § 2700)

2.36.020 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted in order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters, to attract and retain competent personnel, and to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness. (Prior code § 2700.1)

2.36.030 Personnel department created.
There is created the department of personnel for the city. The personnel department shall be headed by the personnel director, who shall be appointed by the city administrative officer. (Prior code § 2700.2)

2.36.040 Personnel director—Duties.
The personnel director shall:
A. Administer all provisions of this chapter not specifically reserved to the council:
B. Recommend any revisions and amendments to this chapter and the employer-employee relations resolution;
C. Prepare and maintain a job classification plan, including job descriptions, and make periodic revisions of the plan as needed:
D. Provide for the administration of the recruitment and selection process as outlined in this chapter,
E. Supervise and coordinate employee training programs;
F. Conduct employee meet-and-confer sessions and related labor relations functions as directed by the city administrative officer;
G. Administer the compensation plan of the city;
H. Administer an affirmative action program and promote equal opportunity employment in all city departments;
I. Perform other work as assigned by the city administrative officer or designated representative. (Prior code § 2700.3)

2.36.050 Unclassified service.
A. The following positions and types of employment shall be termed the unclassified service;
    1. Elective officials;
    2. Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;
    3. City administrative officer;
    4. City clerk;
    5. City treasurer,
    6. City attorney;
    7. Department heads;
    8. Persons engaged under contract to supply expert professional, technical or other special services;
    9. Volunteer personnel;
    10. Temporary appointments as defined by this chapter,
    11. Persons employed under federal, state or county funded programs.
B. Appointments to the unclassified service shall be made on the basis of merit and fitness. The procedures outlined for filling classified service positions may be used in filling vacancies in the unclassified service.
C. Persons employed under contract shall perform work not normally a part of regular city business, usually without supervision, and for a specified amount rasher then by a time rate. Such contract employment shall be approved by the personnel director and persons so employed shall complete a written contract with the city. (Prior code § 2700.4)

2.36.060 Classified Applicability of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employment in the service of the city not listed in Section 2.36.050 which shall be known as the classified service. (Prior code § 2700.5)

2.36.070 Equal opportunity employment.
A. All persons seeking employment with the city and all city employees shall be treated equally and without discrimination which is prohibited by federal, state or local law. This commitment also applies to job assignment, promotion, demotion, transfer, termination and disciplinary actions.
B. The city is committed to the development of positive measures to help eliminate barriers to the recognition of individual merit in personnel practices.
C. Employees shall not be discriminated against because of the exercise of their rights under Section 3502 of the California Government Code or under the city’s employer-employee relations resolution. (Prior code § 2700.6)

2.36.080 Employment of relatives.
The policy of the council shall be as prescribed in Section 707 of the City Charter covering nepotism. The city administrative officer may establish additional guidelines where considered to be in the best interests of the city. Such guidelines shall be on file in the personnel department. (Prior code § 2700.7)

2.36.090 Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
A. “Appointment authority” means each employee empowered by the city administrative officer to have substantial influence over appointments and other personnel actions. This includes department heads and in some cases division heads.
B. “Benefit date” means the date which determines eligibility for salary step and fringe-benefit increases. If the date of hire or promotion occurs on or between the first and fifteenth day of the month, the benefit date is the first of that month. If the date of hire or promotion is after the fifteenth of the month, the benefit date is the first of the following month.
C. “Business days” means calendar days exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
D. “Certification” means the submission to an appointing authority of the eligible list from which a selection to fill a vacant position shall be made.
E. “Classification” means all positions sufficiently similar in duties, authority, and responsibility to permit grouping under a common title in the application with equity of common standards of selection, transfer, demotion and salary.
F. “Days” means calendar days unless specified otherwise.
G. “Demotion” means the movement of an employee from one class to another class having a lower maximum rate of pay.
H. “Eligible list” means a list of qualified candidates eligible for employment with the city under specific conditions as a result of open or promotional examination for a job classification.
I. “Examination” means any selection instrument, process or procedure used to measure the ability of a person applying for a position within the city service to perform successfully in that position.
J. “Line-item position” means a position which is specifically itemized in the city budget, requiring forty hours or more per week. Such a position is eligible to accumulate fringe benefits.
K. “Normal work week” means the number of an employee’s regularly scheduled paid hours of work averaged over the fiscal year.
L. “Probationary employee” means an employee appointed from an eligible list filling a line-item position in the classified service who has not completed the probationary period.
M. “Promotion” means the advancement of an employee from one job classification to another having a higher maximum base rate of pay.
N. “Reclassification” means the change in classification of an individual position by raising it to a higher, reducing it to a lower, or allocating to another classification at the same pay range, on the basis of significant and substantive changes in the kind or difficulty of duties and responsibilities in that position.
O. “Regular employee” means an employee filling a line-item position who has successfully completed the probationary period and has been retained as hereafter provided in this chapter.
P. “Reinstatement” means the reemployment without examination of a former regular or probationary employee following separation of service with the city within the time limits prescribed in this chapter.
Q. “Suspension” means the temporary separation of an employee from the city service for disciplinary reasons with loss of pay.
R. “Temporary appointment” means the placement of a person in a line-item position on an interim basis while an eligible list is being prepared for the appointment of a probationary employee.
S. “Temporary position” means a position not specifically itemized in the budget, either full or part time, requiring less than an average of forty hours per week for the calendar year. Such a position is not eligible to accumulate fringe benefits and is paid on a straight hourly basis for all hours worked, with the exception of retirement benefits which are accrued and partially paid for by employees who work an average of twenty hours a week or more during a calendar year.
T. “Temporary promotion” means the advancement of a regular or probationary employee from one line-item position to another on an interim basis.
U. “Transfer” means a change of an employee from one position to another position in the same classification or in a comparable classification having the same pay range, requiring substantially the same basic qualifications and involving the performance of similar duties. (Prior code § 2701)

2.36.100 Classification plan—Purpose.
The classification plan is, in effect, an occupational inventory of the positions of the city service. It is a fundamental tool of personnel administration, since it makes possible standardization of class titles for purposes of personnel recordkeeping, examining, pay administration and related personnel administrative objectives. (Prior code § 2702)

2.36.110 Classification plan—Summary.
The classification plan may be summarized as follows:
A. A grouping of positions involving substantially the same duties and responsibilities, which require similar levels of education, experience, knowledge, skills and abilities and are of such character that the same tests of fitness may be used to select qualified employees;
B. A list showing the classification titles of all positions in the city service, together with the allocation of each position to its appropriate class, including the number of such positions currently authorized and budgeted;
C. Written job descriptions containing at least the following elements:
    1. A brief descriptive title;
    2. A concise definition of the job’s general scope and function;
    3. The series of duties most commonly performed by the position;
    4. The minimum qualifications for the position listed in terms of knowledge, abilities and specialized education, experience and/or licenses essential for satisfactory performance of the job.
A job description should clearly show those features which distinguish it from other descriptions with similar duties. Classification definitions do not restrict the assignment of duties to an employee in any way. However, assignment of substantial volume of higher grade or lower grade duties to an employee over a period of time may result in raising the question of a reclassification of the employee’s position. (Prior code § 2702.1)

2.36.120 Classification plan—Maintenance.
A. The classification plan shall be so maintained that all positions substantially similar with respect to duties, responsibilities, authority and character of work are included within the same class, and that the same schedules of compensation may be made to apply with equity under like working conditions to all positions in the same class.
B. The classification plan shall be adopted by resolution of the council and may be amended from time to time in accordance with the following procedure:
    1. Upon the request of a department head to create a new position or reevaluate a current position’s job classification, the personnel director shall classify or reclassify each such position on the basis of the duties and responsibilities of that position. The classification action of the personnel director will become final when approved by the city administrative officer.
    2. An employee may request consideration of a change in the classification of his/her position during January and February of any year. Such requests shall be in writing, and shall set forth supporting reasons. The personnel director shale make a study of the position and shall submit a written report by May 1st to the city administrative officer, whose decision shall be in writing and shall be final. The decision, including supporting data, shall be submitted to the employee by May 15th. Such decision shall be made before adoption of the city budget for the next fiscal year. Upon the adoption of such a reclassification, the affected employee shall be placed in the new classification without competitive examination, in the first step of the new classification whose salary is at least five percent above that step last held in the former position. In no case, however, shall the new step number be higher than the step held in the previous salary range. Reclassification shall have no effect on an employee’s anniversary date or probationary status. (Prior code § 2702.2)

2.36.130 Compensation plan—Purpose.
The compensation plan is based upon the classification plan and is designed to establish levels of pay and benefits which reflect on appropriate relationships among classifications in the city service. The plan should be maintained consistent with the goals of adequately compensating city employees for their work and attracting and retaining qualified applicants. (Prior code § 2702.3)

2.36.140 Compensation plan—Adoption—Rules governing step increases for line-item employees.
A. The compensation plan shall be adopted by resolution of the council covering classified and unclassified city employees.
B. The following rules shall govern step increases for line-item employees:
    1. The first step is the minimum rate and shall normally be the hiring rate for the class.
    2. In cases where it is difficult to secure qualified personnel, or if a person of unusual qualifications is considered for hire, the city administrative officer may authorize hiring at any step.
    3. Rules for advancement shall be outlined in the salary resolution. (Prior code § 2703.1)

2.36.150 Staffing—Generally.
The staffing function comprises recruitment, examinations, eligible lists, selection, appointment, probation, performance evaluation and related activities. (Prior code § 2704)

2.36.160 Staffing—Recruitment.
A. When necessary to establish an eligible list, the personnel director shall prepare a job announcement which shall specify the position title, nature of duties, minimum qualifications, rate of compensation, application procedure and other pertinent information. Suitable and effective methods of distributing and publicizing information relative to job openings shall be practiced to secure qualified candidates. All applicants shall fill out the application forms prepared by the personnel director and obtainable in the personnel department.
B. The personnel director shall reject any application for any of the following reasons which indicate unfitness of the applicant for the position:
    1. Failure of the applicant to meet the minimum qualifications stated on the job announcement;
    2. False statements by the applicant on the application;
    3. Any fraudulent practice by the applicant in connection with any phase of the recruitment and selection process;
    4. Unsatisfactory criminal or driving conviction records of the applicant. Driving records will only be considered for those positions requiring a driver’s license unless a felony conviction is involved.
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, conviction (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere) of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude shall be prima facie disqualification of an applicant for employment by the city; provided, however, that the personnel director may disregard such conviction if it is found and determined that mitigating circumstances exist. In making such a determination, the personnel director shall consider the following factors:
        a. The classification, including its sensitivity, to which the person is applying or being certified and whether the classification is unrelated to the conviction;
        b. The nature and seriousness of the offense;
        c. The circumstances surrounding the conviction;
        d. The length of time elapsed since the conviction;
        e. The age of the person at the time of conviction;
        f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation or efforts at rehabilitation;
        g. Contributing social or environmental conditions.
The personnel director shall give written notice of disqualification to an applicant disqualified under this provision.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subdivision, an applicant for a peace officer position shall be disqualified, without right of appeal, from employment, if the applicant shall have been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
    5. Any other reason which would indicate unfitness of the applicant for the position, upon determination of the personnel director.
C. The personnel director shall notify in writing those persons whose applications have been rejected with statement of reason. Accepted applications shall be notified in writing of the time and place of examination. (Prior code § 2704.1)

2.36.170 Staffing—Examinations.
A. The examination process shall be impartial and related to those subjects which, in the opinion of the personnel director, measure the relative abilities of the person examined to execute the duties and responsibilities of the job. The identity of applicants shall be concealed in written until after they have been graded and the pass point established.
B. In examining persons for positions in the classified service, promotional and/or open examinations may be used as determined by the personnel director. Candidates for promotional examination must be employed by the city at the time of the examination and must possess the minimum requirements for the position.
C. Examinations shall consist of selection techniques which will test the qualifications of candidates such as, but not necessarily limited to, achievement, aptitude and other written tests; personal interviews, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples, medical and/or psychological, polygraph or similar tests, successful completion of prescribed training, or any combination of these or other tests. The personnel director may establish a lateral transfer policy, permitting candidates meeting minimum education and experience requirements to be placed on an eligible list based on a limited examination process.
D. Oral board members will be selected from individuals who can fairly and impartially evaluate candidates on the basis of merit. Every effort will be made to utilize raters who have no preconceived opinions or prejudices regarding one or more of the candidates to be examined.
E. The personnel director shall establish the minimum qualifying score on individual tests or the entire examination in accord with the needs of the service. The personnel director may, at his/ her discretion, include as part of the examination, tests which are qualifying only.
F. Each candidate in an examination shall be given written notice of the results thereof, and if successful, the final earned score and/or rank on the eligible list. (Prior code § 2704.2)

2.36.180 Staffing—Eligible lists.
A. Establishment of Lists. After completion of an examination, the personnel director shall prepare and keep available an eligible list consisting of the names of candidates who qualified in the examination, arranged in order of final scores, from the highest to the lowest qualifying score.
B. Duration of Lists. Eligible lists shall remain in effect for one year, unless sooner exhausted or abolished by the personnel director upon the recommendation of a department head or other appointing authority. Such lists may be extended for up to one additional year by the personnel director.
C. Reemployment Lists. 
    1. The names of probationary and regular employees who have been laid off for budgetary reasons shall be placed on appropriate reemployment lists for the positions from which they were laid off for consideration for future vacancies.
    2. When a reemployment list is to be used to fill vacancies, the personnel director shall certify all of the names on the list for consideration by the appointing authority as meeting minimum qualifications for the position.
D. Removal from List. The name of any person may be removed from an eligible list by the personnel director upon written request of the candidate, failure to respond to notice mailed to the last known address within ten days, resignation of employee whose name is on promotional eligible list, or for any of the reasons specified in Section 2.36.160 covering disqualifications. (Prior code § 2704.3)

2.36.190 Staffing—Certification and appointment.
A. Notice to Personnel Director. If a vacant position in the city service is to be filled, the appointing authority shall notify the personnel director in the manner prescribed. If there is no reemployment list available for the class, the personnel director and department head shall determine whether to fill the vacancy by transfer, demotion, appointment from a promotional or open eligible list or reinstatement.
B. Certification. If a position vacancy in the competitive service cannot be filled by transfer, demotion or from a reemployment list, certification shall be made from a promotional and/or open eligible list, provided eligibles are available and willing to accept appointment.
C. Appointments. 
    1. All vacancies in the competitive service shall be filled at the discretion of management by transfer, demotion, promotion, reinstatement or utilization of an appropriate eligible list.
    2. After interview and investigation, the appointing authority shall recommend appointments from among those certified, such appointments shall be approved by the personnel director. The person accepting appointment shall present himself/herself to the personnel director, or a designated representative at a specified time before the date of appointment for processing. Otherwise he/she shall be deemed to have declined the appointment.
D. Temporary Appointments. 
    1. In the absence of the appropriate eligible lists, the appointing authority, upon approval of the personnel director, may make a temporary appointment to a vacant line-item position, of a person meeting the minimum qualifications for the position. The personnel director shall immediately commence the recruitment process and establish an eligible list from which a probationary employee shall be appointed. Such temporary appointment to a line-item position shall be for a period not to exceed six months and the temporary employee shall not accumulate fringe benefits.
    2. In the event of a serious emergency, such as extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake, a department head, with the approval of the city administrative officer, may make temporary appointments on an emergency basis. Such appointments shall only last until either the council or city administrative officer declares the end of such emergency.
    3. A temporary employee may be removed at any time without the right of appeal or hearing.
E. Reinstatement. 
    1. A regular or probationary employee who has completed at least six months of probationary service and who has resigned with a good record may be reinstated within one year of the effective date of resignation to a vacant position in the same classification, subject to the approval of the department head and personnel director and a favorable report from the city medical examiner. Upon reinstatement, the employee shall be subject to the one-year probationary period.
    2. No credit for former employment with the city may be granted in computing salary, vacation, sick leave or other benefits except on specific recommendations of the appointing authority and approval of the personnel director at the time of reinstatement. (Prior code § 2704.4)

2.36.200 Staffing—Probationary period.
All appointments in line-item positions in the classified service, including promotional appointments, shall be subject to a probationary period of one year. The probationary period may be extended or reinstated if further employee evaluation is deemed necessary for up to six months upon the written recommendation of the department head and the written approval of the personnel director. (Prior code § 2704.5)

2.36.210 Staffing—Medical examination.
Each appointment to the classified service shall be subject to a medical examination conducted by the city’s medical examiner. Appointments to the unclassified service may be subject to a medical examination at the discretion of the personnel director, based primarily on the nature and duration of the position. (Prior code § 2704.6)

2.36.220 Staffing—Fingerprints.
Fingerprints shall be taken of all new employees filling line-item positions and police record checks will be made to verify conviction record information submitted on the application for employment. Any omissions may be grounds for rejection of the application, removal of name from the eligible list or dismissal from position. New temporary employees may also be fingerprinted at the discretion of the personnel director. (Prior code § 2704.7)

2.36.230 Staffing—Performance evaluation.
Written performance rating reports shall be completed on forms devised by the personnel director at least annually for all department heads and employees in the classified service and at least quarterly for all employees serving their probationary period. Supervisors shall review each report form with the employee concerned and the employee shall sign the form acknowledging that this review has taken place. Employee’s signature does not necessarily constitute agreement with supervisor’s rating. The personnel director shall maintain a record of each employee’s ratings. The rating reports may be used as measures of an employee’s fitness to advance in pay and to determine the order for layoffs as outlined in Section 2.36.280. (Prior code § 2704.8)

2.36.240 Staffing—Transfer, promotion, demotion, temporary assignment.
A. Transfer. 
    1. Upon proper notice and concurrence by the city administrative officer, an employee may be transferred by the appointing authority from one position to another in the same pay range provided he/she possesses the minimum qualifications as determined by the personnel director.
    2. If the transfer involves a change from one department to another, both department heads must consent thereto unless the city administrative officer orders the transfer for purposes of economy and efficiency.
B. Promotion. 
    1. Insofar as consistent with the best interests of the city, all vacancies in the classified service shall be filled by promotion from within the classified service.
    2. If, in the opinion of the personnel director and department head, a vacancy could be filled better by an open-competitive examination, then arrangements will be made for the preparation and certification of an open-competitive eligible list.
    3. A temporary promotion to a higher grade may be made for one hundred twenty days or less without competitive promotion procedures. Temporary promotions for more than one hundred twenty days must be made under competitive promotion procedures.
    4. When an employee is promoted, the employee shall be paid at the first step in the salary range for the new position whose salary is at least five percent above that step last held in the former position. In no case, however, shall the new step be higher than the fifth step in the salary range. If the promotion is to a supervisory position, the promoted employee shall receive no less than the next higher rate above the highest rate being paid to his/her subordinates. If the employee returns to his/her regular position, the pay rate will be the same as if no temporary promotion had occurred.
C. Demotion. An employee who performs his/her duties in an unsatisfactory manner may be demoted in accordance with Section 2.36.320 if the employee gives evidence of the ability to perform work satisfactory in a lower classification where a vacancy exists. A demoted employee shall be placed in a salary step in the new classification which is the same as or lower than the salary rate held prior to demotion.
D. Temporary Assignment. An appointing authority may temporarily assign an employee to a different position for a specific period of time, after which the employee returns to his/her regular duties and position from which he/she was detailed. Such action shall have the prior approval of the personnel director. (Prior code § 2704.9)

2.36.250 Separation—Generally.
In the normal course of events, each employee becomes separated from the city service. Separation may occur due to resignation, termination, layoff, removal, retirement or medical reasons. (Prior code § 2705)

2.36.260 Separation—Resignation.
A. An employee wishing to leave the city service in good standing shall file with the appointing authority, a written resignation stating the effective date and reason(s) for leaving at least two weeks before leaving the service. A statement from the department head as to the resigning employee’s service performance and other pertinent information shall accompany the written resignation and shall be forwarded the personnel department.
B. The personnel director shall hold an exit interview with each regular line-item employee leaving the city service when possible. The results shall be filed in the employee’s personnel folder. (Prior code § 2705.1)

2.36.270 Separation—Termination of probationers.
During the probationary period, an employee may be terminated at any time by the appointing authority without the right of appeal or hearing (Prior code § 2705.2)

2.36.280 Separation—Layoff.
A. Any city employee may be laid off for an indefinite period of time whenever the city council determines there is a lack of work or funds for the position or that the necessity for the position no longer exists. No regular or probationary employee shall be laid off while a temporary employee is serving in the same classification in that department.
B. Temporary employees within a deleted position within a particular department shall be the first subject to layoff, followed by probationary employees, the order being determined by seniority, the last hired being laid off first. For regular employee, layoffs shall be governed by job performance and seniority in service within a particular department and job classification: that is, a regular employee being laid off shell be that employee with the least seniority in the particular job classification concerned and in the department involved who is in the lowest job performance category based on the overall performance rating on the last evaluation form due prior to the effective date of the layoff(s). In other words, the regular employee in the lowest job performance category having the least seniority within the job classification to be deleted from a department, will be the first to be laid off.
C. The names of regular and probationary employees laid off shall be placed upon reemployment lists for one year for those classes requiring substantially the same basic (minimal) qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the class from which the layoff was made. (Prior code § 2705.3)

2.36.290 Separation—Removal.
Any employee may be removed from the city service for just and proper cause as outlined in Section 2.36.320. (Prior code § 2705.4)

2.36.300 Separation—Retirement.
A. The council is empowered to enter into a contract with the board of administration of the Public Employees’ Retirement System of California (PERS), as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, making the appointed officials and employees of the city members of PERS.
B. It is provided, however, that the council may terminate this contract only upon authority granted by an ordinance adopted by a majority vote of the electors of the city voting on such a proposition at an election at which such proposal is presented. (Prior code § 2705.5)

2.36.310 Separation—Medical.
An employee may be separated for medical reasons when a chronic or frequently recurring mental or physical condition renders the employee inefficient incapable of performing the duties of this position. At the request of the appointing authority, the personnel director may require an employee to submit to an examination by one or more medical examiners. If the results of the examination indicate that the employee is incapacitated for performance of required duties, the employee shall be placed on sick leave as a preliminary to restoration of adequate mental or physical fitness or disability retirement or disability separation. (Prior code § 2705.6)

2.36.320 Disciplinary action—Authority.
Each appointing authority shall have the right to discipline any employee subject to his/her jurisdiction for misconduct, incompetency, inefficiency, insubordination, failure to perform duties, falsifying an oath, failure to observe the personnel rules or the rules of the individual department or a related serious offense. Such discipline may include but not be limited to reprimand, demotion, removal, reduction in compensation, or suspension without pay for up to thirty calendar days in any fiscal year. The appointing authority shall consult with the personnel director before suspending for more than five days, demoting or removing a regular employee in the classified service and, prior to imposition thereof, the city administrative officer shall act to affirm, modify or disallow such actions. Suspensions of five days or less shall be approved by the department head and personnel director prior to their imposition. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a part of a fiscal emergency calling for a reduction in salaries, wages hours of work or positions. (Prior code § 2706)

2.36.330 Disciplinary action—Charges, response, final action.
A. Removal, Demotion, Reduction in Compensation, Suspension of More Than Five Days. In the case of employees declared exempt from the overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), such employees may be terminated, demoted, suspended for more than one work week or reduced in compensation for any of the grounds set forth above. Such employees may also be suspended for less than one work week for a violation of city safety rules of major significance. Employees not exempt from the overtime requirements of the FLSA may be removed, reduced in compensation, demoted or suspended for more than five days. In any disciplinary matter wherein it is proposed that a regular employee in the classified service shall be removed, reduced in compensation, demoted, or suspended for more than five days or the shift equivalent, the procedures for notifications, response and final action shall be as follows:
    1. Charges. The employee against whom the disciplinary action is proposed shall be provided with written notice stating any and all reasons, specifically and in detail, for the proposed action prior to the effective date thereof. The material on which the notice is based, including, but not limited to, statements of witnesses, documents, and investigative reports or extracts therefrom, shall be assembled and either provided to the employee or made available to the employee for review. Any materials not so provided or made available shall not be used to support the reasons in the notice.
    2. Response Period. 
        a. The employee may respond to the notice of proposed disciplinary action within five business days, unless the appointing authority authorizes a longer time, following delivery of the notice to the employee. The employee may respond through a designated representative, personally in writing or any combination thereof. The right to answer personally includes the right to answer orally in person by being given an opportunity to make any representations which the employee believes are pertinent to the matter. When the employee requests an opportunity to answer personally, the appointing authority shall personally hear the answer.
        b. Irrespective of the manner of response, the employee may submit any material or evidence which is pertinent to the matter. The appointing authority shall consider any representations, statements, materials, or any other evidence submitted by the employee with or as his/her response.
    3. Employee Status After Notice. The employee shall be retained in active status during the response period. Provided, however, when in the opinion of the appointing authority, circumstances are such that the retention of the employee in an active status during the response period may result in damage to city property, may be detrimental to the interests of the city, or may be injurious to the employee, fellow workers or the public, the appointing authority may temporarily assign the employee to duties in which these conditions do not exist, or may place the employee on paid suspension during the response period.
    4. Final Action. 
        a. Within three business days following the response of the employee to the notice of the proposed disciplinary action or, if no response is received within three business days following the expiration of the response period, the appointing authority shall deliver a notice of final decision to the employee. If discipline is imposed a notice of decision shall be delivered to the employee personally or by mail to the address of record in the employee’s personnel file. The notice shall be dated and shall inform the employee of his/her right to appeal the notice of decision pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.36.340. Disciplinary action shall be effective upon the personal delivery or mailing of the notice.
        b. If no discipline is to be imposed, the notice of decision shall so indicate and the personnel director shall be directed to delete from the employee’s personnel file all references to the matter.
B. Suspension of Five Days or Less. In any disciplinary action wherein it is proposed that a regular employee in the classified service who is not exempt from the provisions of FLSA be suspended for five days or less, the procedures shall be as provided under subsection A of this section. In a disciplinary action for a major safety rule violation, wherein it is proposed that a regular exempt employees in the classified service be suspended for five days or less, the procedures shall be as provided under subsection A of this section. Provided however, that in the alternative the appointing authority may impose immediate final discipline without prior notice and right to respond in which event the procedures subsequent to imposition of discipline shall be as follows:
    1. Materials. Within five business days following the imposition of discipline a written notice stating any and all reasons specifically and in detail for the proposed action, materials on which the disciplinary action is based and investigative reports or extracts therefrom shall be assembled and either provided to the employee or made available to the employee for review.
    2. Response. 
        a. The employee may respond to the appointing authority concerning the imposed disciplinary action and the materials in support thereof within five business days of receipt of the materials. The employee may respond through a designated representative or personally, or in writing or any combination thereof.
        b. The right to answer personally includes the right to answer orally in person by being given an opportunity to make any representations which the employee believes are pertinent to the matter. When the employee requests an opportunity to answer personally, the appointing authority shall personally hear the answer.
        c. Irrespective of the manner of response, the employee may submit any material or evidence which is pertinent to the matter. The appointing authority shall consider any representations, statements materials or any other evidence submitted by the employee with or as his/her response.
    3. Appointing Authority Action. Within three business days following the response, if any, of the employee, the appointing authority shall either confirm or rescind the imposed disciplinary action, and shall give written notice to the employee of the decision to confirm or rescind. If the discipline is rescinded, appropriate action, including credit for back pay in case of suspension, shall be taken and the personnel director shall be directed to delete from the employee’s personnel file all references to the matter. If the discipline is confirmed the notice to confirm shall inform the employee of his/her right to appeal: the effective date of the disciplinary action for the purpose of appeal shall be the date of delivery or mailing of the notice to confirm.
C. Reprimands. In any disciplinary action wherein it is proposed that a regular employee in the classified service receive a written reprimand, the procedures shall be as provided in the alternate method in subsection B of this section, with the following exceptions:
    1. A reprimand need not include statements of witnesses or other supporting documents, but shall set forth the circumstances in sufficient detail to permit the employee to understand the nature and basis of the action.
    2. Reprimands shall not be placed in the employee’s personnel file unless approved by the appointing authority. In such cases, the employee shall have the right to submit a written response to the reprimand and such response shall be placed in the employee’s personnel file. (Ord. 1313 § 1, 1996; prior code § 2706.1)

2.36.340 Disciplinary action—Right of appeal.
A. Any employee (except employees represented by the police officers’ [SLOPOA] or firefighters’ [SLOFA] associations) demoted, suspended for more than five days or the shift equivalent, reduced in pay, or removed under the provisions of Section 2.36.330 shall have the right to appeal such disciplinary action to the personnel board. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the personnel director within fifteen business days following the effective date of the notice of decision on disciplinary action.
B. Any employee represented by SLOPOA or SLOFA who is demoted, suspended for four days or more or the shift equivalent, reduced in pay, or removed under the provisions of Section 2.36.330 of the personnel rules and regulations shall have the right to appeal such disciplinary action to a hearing officer. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the personnel director within fifteen business days following the effective date of the notice of decision on disciplinary action.
C. Any employee suspended for five days or less (less than four days for employees represented by SLOPOA or SLOFA) under the provisions of Section 2.36.330 shall have the right to appeal such disciplinary action to the city administrative officer. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city administrative officer within fifteen business days following the effective date of the notice of decision on disciplinary action. The city administrative officer shall meet with the disciplined employee if requested by the employee and conduct such investigations as he or she deems necessary. His or her written decision shall be final and shall be delivered or mailed to the employee within twenty business days of the filing of the appeal.
D. There shall be no right for any employee to appeal a reprimand or for a probationary employee to appeal any disciplinary action. (Ord. 1147 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 2706.2)

2.36.350 Disciplinary action—Hearings.
A. Date. Within five business days of receipt of an employee appeal (except an employee represented by the police officers’ [SLOPOA] or firefighters’ [SLOFA] associations) under Section 2.36.340(A), the personnel director, following consultation with the chairperson of the personnel board, shall set a date and time for a hearing before the personnel board.
B. Date. Within five business days of receipt of an employee appeal from an employee represented by SLOPOA or SLOFA under Section 2.36.340(B), the personnel director shall obtain from the State Mediation and Conciliation Service a list of five potential hearing officers. Following a random determination of which party begins, the parties (city and appellant) shall alternately strike one name from the list until only one remains. The personnel director shall then set a date and time for a hearing before the hearing officer.
C. Notification. When a hearing on any disciplinary action is to be heard, the personnel director shall notify the employee requesting the hearing and the appointing authority from whose action the appeal is being taken, of the date, time and place of the hearing.
D. Public or Closed Hearing. The hearing may be public or closed, at the employee’s option.
E. Appearance, Representation, Witnesses, Conduct of Hearing. 
    1. The employee requesting the hearing shall not be required to appear at the hearing; provided, however, that the city shall have the right to call as a witness and examine the employee requesting the hearing as if under cross-examination.
    2. The employee may be represented by any person, including a representative of a recognized employee association.
    3. Unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the employee and the city’s representative, during the hearing any witnesses to be called by either the employee or the city shall be excluded from the hearing room unless actually testifying. Provided, that the employee and city each may designate a person, who shall not be subject to exclusion who has investigated the matter at issue in the hearing and whose assistance during the hearing is necessary to the efficient conduct of the hearing.
    4. The hearing shall be presided over by the chairperson of the personnel board or the chairperson’s designated representative on the board (hearing officer for employees represented by SLOPOA or SLOFA).
    5. The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses, but the hearing shall be conducted in a manner most conducive to determination of the truth. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence which responsible persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil actions, and irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. Decisions made by the personnel board or hearing officer shall not be invalidated by any informality in the proceedings, and the personnel board shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence.
    6. The personnel board or hearing officer shall rule on the admission or exclusion of evidence and application of other rules of law with the assistance of its legal advisor.
    7. The hearing shall proceed in the following order unless the personnel board otherwise directs:
        a. City’s representative and the employee may make opening statements;
        b. City’s representative shall present evidence in support of city’s position; employee may cross-examine city’s witnesses;
        c. The employee may present evidence in his/ her own behalf; city’s representative may cross examine the employee’s witnesses;
        d. Both the city’s representative and the employee may then present rebuttal evidence, unless the personnel board or hearing officer for good reason permits additional evidence upon the original cases;
        e. City’s representative and the employee may make closing arguments.
    8. Each party may impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness.
    9. No still or moving photography or pictures of any kind shall be taken in the hearing room during the hearing.
    10. Prior to or during a hearing the personnel board or hearing officer may grant a continuance for any reason it believes to be important to its reaching a fair and proper decision.
    11. Upon conclusion of the hearing the personnel board may deliberate its decision in executive session. No persons other than members of the personnel board shall participate in the deliberations; provided, that the board may request the attendance of its legal advisor for the sole purpose of rendering legal advice.
F. Action. 
    1. No later than twenty calendar days following conclusion of the hearing, the board or hearing officer shall prepare findings and recommendations for submission to the council.
    2. At a minimum, the personnel board or hearing officer shall find whether the city has substantiated the charges in support of the disciplinary action. It shall base its findings on the preponderance of the evidence. Findings shall be made as to each charge. If the personnel board or hearing officer finds that none of the charges are supported by the evidence presented, the recommendation shall be that no disciplinary action be taken. If the personnel board or hearing officer finds that any or all of the charges are supported, it shall either:
        a. Recommend that the imposed disciplinary action be earned out;
        b. Recommend such other disciplinary action deemed appropriate under the circumstances; or
        c. Recommend that no disciplinary action be taken.
    3. The personnel board or hearing officer findings and recommendations shall be filed as a permanent record with the personnel director. The personnel director shall deliver a copy of the findings and recommendations to the council, the employee, the city clerk, the city administrative officer, and to the appointing authority from whose action the appeal was taken.
G. Council Action. 
    1. The council shall review the findings and recommendations and the record of the hearing. The council shall then determine whether the disciplinary action imposed by the appointing authority is proper, and shall make appropriate findings. If it is determined by the council that the action of the appointing authority is proper or that other action is proper, the employee shall be notified in writing of the findings and order, and no further action shall be necessary. If it is determined that no discipline shall be imposed the action shall be rescinded and the employee’s records and pay shall be appropriately adjusted.
    2. The council’s findings and order shall be filed with the city clerk.
    3. The action of the council shall be final. (Ord. 1147 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 2706.3)

2.36.360 Grievance procedure.
A. A grievance is an alleged violation, misinterpretation or misapplication of the employer-employee resolution, the personnel rules and regulations, any memorandum of agreement with an employee association or any existing written policy or procedure relating to wages, hours or other terms and conditions of employment excluding disciplinary matters.
B. Any employee may file and process a grievance by providing the time, place and circumstances of the action prompting the grievance. Employees may be accompanied by a representative at each step of the process. If a specific action to be grieved affects several employees, those employees may consolidate their grievances and be represented.
C. Each grievance shall be handled in the following manner:
    1. The employee who is dissatisfied with the response of the immediate supervisor shall discuss the grievance with the supervisor’s immediate superior. If the matter can be resolved at that level to the satisfaction of the employee, the grievance shall be considered terminated.
    2. If still dissatisfied, the employee may immediately submit the grievance in writing to the department head for consideration, stating the facts on which it was based, including the provision of the rules, regulations or agreement said to be violated, and the proposed remedy. This action must take place within fifteen business days of the occurrence of the grievance. The department head shall promptly consider the grievance and render a decision in writing within fifteen business days of receiving the written grievance. If the employee accepts the department head’s decision, the grievance shall be considered terminated.
D. If the employee is dissatisfied with the department the employee may immediately submit the grievance in writing to the personnel director within five business days of receiving the department head’s decision. The personnel director shall confer with the employee and the department head and any other interested parties, and shall conduct such other investigations as may be advisable.
E. The results or findings of such conferences and investigations shall be submitted to the city administrative officer in writing within fifteen business days of receiving the employee’s written request. The city administrative officer will meet with the employee if the employee so desires before rendering a decision with respect to the complaint. The city administrative officer’s decision shall be in writing and given to the employee within fifteen business days of receiving the personnel director’s results and findings. Such decision shall be final unless employee desires a review of the decision.
F. If the employee desires a review of the decision the procedure is as follows:
    1. Personnel board (for all except employees represented by police officers’ [SLOPOA] or firefighters’ [SLOFA] associations): the employee will have five business days following receipt of the city administrative officer’s decision to submit a written request to the personnel board through the personnel director for review of the decision. The personnel board within thirty business days shall review the record and either (1) issue an advisory opinion to the city administrative officer, or (2) conduct a hearing on the matter. If a hearing is held, an advisory opinion shall be rendered by the board within ten business days of the close of such hearing. If an opinion signed by at least three members of the personnel board recommends overruling or modifying the city administrative officer’s decision, the city administrative officer shall comply or appeal this recommendation to the council. Such appeal shall be filed with the city cleric within three business days of the board’s action. If appealed, the council shall review the case on the record and render a final decision within fifteen business days of submittal.
    2. Hearing officer (for employees represented by SLOPOA or SLOFA):
        a. The employee will have five business days following receipt of the city administrative officer’s decision to submit a written request to the personnel director for review of the decision. The personnel director will obtain a list of five potential hearing officers from the State Mediation and Conciliation Service. Then following a random determination of which party (city or appellant) begins, parties shall alternatively strike one name from the list until only one remains.
        b. Within thirty business days the hearing officer shall review the record and conduct a hearing on the matter. Within ten business days the hearing officer shall render a decision which shall be final.
        c. Any dispute regarding the eligibility of an issue for the grievance process may be appealed through the process ultimately to the hearing officer who shall decide on the eligibility prior to ruling on the merits.
        d. Any fees or expenses of the hearing officer shall be payable one-half by the city and one-half by the appellant. All other expenses shall be borne by the party incurring the expense.
        e. The city reserves the right to make the hearing officer’s opinion advisory or to replace the hearing officer position in the grievance process with the personnel board for an employee organization after July 1993, provided that:
            i. The hearing officer has ruled on at least five separate grievances Sled by the members of the employee organization; and
            ii. The city has been sustained in at least sixty-five percent of the determinations on grievances filed by members of the employee organization. (Ord. 1147 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 2707)

2.36.370 Employee responsibilities and benefits—Generally.
City employment provides employees with many responsibilities and benefits.
They include those responsibilities and benefits set out in Sections 2.36.380 through 2.36.480. (Prior code § 2708)

2.36.380 Employee responsibilities benefits—Code of ethics.
A. An official or employee of the city shall not engage in conduct which would tend to discredit or dishonor his/her position with the city. Such elected or appointed officials and employees must avoid conflicts of private interests with public duties and responsibilities and shall not do indirectly what may not be done directly.
B. Disciplinary action generally does not follow an occasional error in judgment which occurs in good faith and is unintentional. However, misconduct, dishonesty and fraud shall be the basis for severe disciplinary action, including removal for cause.
C. Officials and employees occupying designated positions are required to file an annual statement of financial interests with the city clerk as prescribed by the Conflict of Interest Code as adopted by the city.
D. Each new employee must be informed of the obligation to submit a statement of financial interests if he/she falls within the listed designated position categories.
E. Any employee whose job performance is adversely affected by the taking of alcohol, drugs, or other stimulants shall be subject to disciplinary action.
F. Each employee is required to be familiar with city standards and statutory provisions relating to ethical and other standards of conduct. Each employee is expected to secure the advice of his/her superior or the personnel director or other appropriate officials, when in doubt about the meaning or application of any conduct requirement applying to his/her particular situation.
G. The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state and federal laws. (Prior code § 2708.1)

2.36.390 Employee responsibilities and benefits—Outside employment.
A. City employees filling line-item positions may engage in part-time or occasional outside employment outside of their regular working hours if such employment is approved in advance by the city administrative officer or delegated representative, or in the case of council appointees, by the council. The city administrative officer may establish a minimum time period worked on such outside employment and a minimum number of hours of outside work per week before requiring advance written approval.
B. “Incompatible employment” includes, but is not limited to:
    1. Work which tends to impair mental or physical capacity to perform city duties efficiently and effectively;
    2. Work which takes the employee’s time and attention during his/her official working hours;
    3. Activities which create a conflict of responsibility or duty between the employee’s city work responsibility and the proposed outside employment. This includes work which would, by its nature, tend to reduce the ability of the employee to exercise completely independent and unfettered judgment with respect to effectively discharging city work responsibility.
    4. Employment in another city department for full-time city employees.
C. Any employee who engages in employment outside regular working hours shall be subject to perform regular city duties first (Prior code § 2708.2)

2.36.400 Employee and benefits—Safety.
It is the policy of the city to maintain a safe and healthful work environment for its employees. The personnel director shall convene a safety committee of appropriate managerial, supervisorial and other employees on a regular basis to evaluate occupational safety problems and discuss and institute appropriate remedies where unsafe working conditions are discovered. (Prior code § 2708.3)

2.36.410 Employee responsibilities and benefits—Training.
A. It is the policy of the city to develop maximum efficiency in the performance of official duties by city employees by providing for a training program to assist them in fulfillment of their duties and responsibilities.
B. The personnel director shall supervise and coordinate training programs for city personnel. The department head, with the approval of the personnel director, may authorize participation in approved training courses and attendance at meetings of professional organizations and other groups where such attendance will benefit the city. Employees attending such training sessions shall submit a written summary of the session to the personnel department. (Prior code § 2708.4)

2.36.420 Employee responsibilities and benefits—Sick leave.
A. Sick Leave Defined. “Sick leave” shall be defined as follows:
    1. Absence from duty because of illness or off the job injury, or exposure to contagious diseases as evidenced by certification from an accepted medical authority;
    2. At each employee’s option, absence from duty due to the death of a member of the “employee’s immediate family,” meaning spouse, child, brother, sister, parent, parent-in-law step-parent, step-brother, step-sister, or any other relative living in the same household, provided such leave as defined in this subsection shall not exceed five working days from each incident. The employee may be required to submit proof of relative’s death before being granted sick leave pay:
    3. An employee whose memorandum of understanding incorporates a provision for “family leave” may use sick leave not to exceed three days per year if required to be away from his/her job to personally care for a member of the employee’s immediate family as defined in this subsection.
B. Rules Governing Sick Leave. 
    1. Each incumbent of a line-item position shall accrue sick leave with pay at the rate of twelve days or the shift equivalent per year of continuous service since the benefit date.
    2. Sick leave may be used after the completion of the month of service in which it was earned.
    3. Sick leave shall begin with the first day of illness.
    4. Department heads shall be responsible to the city administrative officer for the uses of sick leave in their departments.
    5. A department head shall require written proof of illness from an authorized medical authority at the employee’s expense for sick leave use in excess of five consecutive working days by personnel in his/her department. Such proof may be required for periods of less than five consecutive working days where there exists indication of abuse.
    6. Any employee who is absent because of sickness or other physical disability shall notify his/her immediate supervisor or department head as soon as possible but in any event during the first day of absence. Any employee who fails to comply with this provision without having a valid reason will be placed on leave of absence without pay during the unexcused absence and be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with procedures established by this chapter.
    7. Any employee absent for an extended illness or other physical disability may be required by the personnel director to have an examination by the city’s medical examiner at city expense prior to reinstatement to the city service.
    8. An appointing authority, subject to approval of the personnel director, may require any employee to be medically examined where reasonable cause exists to believe that an employee has a medical condition which impairs his/her job effectiveness or may endanger the health, safety or welfare of the employee, other employees or the public. Employees who are judged to be physically incapable of meeting normal requirements of their positions may be placed in a classification of work for which they are suitable when a vacancy exists, or may be separated for physical disability.
    9. In the event that an employee’s sick leave benefits become exhausted due to illness or exposure to contagious disease, the employee shall revert to a status of leave of absence without pay and be subject to the provisions of Section 2.36.460.
    10. The right to benefits under the sick leave plan shall continue only during the period that the employee is employed by the city. This plan shall not give any employee the right to be retained in the services of the city, or any right of claim to sickness disability benefits after separation from the service of the city. When an employee receives compensation under the Worker’s Compensation Act of California, such compensation received shall be considered part of the salary to be paid to the employee eligible for such payments as required by state law. The amount paid by the city shall be the difference between the amount received by the employee from the city’s compensation insurance coverage and the eligible employee’s regular rate of pay.
    11. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no employee shall be entitled to receive any payment or other compensation from the city while absent from duty by reason of injuries or disability received as a result of engaging in employment other than employment by the city for monetary gain or other compensation, or by reason of engaging in business or activity for monetary or other compensation other than business or activity connected with his/her city employment.
    12. A public safety employee shall not receive sick leave payments while receiving Worker’s Compensation payments.
    13. Accumulation of sick leave days shall be unlimited. (Prior code § 2708.5)

2.36.430 Employee responsibilities and Benefits—Worker’s compensation.
Employees are insured by the city, under the State Worker’s Compensation Act, against injury occurring in the course of employment. Department heads shall be required to obtain a report of any injury sustained by an employee on duty and shall forward such reports to the personnel director for review and to the city’s compensation insurance administrator for adjustment and investigation. (Prior code § 2708.6)

2.36.440 Employee responsibilities and benefits—Vacation leave.
A. Each incumbent of a forty-hour-a-week line-item position shall accrue vacation leave with pay at the rate of twelve days per year of continuance service since the benefit date for the first five years, fifteen days per year upon completion of five years, eighteen days per year upon completion of ten years, and twenty days upon completion of twenty years. Employees scheduled for more than forty hours a week shall receive the equivalent number of vacation days prorated to the number of regularly scheduled work hours.
B. An incumbent is not eligible to use accrued vacation leave until after the completion of the twelfth calendar month of service since the benefit date.
C. A regular employee who leaves the city service shall receive payment for any unused vacation leave. Probationary employees with less than twelve months of continuous service shall not be eligible for such payment.
D. Department heads shall be responsible for arranging a vacation schedule, first with the needs of the city as the determining factor, second, insofar as possible, with the wishes of the employee.
E. Any employee who is on approved vacation leave and becomes eligible for sick leave as defined in Section 2.36.420(A) may have such time credited as sick leave under the following conditions:
    1. A physician’s statement certifying that illness, injury or exposure to contagious disease has occurred is presented to the supervisor upon returning to work;
    2. The vacation leave immediately ends and the employee reports to work following the end of sick leave usage. (Prior code § 2708.7)

2.36.450 Employee responsibilities and benefits—Retirement.
All employees who are members of the Public Employees’ Retirement System shall be retired at the age designated in the city’s current agreement with the retirement system. Upon application by the city or by a member employee, the employee may be separated for disability retirement upon determination of the board of administration of the Public Employees’ Retirement System. Benefits are paid in accordance with the Retirement System’s current schedule of benefits. (Prior code § 2708.8)

2.36.460 Employee responsibilities and benefits—Leave of absence without pay.
A regular full-time employee may be granted a leave of absence without pay upon written application approved by his/her department head and the city administrative officer. Such leave may not exceed six months’ time. Such leave shall be granted only in those cases where an employee’s record of service makes it desirable for the city to retain his/her services even at the cost of some inconvenience to the city or when an employee’s application for disability retirement is pending and no other leave is available. An employee on such an approved leave shall not accrue seniority or other benefits during the leave period. Failure of an employee to report promptly at the expiration of the leave, or within a reasonable time after notice to return to duty, shall be cause for dismissal. The mailing by U.S. mail of a first class letter postage paid, addressed to the employee’s last known address, shall be reasonable notice. (Prior code § 2708.9)

2.36.470 Employee responsibilities and benefits—Military leave.
Any line-item employee shall receive normal salary and fringe benefits during the first thirty days of any period of temporary military leave. Such compensation shall not exceed thirty calendar days in any one fiscal year. Any temporary military leave in excess of thirty days in one fiscal year shall be taken as vacation leave or leave of absence without pay. (Prior code § 2708.10)

2.36.480 Employee responsibilities and benefits—Jury duty.
Any regular or probationary city employee, when duly called to serve on any jury, and when not excluded therefrom, or when subpoenaed to appear as a witness at any trial, shall be compensated for the time required to be spent under the jurisdiction of the court by an amount equal to the difference between the pay he/she received as a juror and his/her regular daily rate received from the city. The difference between the time required to be spent on jury duty and the normal work day of the employee shall be spent performing the employee’s regular job assignments unless the department head, upon approval of the personnel director, determines this not to be practical. (Prior code § 2708.11)

2.36.490 Reports and records required.
A. The personnel department shall maintain a service record for each employee, showing the original date of employment, and the original job classification and pay rate, together with a record of subsequent changes in the status of the employee in the course of employment with the city. In addition, a personnel file shall be maintained for each employee in which is placed copies of forms and other records affecting the personnel status of the employee as determined by the personnel director.
B. Every appointment, transfer, promotion, demotion, change of salary rate, and any other temporary or permanent change in status of employees shall be reported on a personnel action form to and approved by the personnel director before taking effect. The personnel director shall advise the finance director of each of these changes.
C. Each department shall keep daily attendance records of all employees on time cards prepared by the finance director. Such other information as may be required to be maintained about city employees by federal or state requirement shall be kept in the manner prescribed.
D. At the time of separation from service, a employee’s service record will be placed in the personnel file and kept on inactive status for at least five years.
E. Employment applications and examination materials shall be kept on file for two years from the date the eligible list was established.
F. “Public records,” as defined in the Government Code, are open to inspection during regular office hours under the supervision of the custodian of such records. Each city employee may inspect his/her personnel file under the supervision of the personnel director. The city administrative officer shall justify withholding any record by demonstrating that the record in question is exempt under the Government Code or that on the facts of the particular case the public interest served by not making the record public clearly outweighs the public interest served by disclosure of the record. (Prior code § 2709)

2.36.500 Departmental rules.
Each department head shall have the right to adopt such rules and regulations for his or her department provided they do not conflict with the City Charter, with these rules and regulations, or with applicable state or federal law or regulation. Such rules shall be reviewed by the personnel director prior to adoption. (Prior code § 2710)

2.36.540 Personnel board—Established—Membership—Term of office—Duties.
A. Established. 
    1. There is established pursuant to Section 1102 of the City Charter a personnel board. The personnel board shall have five members who shall be qualified to serve under the terms of Section 1202 of the City Charter.
    2. Term of Office. Members of the personnel board shall be appointed for terms of four years and shall serve at the pleasure of the council; provided, that initial appointment shall be as follows:
        a. The terms of two members shall expire June 30, 1981;
        b. The terms of three members shall expire June 30, 1983.
    3. Three members of the personnel board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business; provided, however, that for the purpose of a hearing on appeal of a disciplinary action, no board member may vote on a decision if absent from part of a hearing, unless such member certifies that he/she listened to a recording of or read the transcript of the entire hearing.
    4. Filling Vacancies on Personnel Board. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term of the person replaced.
B. Functions. 
    1. The duties of the personnel board shall be advisory only.
    2. The personnel board shall hear employee appeals from disciplinary actions taken pursuant to Section 2.36.340.
    3. The personnel board shall review grievances pursuant to Section 2.36.360.
    4. In connection with such hearings, the personnel board shall administer oaths to all witnesses appearing before it. Any regular officer or employee of the city who fails to take the oath or fails to testify truthfully under oath at a hearing shall be subject to disciplinary action.
    5. In connection with such hearings, the personnel board shall have the authority to subpoena witnesses and to require the production of books, papers and any other materials pertinent to the investigation or hearing. It is unlawful for any person to disobey such a subpoena or order to produce. Subpoenas shall be issued at the request of either party prior to the commencement of such hearing, and after the commencement of such hearings only in the discretion of the personnel board.
    6. The personnel board shall perform such other duties as the council may require pertaining to personnel administration. (Prior code § 2711)

Chapter 2.40 ELECTION CAMPAIGN REGULATIONS

Sections:
2.40.010     Title.
2.40.020     Purpose and intent.
2.40.030     Definitions.
2.40.040     Contribution limitations.
2.40.050     Election campaign accounts.
2.40.060     Campaign statements.
2.40.070     Repealed.
2.40.080     Responsibilities of city clerk.
2.40.090     Criminal misdemeanor actions.
2.40.100     Civil or administrative actions.
2.40.110     Injunctive relief.
2.40.120     Cost of litigation.
2.40.130     Construction of provisions.
2.40.140     Council study committee.
2.40.150     Repealed.
Prior legislation: prior code §§ 2800—2812; Ords. 1067 § 3, 1191 § 3, 1254 § 3.

2.40.010 Title.
This chapter may be cited as the election campaign regulations of the city. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2017: Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998)

2.40.020 Purpose and intent.
A. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter:
    1. To promote integrity, honesty, fairness, and transparency in municipal election campaigns.
    2. To prevent corruption, or the appearance of corruption, which results from the real or imagined influence of large contributions on the conduct or actions of candidates elected to office.
    3. To ensure a level of discussion of public issues adequate for a viable campaign by providing voters with the information necessary to make an assessment of each candidate or measure before voting.
    4. To require public disclosure of campaign contributions and expenditures made in support of or in opposition to candidates or measures in municipal elections.
    5. To place realistic and enforceable limits on the amounts persons may contribute in municipal election campaigns.
    6. To ensure that funds contributed to a campaign committee are used solely for campaign purposes.
    7. To provide full and fair enforcement of all the provisions of this chapter.
B. By enacting this chapter, the council does not intend to deprive or restrict any citizen of the exercise of rights guaranteed under the United States Constitution and the California Constitution.
C. The city council takes specific notice of the findings and declarations made in the Political Reform Act and finds and declares them applicable to San Luis Obispo and a basis for enacting this chapter.
D. It is the intent of this chapter to impose limits on the amount of money that may be contributed to a candidate or controlled committee to achieve the purposes specified in this section. This chapter is not intended, and shall not be construed, to establish any reporting, filing, or procedural requirement in addition to, or different from, the Political Reform Act or the regulations adopted by the Fair Political Practices Commission (FPPC), except as specifically set forth in Sections 2.40.050 and 2.40.090 infra. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2017: Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998)

2.40.030 Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter shall have the same definitions as specified in the Political Reform Act and FPPC regulations. In those cases where definitions in the Political Reform Act or FPPC regulations contain a specific reference to any state election, candidate, or electoral criteria, the definition shall be modified to reflect the municipal equivalent, or, in the absence of a municipal equivalent, to delete the specific reference. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2017: Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1407 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998)

2.40.040 Contribution limitations.
A. Contributions by Persons to Candidates and/or Controlled Committees. No person shall make any contribution to a candidate and/or any controlled committee connected with that candidate, with respect to any single election, which would cause the total amount contributed by such person to the candidate and any controlled committee connected with that candidate, when combined, to exceed three hundred dollars.
B. Acceptance or Solicitation by Candidates or Controlled Committees. No candidate or controlled committee shall solicit or accept any contribution from any person which would cause the total amount contributed by such person, with respect to any single election, to the candidate and/or any controlled committee connected with that candidate, when combined, to exceed the sum of three hundred dollars.
C. Contributions by Candidates. The provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to contributions from a candidate or from his or her immediate family to any controlled committee connected with that candidate, nor to the expenditure, by the candidate, of his or her personal funds. For purposes of this section, “immediate family” means a candidate’s or elected officeholder’s spouse or domestic partner, and/or dependent children.
D. Anonymous Contributions. No candidate or controlled committee shall accept anonymous contributions, with respect to any single election, which exceed fifty dollars. Subject to the provisions of state law, in the event a candidate or controlled committee receives an anonymous contribution that would result in a violation of this subsection, the candidate or controlled committee shall promptly pay that sum to the city for deposit into the general fund to be used to defray the costs of municipal elections. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2017: Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1407 § 3, 2002; Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998. Formerly 2.40.050)

2.40.050 Election campaign accounts.
A. Campaign Bank Accounts. An individual who plans to run for a city elective office and who plans to accept contributions and make campaign-related expenditures must set up a campaign bank account at a financial institution with a branch located in the city of San Luis Obispo.
B. Access to Records by City Clerk. The city clerk shall have full access at all reasonable hours to the bank’s records concerning all election campaign accounts. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2017: Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1407 §§ 4, 5, 6, 2002; Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998. Formerly 2.40.060)

2.40.060 Campaign statements.
A. Required Filing Schedule. Every campaign treasurer shall file with the city clerk campaign statements as required by the provisions of the Government Code and in a format acceptable to the city clerk.
B. Contents. Each state campaign statement filed shall contain the information required under the provisions of the Government Code and any contributions greater than fifty dollars.
C. Filing. Each document required to be filed in this chapter shall be filed with the city clerk, and elsewhere as may be required by the Government Code, in accordance with such deadlines as may be specified by the elections official or otherwise required by applicable law.
D. Publication. The city clerk shall promptly, following receipt for filing, post a copy of each campaign statement on the city of San Luis Obispo’s website for public inspection, redacting personal information in accordance with state law. The city clerk shall report on the website of any candidate and/or committee that has failed to comply by the required deadline with the campaign statement requirements pursuant to this section or state law. In addition, the city clerk shall cause to be published a display ad in a newspaper of general circulation advising the public how and where to access copies of the filed campaign statements on the city of San Luis Obispo’s website, at the time mail ballots are distributed for said election.
E. Electronic Campaign Disclosure. Each candidate, candidate controlled committee and independent committee that is required to file a semi-annual campaign statement, a pre-election campaign statement, or an amended campaign statement with the city clerk pursuant to the Political Reform Act, and that receives a total of two thousand dollars or more in contributions or makes a total of two thousand dollars or more in independent expenditures, shall file the statement with the city clerk in an electronic format.
    1. In addition to any other report required by this section, all persons subject to the requirements of this section shall file the following reports with the city clerk in an electronic format:
        a. A report disclosing a contribution received by or made to a candidate or local ballot measure, or an independent expenditure made for or against a candidate or local ballot measure, of two thousand dollars or more during an election cycle. The report shall be filed within twenty-four hours of the independent expenditure or receipt of the contribution.
        b. A report disclosing a contribution received by or made to a candidate or a local ballot measure, or an independent expenditure made for or against a candidate or local ballot measure, of two thousand dollars or more at any time other than during an election cycle. The report shall be filed within ten business days of the independent expenditure or receipt of the contribution.
    2. A candidate or committee that has filed an electronic statement or report is not required to file a paper copy.
    3. Once a candidate or committee is subject to the electronic filing requirements imposed by this section, the candidate or committee will remain subject to the electronic filing requirements until the candidate or committee files a termination statement pursuant to the Political Reform Act.
    4. Any candidate or committee not required to file an electronic statement or report by this section may voluntarily opt to file an electronic statement or report by submitting written notice to the city clerk’s office. A candidate or committee that opts to file an electronic statement or report is not required to file a paper copy. (Ord. 1682 §§ 4, 5, 2020; Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1407 § 7, 2002; Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998. Formerly 2.40.070)

2.40.070 Campaign signs.
Repealed by Ord. 1667. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2017: Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1407 § 14, 2002. Formerly 2.40.080)

2.40.080 Responsibilities of city clerk.
A. Duties. In addition to any other duties required of the city clerk under this chapter, the city clerk shall:
    1. Prescribe and furnish, without charge, appropriate forms for all campaign statements, documents and reports required to be filed by this chapter.
    2. Determine whether required statements and declarations have been filed and, if so, whether they conform on their face with the requirements of this chapter.
    3. Promptly notify all persons who have failed to file a statement in the form and at the time required by this chapter.
    4. Report, in writing, apparent violations of this chapter to the city attorney.
    5. Promptly, following receipt for filing, post a copy of each campaign statement on the city of San Luis Obispo’s website for public inspection. The city clerk shall report on the website of any candidate and/or committee that has failed to comply by the required deadline with the campaign statement requirements pursuant to this section or state law. In addition, the city clerk shall cause to be published one display ad in a newspaper of general circulation advising the public how and where to access copies of the filed campaign statements on the city of San Luis Obispo’s website.
    6. Compile and maintain a current log of all filed statements pertaining to each reporting committee. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2017: Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1407 § 8, 2002; Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998. Formerly 2.40.090)

2.40.090 Criminal misdemeanor actions.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who causes any other person to violate any provision of this chapter, or who aids and abets any other person in the violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be liable under the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2017: Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998. Formerly 2.40.100)

2.40.100 Civil or administrative actions.
A. Any person who intentionally or negligently violates any provision of this chapter relating to campaign contribution limits or disclosures may be liable in a civil action brought by the city attorney or by a person residing within the city for an amount not more than three times the amount of the unlawful contribution or expenditure. If, after consultation with the city clerk and review of the facts surrounding an alleged violation, the city attorney does not find the alleged violation to warrant the filing of a civil action and/or criminal prosecution, the city clerk may issue a notice of violation and/or administrative citation pursuant to Chapter 1.24.
B. If any person files an original city campaign statement after any deadline imposed by this chapter, he or she shall pay, in addition to any other penalties provided for under this chapter, the sum of one hundred dollars per day after the deadline until the statement or report is filed. Liability may not be enforced if on an impartial basis the city clerk determines that the late filing was not willful and that enforcement of the liability will not further the purposes of this chapter. In addition, the city clerk may assess any applicable fines in accordance with state law.
C. If two or more persons are responsible for any violation, they shall be jointly and severally liable.
D. Any person, before filing a civil action pursuant to this section, shall first file with the city attorney a written request for the city attorney to commence the action or the city clerk to issue a notice of violation as provided in subsection A of this section. The request shall contain a statement of the grounds for believing a cause of action exists and/or a violation has occurred. The city attorney and/or the city clerk shall respond within ten days after receipt of the request indicating whether he or she intends to file a civil action, notice of violation or administrative citation. If the city attorney or the city clerk indicates in the affirmative and files a suit or serves a notice of violation and/or administrative citation within thirty days thereafter, no other action may be brought, unless any action by the city attorney or city clerk is dismissed without prejudice.
E. In determining the amount of liability, the court may take into account the seriousness of the violation and the degree of culpability of the defendant. If a judgment is entered against the defendant or defendants in an action, the plaintiff shall receive fifty percent of the amount recovered. The remaining fifty percent shall be deposited into the city treasury. In an action brought by the city attorney, the entire amount shall be paid to the city treasury.
F. No civil action alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be filed more than four years after the date the violation occurred. (Ord. 1682 § 5, 2020; Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1407 § 9, 2002; Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998. Formerly 2.40.110)

2.40.110 Injunctive relief.
The city attorney or any person residing in the city may sue for injunctive relief to enjoin violations or to compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2017: Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998. Formerly 2.40.120)

2.40.120 Cost of litigation.
The court may award to a plaintiff or defendant who prevails in any action authorized by this chapter his or her costs of litigation, including reasonable attorneys’ fees; provided, however, no costs of litigation or attorneys’ fees shall be awarded against the city. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2017: Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998. Formerly 2.40.130)

2.40.130 Construction of provisions.
A. This chapter shall be in addition to all other city and state laws applicable to municipal elections. Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the definitions and terms set forth in the Government Code shall govern the interpretations of terms used in this chapter. This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purposes.
B. If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the chapter and the applicability of such provision to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1643 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2017: Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998. Formerly 2.40.150)

2.40.140 Council study committee.
A. Appointment. The council may appoint a committee of at least five citizens to study the efficacy of this chapter. (Ord. 1643 § 2, 2017: Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1407 § 10, 2002: Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998. Formerly 2.40.160)

2.40.150 Expiration of provisions.
Repealed by Ord. 1643. (Ord. 1599 § 2 (part), 2014: Ord. 1538 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 1483 § 1 (part), 2005: Ord. 1407 § 11, 2002: Ord. 1333 § 1 (part), 1998. Formerly 2.40.170)

Chapter 2.42 MAILED BALLOT ELECTIONS

Sections:
2.42.010     Special municipal election—Conducting as all-mail ballot election.
2.42.020     Scope of mailed ballot elections.
2.42.030     Conduct of mailed ballot elections.
2.42.040     Dates for special municipal elections.
2.42.050     Drop-off centers.
2.42.060     Provision of ballot materials.
2.42.070     Return of ballots.
2.42.080     Official ballot drop-off centers.
2.42.090     Absent voter.
2.42.100     Provisional ballots.
2.42.110     Processing of ballots.

2.42.010 Special municipal election—Conducting as all-mail ballot election.
Any special municipal election may be conducted as an all-mail ballot election in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1559, 2011)

2.42.020 Scope of mailed ballot elections.
Any special municipal election specified herein may be held as a mailed ballot election for any purpose. (Ord. 1559 § 1, 2011)

2.42.030 Conduct of mailed ballot elections.
Any mailed ballot election may be conducted, and the votes thereof canvassed, and the returns thereof made, and the result thereof ascertained and determined, as herein provided; and in all particulars not prescribed by this chapter, said elections shall be held as provided by the general laws of the state of California for the holding of municipal elections in the city. The elections official is hereby authorized and directed to take all actions necessary to conduct said special elections as provided herein and as required by law. (Ord. 1559 § 2, 2011)

2.42.040 Dates for special municipal elections.
The date for any mailed ballot special municipal election shall either be on a date set by the California Elections Code Sections 1000, 1001, or 1500, or on any other date set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1559 § 3, 2011)

2.42.050 Drop-off centers.
The elections official, or his or her designee (hereinafter “elections official”), shall establish the official ballot drop-off centers. At least one of the official drop-off centers shall be open during normal business hours twenty-nine days before Election Day on weekdays (excluding holidays). The elections official may establish such additional official drop-off centers as he or she may deem necessary. All official drop-off centers shall be open on Election Day from seven a.m. to eight p.m. and at that time shall be closed. (Ord. 1563 § 1, 2011: Ord. 1559 § 4, 2011)

2.42.060 Provision of ballot materials.
The elections official shall provide to each registered voter appropriate supplies necessary for the use and return of the ballot by mail.
A. Each ballot mailed by the elections official shall be accompanied by a ballot pamphlet and instructions for return of the ballot, including the location of the official ballot drop-off centers for the special election, and the date and time by which such ballot must be received at the official ballot drop-off centers to be counted for the election.
B. Each ballot mailed by the elections official shall be accompanied by an official return envelope.
C. The form of the return envelope shall be as set forth in the provisions of the California Elections Code governing the form of vote-by-mail voter identification envelopes.
D. The elections official shall not commence to mail the ballot and election materials prior to the twenty-ninth day before the election, and shall complete the mailing no later than the tenth day prior to the election, except as otherwise permitted or required by the California Elections Code.
E. The failure of any registered voter to receive an official ballot shall not invalidate any election conducted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1563 § 2, 2011; Ord. 1559 § 5, 2011)

2.42.070 Return of ballots.
A. Ballots may be returned by regular, certified or registered United States mail, overnight commercial carrier, in person, or in any other manner authorized by the California Elections Code. Ballots returned in person may be returned to the official drop-off centers and shall be deemed received by the registrar of voters on the date and at the time of return to an official drop-off center. The elections official may include a notice to voters specifying the permitted means by which to return the voted ballot.
B. All ballots shall be delivered in a manner authorized by the California Elections Code by the voter or other authorized person to the official ballot drop-off centers no later than eight p.m. on the date of the special election. Any ballot received by the elections official by mail or at the official ballot drop-off centers after eight p.m. on the date of the special election shall not be accepted or counted. However, if at the time of the announcement that the poll is closed there are any voters inside the official ballot drop-off centers who have not been able to deposit their official ballot envelope with the election officials there, the election officials shall continue to accept envelopes from such voters until all have had the opportunity to deliver their ballots.
C. Any ballot returned in person shall be returned by the voter who was authorized to cast the ballot or by a person designated and authorized by the voter, in accordance with the California Elections Code, in the appropriate place provided by the elections official on the outside of the return envelope.
D. The elections official shall establish appropriate procedures for verifying the signature and residence address of each voter casting a mailed ballot. Upon receipt at the elections official’s office, the elections official or a deputy elections official shall compare the signature on each envelope with that appearing on the affidavit of registration of such voter and, if determined to be the same, deposit the ballot, still in the official return envelope, in a ballot container in the elections official’s office. If the ballot is rejected on the basis of such comparison, the envelope shall not be opened and the ballot shall not be counted, and the cause of rejection shall be noted on the face of the envelope. A variance between the signatures caused by the substitution of initials for the first or middle name, or both, shall not invalidate the ballot. No ballot shall be removed from its envelope until the time for processing. No ballot shall be rejected on the basis of this subsection after the envelope has been opened. (Ord. 1563 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1559 § 6, 2011)

2.42.080 Official ballot drop-off centers.
The elections official shall establish the appropriate procedures and furnish the necessary staffing to ensure the secrecy and adequate security of ballots returned to the officially designated ballot drop-off centers. (Ord. 1559 § 7, 2011)

2.42.090 Absent voter.
A. No application need be made by any voter for an absentee ballot for this special election conducted entirely by mail and, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of Chapter 1 (except Sections 3011, 3014, 3017, and 3021 to the extent not inconsistent with this chapter) and Chapter 3 of Division 3 (Section 3000 et seq.) of the Elections Code of the State of California shall not apply to special elections hereunder; provided, however, that any voter who has qualified as a permanent absentee voter under the Elections Code shall receive and return a ballot in the manner provided herein for all other voters. The return of the mailed ballot in the manner authorized and conforming in all particulars to the requirements of this chapter shall be accepted as an absentee ballot on behalf of any voter who is absent from the city on the date of the election.
B. Any registered voter who will be absent from the city prior to the mail-ballot election to and including the date of the election may file a written application with the elections official to receive an absentee mailed ballot at an address other than the voter’s residence. The application shall be filed following the adoption of the resolution calling the mailed ballot election and on or before the seventh day prior to the election. The application shall show the voter’s place of residence and the address to which the ballot should be mailed, and state that the voter will be unable to receive and return the mailed ballot by the election date, and shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury. No voter who requests an absentee mail ballot shall be required to return or surrender a duplicate mailed ballot sent to the voter’s residence. (Ord. 1563 § 4, 2011: Ord. 1559 § 8, 2011)

2.42.100 Provisional ballots.
Any registered voter who has not already cast his or her vote may obtain a ballot at the official drop-off centers. The drop-off centers shall provide the necessary materials to enable voters to cast their votes in person, in accordance with the provisional ballot provisions of the Elections Code. (Ord. 1559 § 9, 2011)

2.42.110 Processing of ballots.
Notwithstanding any provision in the California Elections Code, the elections official may commence processing the ballots no earlier than the seventh working day prior to the election. However, the elections official shall not release any results until eight p.m. on the day of the special election. (Ord. 1559 § 10, 2011)

Chapter 2.44 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT REVIEW PROCEDURES

Sections:
2.44.010     Purpose.
2.44.020     Resources.
2.44.030     Applicability.
2.44.040     Review procedures.

2.44.010 Purpose.
A. This chapter is intended to ensure that the city knows the capabilities of its basic services and resources and does not take action which will overload them.
B. This chapter deals with resources in the broadest sense. As it is used in this chapter, the term “resources” means and includes manmade systems and municipal services in addition to natural resources. To deal with different types of resources, this chapter divides them into two groups according to their importance to the public health, safety and general welfare.
C. The city intends to avoid the financial and planning crises created when development exceeds the capacity of the city’s resources. To that end, this chapter establishes procedures for reviewing the impact a proposed development plan or construction project will have on city resources. These procedures are designed to alert the city to resource problems. The city shall use this information to ensure adequate services and resources for the entire community as well as for new development, insofar as the city is capable of doing so. The city has the responsibility to alleviate resource problems and provide the services necessary for new development when doing so makes good fiscal planning sense. (Prior code § 2900)

2.44.020 Resources.
A. Types. Listed below are the basic city resources covered by this chapter. They are divided into the following two categories:
    1. Level 1: Life and Safety Support Systems. Deficiencies in these resources are termed Level 1 deficiencies.
        a. Water – Supply, distribution, availability for fire fighting;
        b. Sewage – Collection and treatment;
        c. Flood control – Storm drainage.
    2. Level 2: Safety and Security Services and General Resources.
        a. Fire protection;
        b. Police protection;
        c. Circulation – Pedestrians and vehicles;
        d. Social, cultural and educational. For example, youth centers, libraries and schools;
        e. Parks and open space;
        f. Land in each of the use categories established by the city’s general plan;
        g. Air quality and airshed capacity.
B. Resource Inventory. The city shall develop and maintain up-to-date information on the capabilities of its basic resources.
C. Standards and Policies. 
    1. The council shall adopt, by resolution, standards and policies for determining the capacity and current status of city resources. These standards will be used by city departments to determine whether a resource is overburdened, or would be overburdened if a development project were allowed.
    2. The council may amend these standards and policies whenever it considers it necessary. Before any such standard or policy may be adopted or amended, the council must hold a public hearing on the proposal. A notice of the hearing must be published at least ten days before the hearing.
    3. The absence of any particular standard or policy shall not in itself be sufficient reason to deny a permit. (Prior code § 2900.1)

2.44.030 Applicability.
A. Projects Subject to Review. All development projects are subject to the review procedures described in the following sections, with the exemptions listed below:
    1. Building permits;
    2. Use permits;
    3. Subdivision tract and parcel maps;
    4. Planned developments;
    5. Rezonings;
    6. General and specific plans and amendments to them;
    7. Annexations;
    8. Agreements or other arrangements requiring the city to commit any of its resources to the use of any other entity;
    9. All other actions and entitlements for new development or construction that could lead to an increased burden on city resources.
B. Exemptions. The following types of projects are exempt from the review procedures described in the following sections:
    1. An alteration or addition to an existing dwelling that does not divide the dwelling into two or more units;
    2. A remodeling, repair or addition to a structure that does not increase the structure’s occupancy or change its use;
    3. Construction of public works other than buildings. (Prior code § 2900.2)

2.44.040 Review procedures.
A. General Requirements. 
    1. As far as possible and reasonable, review and action on a resource problem will be simultaneous with the processing of entitlements for the affected development project. However, if the project would create a Level 1 deficiency, no entitlement may be issued until the city considers the need for action on the deficiency adequate to protect the public’s health, safety and general welfare and meet the intent of this chapter. Unless findings to the contrary are made, a Level 2 deficiency may not be a reason for withholding or delaying approval of a project.
    2. In the case of Level 2 problems, the authority which determines appropriate measures to mitigate the problem must also find that these measures adequately protect the public’s health, safety and general welfare and meet the intent of this law. This finding shall be made before a project may be approved, and shall be stated in the minutes or other record of the action.
    3. When the community development director, planning commission or council determines mitigation measures, the minutes of the action must state the specific measures decided upon and the reasons for them. The minutes must also reflect any action to proceed without mitigating measures together with the reasons for such action on any project where it has previously been determined that a deficiency would be created.
    4. Although the intent of this chapter is to resolve resource problems during the normal processing of development projects, and to make every reasonable effort to expedite action, the council may, within time limits imposed by any applicable law, order as much research and as many meetings as necessary to protect the public’s health, safety and general welfare.
    5. All hearings held on Level 1 resource problems must be advertised the same way as zoning ordinance amendments are advertised. Level 2 deficiencies shall be considered as part of the project review and need not be advertised apart from such advertising as may be required for the specific entitlement being requested.
B. Initial Review by City Staff. 
    1. The staff of the community development department shall transmit all project applications to various city departments and shall review the application to determine the impact the project would have on city resources.
    2. If the project can be accommodated according to the resource standards and policies set by the council, the director of public services shall file a written statement saying so. The director may file this statement if the project can be accommodated whether by existing resources or by resources that are planned to exist before the project is built or occupied.
    3. If the project cannot be accommodated, the staff will prepare a report within thirty days of receipt of a complete application detailing the problem and possible solutions. The report shall include a detailed graphic and written description of the total area affected by the deficiency.
    4. If information on file is inadequate to determine whether a project will overload a city resource, the city staff must immediately investigate the situation and report. The report shall state the reasons for the lack of adequate information, give any new information learned from the investigation and be completed in time for review by the community development director, planning commission, council or other reviewing body at the same time the project is reviewed.
    5. Staff reports on resource overloads will be reviewed as described in subsections C through E of this section.
C. Administrative and ARC-Approved Projects. 
    1. When a city department or the architectural review commission is to make the final decision on a project, the staff report on a resource problem will be submitted to the community development director. The report will include recommendations for action. The director then must determine appropriate mitigation measures for both Level 1 and Level 2 deficiencies. In the case of Level 1 overloads, he or she must also decide whether the appropriate measures are adequate to allow the proposed project. This determination normally shall be made at the same time as the decision on the project except if the mitigation measure requires a capital budget commitment by the city it shall be referred to the council for final action.
    2. The director shall forward to the city council any issues of community-wide significance. Any decision by the director may be appealed to the council.
D. Projects Approved by the Planning Commission. 
    1. When the planning commission is to make the final decision on a project, the staff report on a resource problem will be submitted to the planning commission. The commission must consider the deficiency at the same meeting at which it reviews the project. The commission must determine appropriate mitigation measures for both Level l and 2 deficiencies. In the case of a Level 1 problem, it must also determine whether the measures are adequate to allow the project.
    2. The commission’s decision is final unless appealed to the council except if the mitigating measure requires a capital budget commitment by the city it shall be referred to the council for final action.
E. Projects Approved by the Council. 
    1. When the council is to make the final decision on a project, the staff report on a resource problem and, where applicable, the planning commission’s recommendations will be submitted to the council.
    2. At the same meeting during which it reviews the project, the council must determine appropriate mitigation measures for both Level l and Level 2 deficiencies. In the case of Level l deficiencies, it must also determine whether the measures are adequate to allow the project. (Prior code § 2900.3)

Chapter 2.48 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMISSION

Sections:
2.48.010     Established.
2.48.020     Findings and policy.
2.48.030     Terms.
2.48.040     Duties.
2.48.050     Projects subject to architectural review.
2.48.060     Noncompliance with provisions.
2.48.070     Revocation, expiration and extension of approval.
2.48.080     Appeals.
2.48.090     Architectural review procedures.
Prior legislation: prior code §§ 9500.1—9500.3; Ords. 1010 § 3, 1138 § 3, 1219 § 3, 1412 § 3.

2.48.010 Established.
There is hereby established the San Luis Obispo architectural review commission consisting of seven members appointed by the council. Commissioners are compensated at fifty dollars per meeting with a monthly maximum of two hundred dollars. (Ord. 1417 § 3 (part), 2002)

2.48.020 Findings and policy.
The council finds and declares that:
A. The city of San Luis Obispo is a city with unique characteristics, ideal climate conditions, spectacular natural vistas, and natural dynamic natural features. It is these characteristics which attract a significant number of visitors to San Luis Obispo and which enhance the quality of life of the permanent residents;
B. All of these factors constitute an important economic base for the city, both for those who earn their living and for those who visit the city;
C. The appearance of buildings, structures, and the land, as visible from public streets, places and ways, has a material and substantial relationship to property values and the taxability of property in the city;
D. To protect the economic welfare of the community, it is the policy of the council to protect, maintain and enhance the social and economic values created by past and present investments in the community by requiring all future development to respect these traditions and require that all buildings and structures placed on the land respect the natural land forms, and become a compatible part of the total community environment, both in the local neighborhood and the city as a whole;
E. The policy will be furthered by the creation of an architectural review commission to develop appropriate standards and guidelines for the use of persons planning future developments, to advise and assist both the developers and the city in applying the standards, and to review all proposals for future developments to assure conformance with the policy. (Ord. 1417 § 3 (part), 2002)

2.48.030 Terms.
A. Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of four years which shall commence immediately upon appointment by the council.
B. Commissioners shall serve at the pleasure of the council and may be reappointed; provided, that no appointee shall serve more than two consecutive full terms (eight years). Appointment to a partial term of office following an unscheduled vacancy shall not preclude the appointee from serving two consecutive full terms following completion of the partial term; provided, that the partial term is less than two years.
C. All of the procedures and requirements contained in the council adopted Handbook for Advisory Bodies shall be incorporated in this section by reference. (Ord. 1417 § 3 (part), 2002)

2.48.040 Duties.
A. The commission shall establish appropriate standards and guidelines for the use of persons planning future developments which are subject to architectural review commission approval, the standards and guidelines to be set forth in pictorial and/or narrative form and may illustrate undesirable as well as desirable examples of design. A document containing the standards and guidelines shall be available for public reference in the community development department. The commission shall periodically review these standards and guidelines and may make appropriate amendments.
B. The commission shall make itself available to advise and assist both developers and city staff in the application of its standards and guidelines to projects during schematic and development stages.
C. The commission shall review and approve plans for all structures and physical improvements, and for any relocation, addition, extension, or exterior change to existing buildings, structures and physical improvements, as set forth in Section 2.48.050. Approval by the commission must be obtained before a building permit or other city permit may be issued authorizing construction, alteration, relocation, addition, or extension. This requirement for commission approval shall not apply to work which the director determines to be aesthetically insignificant, or minor or incidental. When, in the opinion of the director, an application for use permit, variance or rezoning may create an architectural impact contrary to the objectives of this chapter, the director may require architectural review prior to any required hearing on the application. (Ord. 1417 § 3 (part), 2002)

2.48.050 Projects subject to architectural review.
A. Architectural review shall be required for all structures and physical improvements except individual-built single-family dwellings and small residential development projects. The exception for the individual single-family dwellings shall not apply: (1) when architectural review is required as a condition of a subdivision, use permit or other discretionary entitlement; (2) when a developer proposes to construct three or more units, and these units do not constitute a “small residential development projects” as defined herein; (3) when the director determines the site is sensitive as set forth in the procedures document; “sensitive sites” shall include, but are not limited to, open space zoning areas designated by resolution of the planning commission, architectural review commission or city council; (4) where the scale or character of the proposed dwelling contrasts significantly with adjacent or neighboring structures; and (5) where any required parking space that is covered is converted to another use and replacement parking is proposed. “Small residential development projects” are projects consisting of the construction, rehabilitation or remodel of less than five dwellings, where the gross floor area of individual dwellings does not exceed one thousand two hundred square feet. The director may require minor or incidental architectural review where necessary to meet the intent of the city’s design guidelines.
B. Architectural review shall be required for all projects, including individual-built single-family dwellings and small residential development projects, located in or along any creek or waterway as defined by the city’s floodplain management policy. Approval shall be granted if a finding can be made that a project complies with the uniform storm design criteria for waterways, all other applicable policies and standards for floodplain management, and otherwise satisfies relevant architectural criteria. Projects involving any building or bridge proposed to be constructed in or over any portion of any of the four major creeks or waterways, as defined by said policy, or any major creek modification project shall be referred to the city council for review and specific directional guidance prior to any architectural review. (Ord. 1461 § 3, 2004: Ord. 1417 § 3 (part), 2002)

2.48.060 Noncompliance with provisions.
A. In addition to any other fines, penalties or enforcement provisions set forth in this chapter, failure to comply in any respect with an approved architectural review application shall constitute grounds for immediate stoppage of the work involved in the noncompliance until the matter is resolved.
B. An occupancy permit shall not be issued in part or whole for any building or group of buildings subject to architectural review unless and until the work specified in the architectural review approval has been completed. (Ord. 1417 § 3 (part), 2002)

2.48.070 Revocation, expiration and extension of approval.
A. In any case wherein demolition or removal of any existing structure is a part of architectural review approval, the demolition or removal shall be completed, and all debris removed from the site, within the specific period of days designated in the architectural review approval, or the entire architectural review approval shall be deemed to have expired for cause.
B. Architectural review approvals will automatically expire in one year unless a different expiration date or unlimited expiration is stipulated at the time of approval. An applicant may at any time apply to the director for an extension of up to one year; provided, that approval not exceed a maximum of two years from the date of original approval. The director may grant the extension if he or she finds that there has been no substantial change in the factual circumstances surrounding the originally approved design. The director may make minor modifications of the approved design at the time of extension. Any further extension beyond two years from the date of original approval shall require submission of a new application for architectural review commission approval. (Ord. 1417 § 3 (part), 2002)

2.48.080 Appeals.
A. Any person may appeal a decision of any official body, except that administrative decisions requiring no discretionary judgment, as provided in Chapter 1.20 of this code, may not be appealed.
B. Appeals must be filed within ten calendar days of the rendering of a decision which is being appealed. If the tenth day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the appeal period shall extend to the next business day.
C. Decisions of the director, as in the case of minor or incidental architectural review determinations, shall be appealed to the architectural review commission. Such appeals shall be filed with the director.
D. Decisions of the architectural review commission shall be appealed to the council. Such appeals shall be filed with the city clerk.
E. The appeal shall concern a specific action and shall state the grounds for appeal.
F. Action on appeals shall be considered at the same type of hearing and after the same notice that is required for the original decision.
G. Once an appeal has been filed, it shall be scheduled for the earliest available meeting, considering public notice requirements, unless the appellant agrees to a later date. (Ord. 1417 § 3 (part), 2002)

2.48.090 Architectural review procedures.
The commission shall adopt the procedures document that sets forth the procedures and criteria for architectural review. The document shall be published and dated and shall be approved by the council. A record copy of the current procedures document shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and in the community development department. Copies shall be available to the general public. (Ord. 1417 § 3 (part), 2002)

Chapter 2.52 JOINT RECREATIONAL USE OF SCHOOL DISTRICT PROPERTY COMMITTEE
(Repealed by Ord. 1574)

Chapter 2.56 HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION

Sections:
2.56.010     Established.
2.56.020     Purpose.
2.56.030     Functions.
2.56.040     Membership.
2.56.050     Terms of office.

2.56.010 Established.
There is hereby established the human relations commission, originally appointed by motion of the council in January, 1964. (Ord. 1244 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 1150 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 939 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 2480)

2.56.020 Purpose.
It is the purpose of the human relations commission to advise the council in its actions to create an environment within the city in which all persons can enjoy equal rights and opportunities regardless of race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, age, physical, mental or economic status. The human relations commission shall make recommendations to the council or the city administrative officer on how these social concerns and human needs can best be addressed. (Ord. 1244 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 1150 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 939 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 2480.2)

2.56.030 Functions.
The functions of the human relations commission are:
A. To promote mutual understanding and foster harmonious relations between persons and groups within the community, and provide a forum for residents to discuss problems relating to human rights and relations;
B. To receive and investigate complaints concerning community tensions and acts of discrimination, and cooperate with and assist other human services groups which have similar purposes;
C. To make recommendations to the council when action is proposed as a means to insuring community cooperation and understanding;
D. To evaluate perceived inadequacies in human rights and services and to recommend possible action;
E. To review and evaluate all city-funding requests from groups which provide human services; to provide liaison to recipients of grants-in-aid moneys, through personal contact and required activity and budget reports;
F. Such duties, including studies and research, as the council deems necessary and appropriate and assigns to the commission. (Ord. 1244 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 1150 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 939 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 2480.3)

2.56.040 Membership.
The human relations commission shall consist of seven members who are representative of diverse groups within the city and who have a demonstrated interest in social issues. (Ord. 1244 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 1150 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 939 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 2480.1)

2.56.050 Terms of office.
A. Commissioners shall be appointed by the council for terms of four years, commencing immediately upon appointment. Commissioners shall serve at the pleasure of the council. Any commissioner may be reappointed, provided that no appointee shall serve more than two consecutive terms (eight years).
B. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for unexpired terms. Appointment for a partial term following an unscheduled vacancy shall not preclude the appointee from serving two consecutive full terms following completion of the partial term, provided the partial term is less than two years. (Ord. 1244 § 1 (part), 1993: Ord. 1150 § 1 (part), 1990: Ord. 939 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 2480.4)

Chapter 2.60 PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING

Sections:
2.60.010     Declaration of intent.
2.60.020     Adherence to state standards.
2.60.030     Enforcement of compliance.

2.60.010 Declaration of intent.
The city of San Luis Obispo declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1, Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 1145 § 1, 1989)

2.60.020 Adherence to state standards.
Pursuant to Section 13510(c), Chapter 1, the San Luis Obispo police department will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST). (Ord. 1145 § 2, 1989)

2.60.030 Enforcement of compliance.
Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the commission to ascertain that the San Luis Obispo police department’s public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 1146 § 3, 1989)

Chapter 2.64 MUNICIPAL ADVOCATES

Sections:
2.64.010     Purpose and intent.
2.64.020     Definitions.
2.64.030     Exemptions.
2.64.040     Registration of municipal advocates.
2.64.050     Registration requirements.
2.64.060     Powers and duties of the city clerk.
2.64.070     Disclosure.
2.64.080     Municipal advocacy by former city officers or employees.
2.64.090     Violation and penalty.
2.64.100     Severability.

2.64.010 Purpose and intent.
The city recognizes that municipal advocates do not have public authority, but they may have significant influence on the city, and the public has a right to know who is being paid to influence the decisions being made by the city, and any financial relationships between those who are being influenced and those who are trying to influence them.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide a procedure whereby persons acting as municipal advocates are required to register and provide sufficient information so that complete disclosure of principals and other parties in interest represented by such municipal advocates may become a public record for the information of the city council and the general public. It is not the intent of this chapter to discourage nor prohibit the exercise of constitutional rights. (Ord. 1271 § 1, 1994)

2.64.020 Definitions.
A. The following persons are deemed to be municipal advocates and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter:
    1. Municipal Advocate. Any person, business entity or other organization, including an individual contract lobbyist, which contracts for economic consideration to communicate with any officer or employee of the City of San Luis Obispo for the purpose of influencing local legislative or discretionary action on behalf of any other person.
    2. In-House Municipal Advocate. Any business or organization, any of whose employees or members, as a part of their employment, communicate with any officer or employee of the City of San Luis Obispo for the purpose of influencing local legislative or discretionary action on behalf of that business or organization.
B. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply where employees or members indicate affiliation or identification with a business or organization, but do not represent the official position of the business or organization. (Ord. 1271 § 1, 1994)

2.64.030 Exemptions.
The term “municipal advocate” shall not include:
A. A public official or employee acting in an official capacity;
B. A person representing a nonprofit organization applying for a grant-in-aid from the City of San Luis Obispo;
C. A person specifically invited by the city council, or by any board or commission, for the purpose of giving testimony in aid of the body extending the invitation;
D. Any person, business entity, or other organization which submits a bid or proposal to the city in response to a solicitation initiated by the city;
E. Any newspaper or other regularly published periodical, radio or television station (including any individual who owns, publishes or is employed by any such newspaper, periodical, radio or television station) which in the ordinary course of business publishes news items, editorials or other comments or paid advertisements which directly or indirectly urge action upon municipal decisions, if such newspaper, periodical, radio or television station or individual engages in no further or other activities in connection with action upon such municipal decision;
F. A person acting on behalf of others in the performance of a duty or service, which duty or service lawfully can be performed for such other only by an attorney, architect, or engineer licensed to practice in the State of California. (Ord. 1271 § 1, 1994)

2.64.040 Registration of municipal advocates.
No municipal advocate shall communicate with any officer or employee of the city for the purpose of influencing local legislative or discretionary action on behalf of any other person without first registering with the city clerk. (Ord. 1271 § 1, 1994)

2.64.050 Registration requirements.
A. At the time of registration, each municipal advocate shall file with the city clerk the following
    1. The full name and city of residence of the municipal advocate;
    2. The name, address and phone number of the principal place of business of the municipal advocate;
    3. The occupation of the municipal advocate. If the filer is a business or organization, a specific description of the business or organization in sufficient detail to inform the reader of the nature and purpose of the business or organization;
    4. The name, address and phone number of each current client subject to the provisions of this chapter;
    5. The proposed local legislative or discretionary action the municipal advocate is employed to support or oppose, and the client on whose behalf the municipal advocate is employed for each proposed local legislative or discretionary action;
    6. Any other information required by the city clerk necessary to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter.
B. All information required under this section shall be filed with the city clerk on forms provided by the city clerk. Filing may be in person or by mail. The individual who files shall swear to the accuracy and completeness of the information under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 1271 § 1, 1994)

2.64.060 Powers and duties of the city clerk.
A. The city clerk shall have the authority to develop all forms and procedures necessary to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter.
B. The city clerk shall issue a “notice of registration required” upon the written request of any officer of the city if there is a reasonable basis to conclude that the requirement to register pursuant to Section 2.64.040 has not been met. Any person who in good faith and on reasonable grounds believes that compliance with this chapter is not required by reason of being exempt under Section 2.64.030, or for other cause, shall not be in violation of this chapter if, within fifteen days after receipt of notice from the city clerk, that person either complies or furnishes satisfactory evidence to the city clerk to establish that said person is exempt from registration. (Ord. 1271 § 1, 1994)

2.64.070 Disclosure.
Any person required to register under this chapter who speaks at a public meeting or public hearing before the city council or any board, commission, committee, or official of the city for the purpose of influencing local legislative or discretionary action on behalf of any other person shall first orally disclose that said person is registered as a municipal advocate pursuant to this chapter, and identify the party or parties represented. (Ord. 1271 § 1, 1994)

2.64.080 Municipal advocacy by former city officers or employees.
No city officer or employee shall, after the termination of service or employment with the city, appear as a municipal advocate before any board, commission, committee or agency of the city, including the city council, in relation to any case, proceeding, application, or contract, in which he or she personally participated during the period of his or her service or employment, or which was under his or her active consideration, for a period of two years from the date of termination of his or her employment with the city. (Ord. 1271 § 1, 1994)

2.64.090 Violation and penalty.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, and subject to the penalty provided for in Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 1271 § 1, 1994)

2.64.100 Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 1271 § 1, 1994)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:
3.01         Business Tax Certification
3.04         Transient Occupancy Tax
3.08         Dwelling Unit Construction Tax
3.12         Uniform Sales and Use Tax
3.15         Essential Services Transactions (Sales) and Use Tax
3.16         Utility Users’ Tax
3.20         Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund
3.24         Procedures for Payment of Claims and Purchases
3.28         General Reserve Account
3.32         Unclaimed Property
3.36         Public Works Contracts
3.40         Financing of Industrial and Commercial Development
3.42         Capital Improvement Board
3.50         Fire and Life Safety Inspections

Chapter 3.01 BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATION

Sections:
Article I.  General Provisions
    3.01.101     Purpose.
    3.01.102     Business tax certificates required.
    3.01.103     Exemptions.
    3.01.104     Definitions.
Article II. Tax Amounts
    3.01.201     Tax basis.
    3.01.202     Tax rate.
    3.01.203     Minimum tax.
Article III. Application and Renewal
    3.01.301     Business tax certificate applications.
    3.01.302     Business tax certificate renewals.
Article IV. Business Tax Certificate Issuance
    3.01.401     Content.
    3.01.402     Posting and keeping.
    3.01.403     Duplicates.
    3.01.404     Branch establishments.
    3.01.405     Change of location.
Article V.  Administration
    3.01.501     Certification of records.
    3.01.502     Information confidential.
    3.01.503     Finance director adjustment powers.
    3.01.504     Debt to city.
    3.01.505     Delinquencies and penalties.
    3.01.606     Enforcement.
    3.01.607     Evidence of doing business.
    3.01.508     Remedies cumulative.
    3.01.509     Apportionment.

Article I. General Provisions

3.01.101 Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter are enacted solely to raise revenue for general municipal purposes and are not intended for regulation. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.102 Business tax certificates required.
Business taxes are hereby imposed upon all businesses, professions, trades, vocations, enterprises, establishments, occupations, or callings conducting business in the city to which a business tax may lawfully apply, in the amount of fifty cents per thousand dollars of gross receipts. It shall be unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, vocation, enterprise, establishment, occupation, or calling in the city not otherwise exempt without first having procured a business tax certificate from the city or complying with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.
The business tax certificate shall be evidence only of the fact that such business tax has been paid. Neither the payment of the business tax nor the possession of the business tax certificate shall authorize, permit, or allow the doing of any act which the person paying or holding such business tax certificate would not otherwise be entitled to do; nor shall it be construed as permission to conduct or carry on a business at any place within the city where the conducting or carrying on of such business is prohibited or fails to comply with the city’s zoning, planning, or building regulations, nor shall it be construed as permission to conduct or carry on a business in such a manner as to create or maintain a nuisance. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.103 Exemptions.
The following persons and organizations are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Minors Under the Age of 18. Businesses owned and conducted by minors under the age of eighteen years shall be exempt from the business tax provisions of this chapter where all of the following conditions exist and legal documentation is provided to support that:
    1. All persons engaged in the operation of the business are under the age of eighteen years.
    2. All persons engaged in the operation of the business have a bona fide ownership interest in the business.
B. Charitable, Religious, and Nonprofit Organizations. 
    1. Organization activities. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a business tax to conduct, manage, or carry on any business, occupation, or activity of any institution or organization recognized by a tax board of the state with a “Statement of Domestic Non Profit Organization” or the Internal Revenue Service of the United States which is conducted wholly for the benefit of charitable, religious, or nonprofit purposes and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person.
    2. Nonexempt activities. The exemption provisions of this section shall not be construed to extend to any person, business, corporation, or organization receiving a fee, wage, stipend, salary, remuneration, compensation, or pay for the performance of any business, occupation, or activity related to exempt organization activities. Any such person, business, corporation, or organization shall be subject to the business tax provisions of this chapter and shall obtain the business tax certificate prior to any business, occupation, or activity being undertaken.
C. Conflicts With Federal and State Laws or Contractual Agreements. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to require a person to obtain a business tax certificate prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with the applicable statues, laws, or constitution of the United States or the State of California or other contractual obligations or franchise agreements. The finance director may develop administrative guidelines concerning exemptions, apportionment, and any other matters which she or he or she determines as necessary for the lawful and effective implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.104 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
A. “Business” shall mean and include professions, trades, vocations, rentals, leases, enterprises, establishments, and occupations and all and every kind of calling, any of which is conducted for the purpose of earning in whole, or in part, a profit or livelihood, whether or not a profit or a livelihood actually is earned thereby, whether paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, and whether or not the business has a fixed place of business in the city.
B. “Finance director” shall mean the individual designated by the city administrative officer to collect business taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
C. “Gross receipts” shall mean and include the total amounts actually received or receivable from sales, services, rentals, or leases in the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or a credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of, or in connection with, the sale or rental of materials, property (real or personal), goods, wares, or merchandise. Included in “gross receipts” shall be receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, rented or leased, the cost of the materials used, labor and service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever.
Excluded from “gross receipts” shall be the following:
    1. Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;
    2. Credit allowed on property accepted as a part of the purchase price in which property may later be sold;
    3. Any tax required by law to be included in, or added to, the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;
    4. Such part of the sales price of property returned by purchasers upon the rescission of the sales contract as is refunded, either in cash or by credit;
    5. Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom the amounts were collected;
    6. Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into the income of the business shall not be excluded;
    7. As to a real estate transaction, the sales price of the real estate sold for the account of others, except that portion which represents commission or other income;
    8. Income from businesses which perform the function of agent or broker, except that portion of income which represents commission or other income to the agent or broker;
    9. As to a retail gasoline dealer, a portion of the receipts of the dealer from the sales of motor vehicle fuels equal to the amount of motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed.
    10. As to retail gasoline dealer, any special motor fuel taxes if paid by the dealer or collected by the dealer from the consumer or purchaser.
D. “Person” shall mean and include all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint-stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts trust, business, and other common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than an employee.
E. “Sworn statement” shall mean an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths or a declaration or certification made under the penalty of perjury.
F. “Gross receipts subject to the business tax” shall be that portion of gross receipts relating to business conducted within the city. For businesses with their headquarters located within the city of San Luis Obispo, their total gross receipts shall be deemed to be related to business conducted within the city unless an apportionment of gross receipts is requested by the business pursuant to Section 3.01.509 of this chapter. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

Article II. Tax Amounts

3.01.201 Tax basis.
The amount of the business tax to be paid by the applicant is to be measured by gross receipts from the preceding completed calendar or fiscal year. For a new business, which has no gross receipt history, the applicant is required to pay the minimum tax. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.202 Tax rate.
The tax rate for all businesses shall be fifty cents per thousand dollars of gross receipts. This rate shall be applied in thousand-dollar increments, and gross income shall be rounded to the next highest thousand-dollar interval for the computation of the business tax. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.203 Minimum tax.
The minimum tax which shall be paid by any business will be twenty-five dollars ($25.00), which represents the minimum cost to the city of issuing or renewing the certificate. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

Article III. Application and Renewal

3.01.301 Business tax certificate applications.
Every person required to have a business tax certificate pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall make a written application to the finance director and submit the following information:
A. The nature or kind of business for which the business tax certificate is requested;
B. The place where the business is to be conducted and, if the business is not to be conducted at a permanent location, the residence address, identified as such, of the owners of the business;
C. If the application is made for the issuance of a business tax certificate to a person to do business under a fictitious name, the names, social security numbers, and residence addresses of the owners of the business;
D. If the application is made for the issuance of a business tax certificate to a corporation or partnership, the names, franchise tax number, and residence addresses of the officers or partners thereof; and
E. Any further information which the federal or state taxing authority or the finance director may require to enable the issuance of the business tax certificate. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.302 Business tax certificate renewals.
In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of the business tax certificate required by the provisions of this chapter shall submit to the finance director a written statement, upon a form provided by the finance director, written under penalty of perjury or sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth the actual gross receipts earned the preceding calendar or fiscal year as reported to any federal or state taxing authority to which gross receipts are reported to enable the finance director to ascertain the amount of the business tax to be paid. Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual business taxes required by the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable on July 1st of each year and shall be delinquent on July 31st of each year.
No renewal of a business tax certificate shall be issued until payment in full of all delinquent business taxes, including accrued interest and applicable penalties thereon is received by the city. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to ensure renewal of the business tax certificate. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

Article IV. Business Tax Certificate Issuance

3.01.401 Content.
All business tax certificates required by the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be prepared and issued by the finance director upon the payment to the city of the proper amount of business tax. Each business tax certificate shall state upon the face thereof the following:
A. The name of the person to whom the business tax certificate is issued.
B. The type of business taxed.
C. The location or address of the business taxes.
D. The date of the expiration of the business tax certificate.
E. That the business tax certificate when issued shall be the receipt for the business tax paid to the city.
F. That the possession of the business tax certificate shall not authorize, permit, or allow the person to do any act which such person would not otherwise be lawfully entitled to do. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.402 Posting and keeping.
All business tax certificates issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be posted and kept in the following manner:
A. Any persons transacting and carrying on business at a permanent location in the city shall keep such business tax certificate posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.
B. Any persons transacting and carrying on business, but not operating at a permanent location in the city, shall keep such business tax certificate upon them at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.403 Duplicates.
A duplicate business tax certificate may be issued by the finance director to replace any business tax certificate previously issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which business tax certificate has been lost or destroyed, upon the filing of a statement of such fact and the payment of a duplicate fee set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.404 Branch establishments.
A separate business tax certificate shall be issued for each branch establishment or location of business; provided, however, warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with, and incidental to, a business taxed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of businesses or branch establishments; and provided, further, any person conducting two or more types of businesses at the same location and under the same management, or at different locations, but which businesses use a single set or integrated set of books and records, may elect to pay only one business tax calculated on all the gross receipts of the businesses, except that a fee set by resolution of the city council shall be paid upon issuance for each additional branch or location. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.405 Change of location.
No business tax certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable; provided, however, where a business tax certificate is issued for a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such person, upon an application therefor and the payment of a fee set by resolution of the city council, may have the business tax certificate reissued for transacting and carrying on of such business under such business tax certificate at some other location to which it is to be moved. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

Article V. Administration

3.01.501 Certification of records.
A. Conclusiveness of Statements. No statement required by the provisions of this chapter shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of such statements preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sums as are actually due and payable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such statements and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to certification by the finance director, the deputies of the finance director, or authorized employees or representatives of the city, who are hereby authorized to examine such books and records of any certificate holder or applicant for a business tax certificate as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of the business tax due.
B. Record Retention. All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall keep complete records of all business transactions and shall retain such records for examination by the finance director, the deputies of the finance director, or authorized employees or representatives of the city, and maintain them for a period of at least three years from the annual due date of the federal tax return or the city business tax return, whichever time period is greater. Records which shall be maintained for audit purposes shall include state and federal income tax returns, schedules and records included in such returns, and any and all work papers used to prepare such returns.
C. Examination of Records. All business tax certificate holders, applicants for business tax certificates, and persons engaged in business in the city are hereby required to permit an examination of such books and records for the purposes set forth in this section during regular business hours and at reasonable times.
D. Interest and Penalties. If, subsequent to the examination, it is determined that the business has been delinquent or has nonreported or under-reported gross receipts, thereby underpaying business taxes, the certificate holder shall pay to the city within ten days of notification of the determination of the amount of tax due, interest in the amount of eight percent from the date the tax was due, and a penalty in the amount of the business tax due. Interest shall continue to accrue on the additional tax amount until such amount is paid in full.
A mistake made in stating the amount of the business tax shall not, in any case, prevent or prejudice the finance director from collecting what is actually due from any person or entity carrying on a trade, calling, profession, or occupation subject to a business tax under this chapter.
E. Determination of Tax Amounts Due. If any person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter fails to submit information required, or if the finance director is not satisfied with records and statements filed, the finance director shall determine the amount of the business tax due from such person by means of such information as may be obtainable and shall mail a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at San Luis Obispo, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at their last-known address. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.502 Information confidential.
It shall be unlawful for the finance director or designee, or any person having an administrative duty pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or financial information obtained by an investigation of the records of any person required to obtain a business tax certificate, or pay a business tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of the official duty of the finance director, or of the amount or source of income, profits, losses, or expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or amended statement or application, or copy of either, or in any book containing any abstract or particulars therein to be seen or examined by any person; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not be construed to prevent:
A. Disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee, or agent for the collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing the provisions of this chapter or collecting the business taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter;
B. The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, if the reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or court of law upon a subpoena;
C. The disclosure of information and the results of examination or records or particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law for proceedings brought to determine the existence of the amount of any business tax liability of such particular taxpayers of the city;
D. The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to the effect, to the taxpayer, or to the taxpayer’s successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, or guarantors if directly interested, of information as to items included in the measure of any paid business tax, any unpaid business tax, or any amount of business tax required to be collected, including interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney shall approve each such disclosure, and the finance director or designee may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when, in their opinion, the public interest would suffer thereby;
E. The disclosure of the names and business address of persons to whom business tax certificates have been issued and the general type and nature of their business;
F. The disclosure, by way of public meeting or otherwise, of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit the city council to be fully advised as to the facts if a taxpayer files a claim for the refund of business taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against them by the city for business taxes, or when acting upon any other similar matter; and
G. The disclosure of general statistics regarding business taxes collected or business done in the city. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.503 Finance director adjustment powers.
The finance director shall have the power, for good cause shown, and documented by the finance director as a permanent record:
A. To extend the time for filing any required sworn statement;
B. To waive any penalties which would otherwise have accrued;
C. To adjust the amount of the business tax due;
D. To make refunds or prorations of taxes paid. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.504 Debt to city.
The amount of any business tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. A suit may be brought against any person to enforce the collection of the debt described in this chapter in any court of competent jurisdiction.
The conviction of any person for transacting any business without a certificate shall not excuse or exempt such person from payment of any license due or unpaid at the time of such conviction, and nothing herein shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.505 Delinquencies and penalties.
For failure to pay the business tax required by the provisions of this chapter prior to the delinquency date, the director of finance shall add a penalty. The amount of this penalty shall be set by resolution of the city council. [See Section 4.20.110.] (Ord. 1234 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.606 Enforcement.
A. Duties of the Finance Director and Chief of Police. It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in such enforcement as may from time to time be required by the finance director.
B. Inspections. The finance director, in the exercise of the duties imposed by the provisions of this section, and acting through deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall have the right to enter and examine all places of business free of charge during normal business hours to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with.
C. Penalty for Violation. Any person who violates any provisions of Section 3.01.102 by transacting and carrying on any business, trade, vocation, enterprise, establishment, occupation, or calling in the city without first having procured a business tax certificate from the city or without complying with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and is subject to punishment as provided for in Chapter 1.12 of this municipal code. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.607 Evidence of doing business.
When any person, by the use of a sign, circular, card, telephone book, newspaper, other publication, or advertising media, shall advertise, hold out, or represent that such person is in business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a government agency indicating that such person is conducting a business in the city, and such person fails to deny, by a sworn statement given to the finance director or designee, that such person is not conducting a business in the city after being requested to do so by the finance director or designee, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is conducting a business in the city. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.508 Remedies cumulative.
All remedies prescribed by the provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

3.01.509 Apportionment.
When the business tax imposed by this chapter cannot be enforced without there being an apportionment according to the amount of business done in the city of San Luis Obispo, apportionment rules shall be established by the finance director. The finance director shall conduct an investigation and shall fix as the business tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory or, if a business tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the business tax so affixed. In fixing the business tax to be charged, the finance director shall have the power to base the business tax upon a percentage of gross receipts, operating expenses, floor space, payroll, number of employees, business taxes paid to other cities, or any other measure which will assure that the business tax assessed shall be uniform with the amount of business done in the city of San Luis Obispo, or of businesses of a like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the business tax set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 1991)

Chapter 3.04 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX

Sections:
3.04.010     Title.
3.04.020     Definitions.
3.04.030     Imposed.
3.04.040     Exemptions.
3.04.050     Operator’s duties.
3.04.060     Registration.
3.04.070     Reporting and remitting.
3.04.080     Delinquencies and penalties.
3.04.090     Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by tax administrator.
3.04.100     Appeal.
3.04.110     Recordkeeping.
3.04.120     Refunds.
3.04.130     Actions to collect.
3.04.140     Violation—Penalty.

3.04.010 Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance” of the city. (Prior code § 2550)

3.04.020 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:
A. “Effective date of tax administrator’s decision” means the date specified in the tax administrator’s decision as the effective date. Generally, the effective date will be the date the tax administrator’s decision is issued.
B. “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, a homestay, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.
C. “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.
D. “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
E. “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
F. “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of a space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
G. “Tax administrator” means the city tax collector or city finance director, or his or her designee, for the city of San Luis Obispo.
H. “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. (Ord. 1674 § 2, 2020: prior code § 2551)

3.04.030 Imposed.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owned by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1184 § 1, 1991: prior code § 2552)

3.04.040 Exemptions.
A. No tax shall be imposed upon:
    1. Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;
    2. Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.
B. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Prior code § 2553)

3.04.050 Operator’s duties.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 2554)

3.04.060 Registration.
Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him or her a “transient occupancy registration certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
A. The name of the operator;
B. The address of the hotel;
C. The date upon which the certificate was issued;
D. [The following text:]This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit.
(Prior code § 2555)

3.04.070 Reporting and remitting.
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he or she may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Prior code § 2556)

3.04.080 Delinquencies and penalties.
A. Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty the amount of which will be set by the tax administrator or by resolution of the city council.
B. Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsection A of this section.
C. Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 1674 § 3, 2020; Ord. 1234 § 1, 1993: prior code § 2557)

3.04.090 Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by tax administrator.
If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. The operator’s application for a hearing must be delivered to the city of San Luis Obispo’s finance department or postmarked within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.04.100. (Ord. 1674 § 4, 2020: prior code § 2558)

3.04.100 Appeal.
A. Appeal. Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal. To appeal the tax administrator’s determination, the appellant shall comply with the appeals process as set forth in Chapter 1.20.
B. Contents of Appeal. The written appeal shall state the following information:
    1. A caption setting forth the names, addresses, phone numbers and other contact information of the appellant(s) and the operator, if the appellant and operator are not the same, participating in the appeal.
    2. A brief statement setting forth the interest of the appellant(s), either as the recipient of the notice of tax administrator’s determination or the legal interest of the appellant(s) in the hotel or property that is the subject of the notice of tax administrator’s determination.
    3. A brief statement describing:
        a. The specific notice of tax administrator’s determination being appealed, by the day of the notice of tax administrator’s determination, address of the hotel or property; and
        b. Whether all or only specified tax, interest, penalties are being appealed; and
        c. Why the tax administrator’s determination should be revoked, modified or otherwise set aside.
    4. A statement that all of the matters alleged in the appeal are true, followed by the signature(s) of each appellant(s), and one official mailing address for the appellant(s) to receive further notices from city relating to the appeal.
C. Hearing Procedures for Appeal. 
    1. Records for Appeal. The tax administrator, or his or her designee, shall ensure that the tax administrator’s determination and any supporting documentation are delivered to the applicable city clerk in sufficient time prior to the appeal hearing.
    2. Failure to Appear. The failure of the appellant(s) to appear at the hearing, unless the appellant(s) has submitted written evidence, shall constitute an abandonment of the appeal.
D. Findings of the Council. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in Section 3.04.090 for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 1674 § 5, 2020: prior code § 2559)

3.04.110 Recordkeeping.
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Prior code § 2560)

3.04.120 Refunds.
A. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.
B. An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received, when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.
C. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.
D. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Prior code § 2561)

3.04.130 Actions to collect.
A. Actions. Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount.
B. Liens. To recover any delinquent tax as a lien on real property, the following conditions must be met:
    1. The tax administrator must submit to and receive approval from the city council for a resolution certifying the amounts of the liens sought to be collected from the operator; and
    2. The total amount of the delinquent tax against the operator must be delinquent for sixty days or more.
C. Lien Collections. The tax administrator is authorized to take any steps necessary to enforce collection of the lien, including but not limited to request the county recorder to record a notice of any lien certified by resolution of the city council.
D. Notice of Lien Collection Procedures. All notices of the amount so assessed by the tax administrator or city council shall contain a notice that unpaid taxes, interest and penalties are subject to the lien collection procedures of this chapter. In addition, the tax administrator shall by first class mail send notice to each operator and property owner at least ten days before the city council considers the resolution to certify the amounts of the liens and special assessments stating the date, time, and location of the meeting. The lien shall be imposed on the date the tax administrator’s determination or city council’s decision is issued to the responsible person and shall become effective upon the recording of a notice of lien by the county recorder.
E. Contesting Certification of a Lien. A person may contest the amount or the validity of any lien for unpaid taxes, interest and penalties at the public hearing when the city council considers the resolution to certify the liens. Such contests shall be limited to the issue of the amount or validity of the lien and may not consider whether the delinquency occurred. Pursuit of such a contest by a person is necessary to exhaust the administrative remedies concerning a legal challenge to the validity of any such lien. (Ord. 1674 § 6, 2020: prior code § 2562)

3.04.140 Violation—Penalty.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as set forth in subsection A of this section. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (Prior code § 2563)

Chapter 3.08 DWELLING UNIT CONSTRUCTION TAX

Sections:
3.08.010     Title.
3.08.020     Purpose.
3.08.030     Definitions.
3.08.040     Exemptions.
3.08.050     Imposition—Amount.
3.08.060     Payment—When.
3.08.070     Payment—Where.
3.08.080     Refunds.
3.08.090     Credits.
3.08.100     Park and recreation facilities fund—Established.

3.08.010 Title.
This tax shall be known as the “dwelling unit construction tax” of the city. (Prior code § 2575)

3.08.020 Purpose.
The council of the city finds that the continued increase in the development and construction of dwelling units in the city has created an urgent need for the planning, acquisition, improvement and expansion of public parks, playgrounds and other recreation facilities to serve the city’s increasing population, and that there exists a need to find sources of revenues with which to finance in part these required additional public facilities. The council declares that the taxes required to be paid under this chapter are assessed pursuant to the taxing power of the city, are assessed solely for the purpose of producing revenue, and are not enacted for regulatory purposes. (Prior code § 2576)

3.08.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section:
A. “City” means the city of San Luis Obispo, California.
B. “Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in an apartment building on such real property. A condominium may include in addition a separate interest in other portions of such real property.
C. “Construct” means the putting together, assembling, erecting or altering of construction materials, components or modules into a structure, or portion of a structure, and includes reconstructing, enlarging or altering any structure. Construct also includes the moving and locating of a building, or portions thereof, onto a lot or parcel of land, and also includes the improvement of land as a mobile home park.
D. “Dwelling unit” means a separate single family habitation structure or unit. Dwelling unit includes:
    1. A single-family dwelling;
    2. Each separate apartment or habitation unit comprising a multiple-dwelling structure or condominium; and
    3. Each space or pad designed and allocated to accommodate a mobile home within a mobile home park.
E. “Mobile home” means a vehicle designed and equipped for human habitation, including, but not limited to, travel trailers, camp cars, recreational vehicles, tent trailers, motor homes, etc.
F. “Mobile home park” means any area or tract of land where one or more mobile home lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation.
G. “Mobile home space” means any area or portion of a mobile home park designated, designed, or used for the occupancy of one mobilehome on a temporary, semipermanent or permanent basis.
H. “Park and recreational facilities” means and includes, but is not limited to, land and interests in land, swimming pools, tennis and volleyball and basketball courts, baseball grounds, children’s play areas, turf, sprinkler systems, community center buildings, recreation buildings, and other works, properties, structures and facilities necessary or convenient for public park, playground and recreation purposes; and also including any of the facilities described in this subsection constructed in or installed within or upon any public school grounds where city is given a right to use the same for public playground or recreation purposes.
I. “Person” means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society, club or individual. (Prior code § 2577)

3.08.040 Exemptions.
The tax imposed under this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. The city, the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, the state or any county, city and county, district or any political subdivision of the state, or any other governmental agency;
B. Construction of any building, intended and used exclusively to house the elderly or handicapped, which is constructed for and operated by a foundation, agency or entity which, pursuant to Article 13, Section 1c of the State Constitution, has been granted a property tax exemption by the State Legislature;
C. Enlargement, remodeling and/or alteration of a building, but only if the number of dwelling units therein is not increased. If the number of dwelling units in the building is increased, then the tax imposed under this chapter shall apply to such increased number of dwelling units;
D. Reconstruction of a building which was damaged or destroyed by earthquake, fire’ flood or other cause over which the owner has no control (provided that compliance with any building code or other ordinance requirement of the city shall not be deemed a cause over which the owner has no control), but only if the number of dwelling units therein is not increased. If the number of dwelling units in the building is increased, then the tax imposed under this chapter shall apply to such increased number of dwelling units;
E. Replacement of any building on the same lot, if construction of the new building is commenced within twelve months from the date the previous building was substantially removed from the lot, but only if the number of dwelling units therein is not increased. If the number of dwelling units in the building is increased, then the tax imposed under this chapter shall apply to such increased number of dwelling units;
F. Any habitation unit within a structure designed, constructed and used exclusively for transient occupancies as defined in Section 3.04.020; provided, however, the tax imposed under this chapter shall apply to the conversion of an existing building, or part thereof, from a transient occupancy use to a dwelling unit;
G. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the state of California. (Prior code § 2578)

3.08.050 Imposition—Amount.
There is hereby imposed an excise tax upon every person who constructs, or causes to be constructed, any new dwelling unit or mobile home space in the city in which the person has an equity or title or other interest either as owner, lessee or otherwise. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of one hundred fifty dollars per dwelling unit.
A. The tax imposed by this section shall be imposed regardless of whether the new dwelling unit is created by new construction or by modification of existing structures, or by conversion from a different use.
B. The tax imposed shall apply to new mobile home park spaces regardless of whether they are part of a new mobile home park or an addition to an existing park. (Prior code § 2579)

3.08.060 Payment—When.
A. Payment of the tax imposed by Section 3.08.050 shall be made at the time of, and shall be a condition precedent to:
    1. The issuance of a building permit for the construction of any such dwelling unit; or
    2. The issuance of a construction permit for a mobile home park; or
    3. The issuance of an occupancy permit for the conversion of an existing building from a transient occupancy use to a dwelling unit, where such conversion does not involve construction or modification of the building.
B. For all dwelling units, the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in addition to the fee required to be paid as a condition to the issuance of any permit or other entitlement, and no permit or other entitlement shall be issued until the tax is paid.
C. Where taxes imposed by this chapter have not previously been paid, any extension of time granted on a building permit shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be deemed the issuance of a new building permit and the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid prior to the granting of any such extension. (Prior code § 2580)

3.08.070 Payment—Where.
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid to the director of finance at the Office of the Department of Finance of the city in the City Hall. (Prior code § 2581)

3.08.080 Refunds.
A tax paid under this chapter for the construction of a new dwelling unit which is not built is refundable. A refund shall be made upon application of the taxpayer to the director of finance and upon taxpayer’s showing that the construction of the new dwelling unit has not been commenced and the building permit issued therefor has expired, has been cancelled, or has been revoked. Application must be made within one year from the cancellation, expiration or revocation of the building permit. Provided, however, no refund shall be made when a dwelling unit is converted to a use other than as a dwelling unit, or when a dwelling unit is damaged or destroyed. In addition, no refund shall be made for mobile home spaces upon final approval of the construction permit for a mobile home park. (Prior code § 2582)

3.08.090 Credits.
Where, as a condition of approval of a subdivision of land which includes the land whereon the new dwelling unit is to be constructed, a person required to pay the tax created by this chapter has paid a fee or has dedicated land, or both, to the city pursuant to the provisions of this code, or has voluntarily paid such a sum or dedicated such land, or both, would have been required by such code, if applicable, the person shall be allowed as a credit against the tax the amount of the fee so paid or the fair market value of the land so dedicated or a combination of both. As used in this chapter “fair market value” means the value of the particular land for which credit is claimed as established pursuant to Section 16.04.080. A credit shall be allowed where the fee has been paid or the land has been dedicated, or a combination of both has been provided to the city by a prior owner of the land upon which the new dwelling unit is to be constructed. Provided, however, that in no event shall the amount of credit exceed the amount of tax. (Prior code § 2583)

3.08.100 Park and recreation facilities fund—Established.
There is established a park and recreational facilities fund. All of the sums collected pursuant to this chapter shall be credited to the park and recreation facilities fund and together with any accumulations thereon shall be used solely for the planning, acquisition, improvement or expansion of public par};, playground or other recreation facilities, or, for refunds due under Section 3.08.080. (Prior code § 2584)

Chapter 3.12 UNIFORM SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:
3.12.010     Title.
3.12.020     Purpose.
3.12.030     Operative date.
3.12.040     Rate.
3.12.050     Administration—Contract with state.
3.12.060     Sales tax—Imposed.
3.12.070     Place of sale.
3.12.080     Use tax—Imposed.
3.12.090     State law provisions—Adopted.
3.12.100     State law provisions—Limitations.
3.12.110     Seller’s permit not required when.
3.12.120     Exemptions.
3.12.130     Amendments to Revenue and Taxation Code—Inclusion.
3.12.140     Enjoining collection prohibited.
3.12.150     Violation—Penalty.

3.12.010 Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “uniform local sales and use tax ordinance.” (Prior code § 6400.1)

3.12.020 Purpose.
The council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions thereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
A. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;
B. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;
C. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;
D. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6400.4)

3.12.030 Operative date.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. (Prior code § 6400.3)

3.12.040 Rate.
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Prior code § 6400.2)

3.12.050 Administration—Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified herein; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. (Prior code § 6400.5)

3.12.060 Sales tax—Imposed.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.040 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Prior code § 6400.6)

3.12.070 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the states sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Prior code § 6400.7)

3.12.080 Use tax—Imposed.
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.040 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Prior code § 6400.8)

3.12.090 State law provisions—Adopted.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part I of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Prior code § 6400.9)

3.12.100 State law provisions—Limitations.
In adopting the provisions of Part I of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part I of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Prior code § 6400.10)

3.12.110 Seller’s permit not required when.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Prior code § 6400.11)

3.12.120 Exemptions.
A. The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.
B. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.
C. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.
D. In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 998 § 1, 1983: prior code § 6400.13)

3.12.130 Amendments to Revenue and Taxation Code—Inclusion.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Prior code § 6400.15)

3.12.140 Enjoining collection prohibited.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Prior code § 6400.16)

3.12.150 Violation—Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 6400.17)

Chapter 3.15 ESSENTIAL SERVICES TRANSACTIONS (SALES) AND USE TAX

Sections:
3.15.010     Title.
3.15.020     Purpose.
3.15.030     Eight-year sunset.
3.15.040     Fiscal accountability provisions—Citizen oversight and independent annual financial audits.
3.15.050     Transactions (sales) tax rate.
3.15.060     Use tax rate.
3.15.070     Operative date.
3.15.080     Contract with state.
3.15.090     Place of sale.
3.15.100     Adoption of provisions of state law.
3.15.110     Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
3.15.120     Permit not required.
3.15.130     Exemptions and exclusions.
3.15.140     Amendments.
3.15.150     Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.15.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “city of San Luis Obispo essential services transactions (sales) and use tax ordinance.” The city of San Luis Obispo hereinafter shall be called the “city.” This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 1, 2006)

3.15.020 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
A. To protect and maintain essential services and facilities—such as open space preservation; bike lanes, sidewalks and other traffic congestion relief projects; public safety; neighborhood street paving and code enforcement; flood protection; senior citizen programs including services and facilities; and other vital general purpose services and capital improvement projects—by extending a general purpose retail transactions and use tax of one-half percent in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2, which authorizes the city to adopt this general purpose tax chapter, which shall be operative if two-thirds of the council and a majority vote of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the extension of this general purpose revenue source at an election called for that purpose.
B. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax chapter that incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
C. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax chapter that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes.
D. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax chapter that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 2, 2006)

3.15.030 Eight-year sunset.
The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall expire in eight years, on March 31, 2023, unless extended by the voters. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 3, 2006)

3.15.040 Fiscal accountability provisions—Citizen oversight and independent annual financial audits.
Along with the city’s ongoing commitment to citizen involvement as a fundamental principle of good government, specific citizen oversight and fiscal accountability provisions are hereby established as follows:
A. Revenue Enhancement Oversight Commission. A citizen’s commission will be established to provide transparency and maximize city accountability. The commission will be responsible for reviewing and making budget recommendations directly to the city council regarding expenditures from the essential services transactions (sales) and use tax, and reporting annually to the community on the city’s use of these tax revenues.
B. Accounting and Tracking Expenditures. The funds collected through the city of San Luis Obispo essential services transactions (sales) and use tax ordinance shall be accounted for and tracked by the city treasurer separately to facilitate citizen oversight.
C. Independent Annual Financial Audit. The amount generated by this general purpose revenue source and how it was used shall be included in the annual audit of the city’s financial operations by an independent certified public accountant.
D. Integration of the Use of Funds into the City’s Budget and Goal-Setting Process. The estimated revenue and proposed use of funds generated by this measure shall be an integral part of the city’s budget and goal-setting process, and significant opportunities will be provided for meaningful participation by citizens in determining priority uses of these funds.
E. Annual Community Report. A written report shall be reviewed at a public hearing by the revenue enhancement oversight commission, and a summary will be provided annually to every household in the community detailing how much revenue is being generated by the measure and how funds are being spent.
F. Annual Citizen Oversight Meeting. An invitation will be extended each year to the entire community inviting them to participate in a forum to review and discuss the use of the revenue generated by this measure. City staff will also be available to meet with any group that requests a specific briefing with their members to discuss and answer questions about the revenues generated by the measure and their uses. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 4, 2006)

3.15.050 Transactions (sales) tax rate.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-half percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this chapter. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 5, 2006)

3.15.060 Use tax rate.
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one-half percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 6, 2006)

3.15.070 Operative date.
“Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 7, 2006)

3.15.080 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax chapter; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 8, 2006)

3.15.090 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 9, 2006)

3.15.100 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 10, 2006)

3.15.110 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:
A. Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:
    1. The word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California.
    2. The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.
    3. In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:
        a. Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or
        b. Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.
    4. In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
B. The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 11, 2006)

3.15.120 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 12, 2006)

3.15.130 Exemptions and exclusions.
The following transactions shall be exempted and excluded:
A. There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.
B. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:
    1. Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.
    2. Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this section, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:
        a. With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and
        b. With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
    3. The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter.
    4. A lease of tangible personal property, which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter.
    5. For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
C. There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:
    1. The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance.
    2. Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.
    3. If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter.
    4. If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter.
    5. For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
    6. Except as provided in subsection (C)(7) of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.
    7. A retailer engaged in business in the city shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel or aircraft at an address in the city.
D. Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for, a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 13, 2006)

3.15.140 Amendments.
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 14, 2006)

3.15.150 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1604 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 1495 § 15, 2006)

Chapter 3.16 UTILITY USERS’ TAX

Sections:
3.16.010     Short title and purpose.
3.16.020     Definitions.
3.16.030     Constitutional, statutory, and other exemptions.
3.16.040     Telecommunication users’ tax.
3.16.050     Electricity users’ tax.
3.16.060     Gas users’ tax.
3.16.070     Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity.
3.16.080     Video users’ tax.
3.16.090     Water users’ tax.
3.16.100     Bundling taxable items.
3.16.110     Substantial nexus/minimum contact.
3.16.120     Duty to collect procedures.
3.16.130     Collection penalties—Service suppliers.
3.16.140     Actions to collect.
3.16.150     Deficiency determination and assessment—Tax application errors.
3.16.160     Administrative remedy—Nonpaying service users.
3.16.170     Additional powers and duties of the tax administrator.
3.16.180     Records.
3.16.190     Refunds.
3.16.200     Appeals.
3.16.210     No injunction/writ of mandate.
3.16.220     Notice of changes to chapter.
3.16.230     Effect of state and federal reference/authorization.
3.16.240     No increase in tax percentage or change in methodology without voter approval—Amendment or repeal.
3.16.250     Remedies cumulative.
3.16.260     Interaction with prior tax.

3.16.010 Short title and purpose.
This chapter shall be known as the “utility users’ tax law of the city of San Luis Obispo.” The taxes imposed and levied by the provisions of this chapter are solely for the purpose of providing revenue for the usual and current expenses of the city. The provisions of this chapter are not enacted for regulatory purposes. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section:
A. “Ancillary telecommunication services” means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services, including but not limited to the following services:
    1. “Conference bridging service” means an ancillary service that links two or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision of a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge.
    2. “Detailed telecommunications billing service” means an ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer’s billing statement.
    3. “Directory assistance” means an ancillary service of providing telephone number information, and/or address information.
    4. “Vertical service” means an ancillary service that is offered in connection with one or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services.
    5. “Voice mail service” means an ancillary service that enables the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail service does not include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service.
B. “Ancillary video services” means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision or delivery of video services, including but not limited to electronic program guide services, recording services, search functions, or other interactive services or communications that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of video services.
C. “Billing address” shall mean the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.
D. “City” shall mean the city of San Luis Obispo.
E. “Gas” shall mean natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel which may be substituted therefor.
F. “Individual service” shall mean utility service at a single contiguous location. A service user with more than one meter or billing invoice per utility service at a single contiguous location may combine all billings for purposes of calculating the maximum tax amount.
G. “Mobile telecommunications service” has the meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 USC Section 124) and the regulations thereunder.
H. “Month” shall mean a calendar month.
I. “Nonutility service supplier” means:
    1. A service supplier, other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which generates electricity for sale to others, and shall include but is not limited to any publicly owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator, distributed generation provider, exempt wholesale generator (15 USC Section 79z-5a), municipal utility district, federal power marketing agency, electric rural cooperative, or other supplier or seller of electricity;
    2. An electric service provider (ESP), electricity broker, marketer, aggregator, pool operator, or other electricity supplier other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electricity users within the city; or
    3. A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer or broker, other than a supplier of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies gas or supplemental services to gas users within the city.
J. “Paging service” means a “telecommunications service” that provides transmission of coded radio signals for the purpose of activating specific pagers; such transmissions may include messages and/or sounds.
K. “Person” shall mean, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and nonprofit), municipal district or municipal corporation (other than the city), cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court.
L. “Place of primary use” means the street address representative of where the customer’s use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer.
M. “Post-paid telecommunication service” means the telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a communication-by-communication basis either through the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service.
N. “Prepaid telecommunication service” means the right to access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount.
O. “Private telecommunication service” means a telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity, extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A communications channel is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications).
P. “Service address” means the residential street address or the business street address of the service user. For a telecommunication or video service user, “service address” means either:
    1. The location of the service user’s telecommunication equipment from which the telecommunication originates or terminates, regardless of where the telecommunication is billed or paid; or
    2. If the location in subsection (P)(1) of this section is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the service address means the location of the service user’s place of primary use;
    3. For prepaid telecommunication service, “service address” means the location associated with the service number or, if not known, the point of sale of the services.
Q. “Service supplier” shall mean any entity or person, including the city, that provides, sells, or resells a utility service to a user of such service within the city.
R. “Service user” shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter.
S. “State” shall mean the state of California.
T. “Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement” means the multi-state agreement commonly known and referred to as the Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement, as it is amended from time to time.
U. “Tax administrator” shall mean the finance director, or his or her designee.
V. “Telecommunications service” means the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used. The term “telecommunications services” includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over Internet protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes video and/or data services that are functionally integrated with “telecommunication services.” “Telecommunications services” include but are not limited to the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services; intrastate, interstate, and international telecommunication services; mobile telecommunications service; prepaid telecommunication service; post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission); and 900 service (or any other similar numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission for services whereby subscribers call in to pre-recorded or live service).
W. “Video programming” means those programming services commonly provided to subscribers by a “video service supplier” including but not limited to basic services, premium services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services, video on demand, origination programming, or any other similar services, regardless of the content of such video programming, or the technology used to deliver such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed.
X. “Video services” means “video programming” and any and all services related to the providing, recording, delivering, use or enjoyment of “video programming” (including origination programming and programming using Internet protocol, e.g., IP-TV and IP-video) using one or more channels by a “video service supplier,” regardless of the technology used to deliver, store or provide such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed, and includes ancillary video services, data services, “telecommunication services,” or interactive communication services that are functionally integrated with “video services.”
Y. “Video service supplier” means any person, company, or service which provides or sells one or more channels of video programming, or provides or sells the capability to receive one or more channels of video programming, including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the provision, use or enjoyment of the video programming, to or from a business or residential address in the city, where some fee is paid, whether directly or included in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. A “video service supplier” includes, but is not limited to, multichannel video programming distributors (as defined in 47 USCA Section 522(13)); open video systems (OVS) suppliers; and suppliers of cable television; master antenna television; satellite master antenna television; multichannel multipoint distribution services (MMDS); video services using Internet protocol (e.g., IP-TV and IP-video, which provide, among other things, broadcasting and video on demand), direct broadcast satellite to the extent federal law permits taxation of its video services, now or in the future; and other suppliers of video services (including two-way communications), whatever their technology.
Z. “VoIP (voice over Internet protocol)” means the digital process of making and receiving real-time voice transmissions over any Internet protocol network.
AA. “800 service” means a “telecommunications service” that allows a caller to dial a toll-free number without incurring a charge for the call. The service is typically marketed under the names “800,” “855,” “866,” “877,” and “888” toll-free calling, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission.
BB. “900 service” means an inbound toll “telecommunications service” purchased by a subscriber that allows the subscriber’s customers to call in to the subscriber’s prerecorded announcement or live service. “900 service” does not include the charge for: collection services provided by the seller of the “telecommunications services” to the subscriber, or service or product sold by the subscriber to the subscriber’s customer. The service is typically marketed under the name “900” service, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.030 Constitutional, statutory, and other exemptions.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person or service when the imposition of such tax upon such person or service would be in violation of a federal or state statute, the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the state.
B. Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection A of this section shall file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name for such service. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the tax administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the tax administrator, such service user shall give the tax administrator timely written notice of any change in service suppliers so that the tax administrator can properly notify the new service supplier of the service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this chapter shall not be entitled to a refund of a users’ tax collected and remitted to the tax administrator from such service user as a result of such noncompliance.
The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.16.200. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the city administrator, or designee, pursuant to Section 3.16.200 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.
C. The city council may, by resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from such tax for a specified period of time.
D. If a billing for utility services includes charges for two or more households situated within nonprofit retirement facilities which (1) are operated solely for the accommodation of persons with low incomes and (2) which qualify for the welfare exemption set forth in the California Revenue and Taxation Code, and if the charges for such services are paid by the operators of the retirement facilities, the operators shall be entitled to an annual refund of all taxes paid under the provisions of this chapter. The procedure for obtaining such refunds shall be established by the tax administrator, including the requirement for whatever proof he or she deems necessary to establish qualification for refund. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.040 Telecommunication users’ tax.
A. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using telecommunication services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four and eight-tenths percent of the charges made for such services and shall be collected from the service user by the telecommunication services supplier or its billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that telecommunication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part, within the city’s boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this section. There is also a rebuttable presumption that prepaid telecommunication services sold within the city are used, in whole or in part, within the city and are therefore subject to taxation under this section. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telecommunication services.
B. “Mobile telecommunications service” shall be sourced in accordance with the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 USC Section 124). The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to telecommunication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of other telecommunication services, including but not limited to post-paid telecommunication services, prepaid telecommunication services, VoIP, and private communication services; provided, that such rules are based upon custom and common practice that further administrative efficiency and minimize multijurisdictional taxation (e.g., Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement).
C. The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to telecommunication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those telecommunication services, or charges therefor, that are subject to or not subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.
D. As used in this section, the term “telecommunication services” shall include, but is not limited to, charges for: connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of telecommunication services; late payment fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including but not limited to call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory or administrative fees, charges or surcharges; cost recovery charges or surcharges for programs imposed by state or federal law; local number portability charges; and text and instant messaging. “Telecommunication services” shall not include digital downloads that are not “ancillary telecommunication services,” such as music, ringtones, games, and similar digital products.
E. To prevent actual multijurisdictional taxation of telecommunication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such telecommunication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.
F. The tax on telecommunication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.050 Electricity users’ tax.
A. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using electricity in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such electricity, and for any supplemental services or other associated activities directly related to and/or necessary for the provision of electricity to the service user, which are provided by a service supplier or nonutility service supplier to a service user. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or nonutility service supplier, or its billing agent.
B. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items that are: (1) necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; or (2) currently are or historically have been included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:
    1. Energy charges;
    2. Distribution or transmission charges;
    3. Metering charges;
    4. Standby, reserves, firming, ramping, voltage support, regulation, emergency, or other similar charges for supplemental services to self-generation service users;
    5. Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, demand charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, power exchange charges, independent system operator (ISO) charges, stranded investment or competitive transition charges (CTC), public purpose program charges, nuclear decommissioning charges, trust transfer amounts (bond financing charges), franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees or surcharges which are necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; and
    6. Charges, fees, or surcharges for electricity services or programs which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, or by any state or federal law, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.
C. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the electricity or services related to the provision of such electricity.
D. The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the electric service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of electric retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such electric service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such electric service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (1) necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; or (2) currently are or historically have been included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.
E. As used in this section, the term “using electricity” shall not include the mere receiving of such electricity by an electrical corporation or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale.
F. The tax on electricity provided by self-production or by a nonutility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.16.070. All other taxes on charges for electricity imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the electric service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month; provided, that such person shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent remittance that becomes due. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.060 Gas users’ tax.
A. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using gas in the city, which is transported and delivered through a pipeline or by mobile transport. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation and delivery of such gas. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or nonutility service supplier, or its billing agent, and shall apply to all uses of gas, including but not limited to heating, electricity generation, and the use of gas as a component of a manufactured product.
B. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items for gas service that are: (1) necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of gas service; or (2) currently are or historically have been included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:
    1. The commodity charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas owned by the service user (including the actual costs attributed to drilling, production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas), which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system;
    2. Gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the extent not included in commodity charges);
    3. Storage charges; provided, however, that the service supplier shall not be required to apply the tax to any charges for gas storage services when the service supplier cannot, as a practical matter, determine the jurisdiction where such stored gas is ultimately used; but it shall be the obligation of the service user to self-collect the amount of tax not applied to any charge for gas storage by the service supplier and to remit the tax to the appropriate jurisdiction;
    4. Capacity or demand charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, transition charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charges which are necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of gas service; and
    5. Charges, fees, or surcharges for gas services or programs which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, or by any state or federal law, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.
C. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or services related to the delivery of such gas.
D. The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the gas service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such gas service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (1) necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of gas service; or (2) currently are or historically have been included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.
E. There shall be excluded from the calculation of the tax imposed in this section charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through a pipeline distribution system.
F. The tax on gas provided by self-production or by a nonutility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.16.070. All other taxes on charges for gas imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the gas service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator, on or before the twentieth day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month; provided, that such person shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent remittance that becomes due. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.070 Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity.
A. Any service user subject to the tax imposed by Section 3.16.050 or by Section 3.16.060, which produces gas or electricity for self-use regardless of technology used to produce such gas or electricity; which receives gas or electricity, including any related supplemental services, directly from a nonutility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter; or which, for any other reason, is not having the full tax collected and remitted by its service supplier, a nonutility service supplier, or its billing agent on the use of gas or electricity in the city, including any related supplemental services, shall report said fact to the tax administrator and shall remit the tax due directly to the tax administrator within thirty days of such use, based on the charges for, or value of, such gas or electricity, or supplemental services, as provided in subsection B of this section. In lieu of paying said actual tax, the service user may, at its option, remit to the tax administrator within thirty days of such use an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or upon the payment pattern of similar customers of the service supplier using similar amounts of gas or electricity; provided, that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator in writing, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.
B. The tax administrator may require said service user to identify its nonutility service supplier, and otherwise provide, subject to audit: invoices; books of account; or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used, including any related supplemental services, and the cost or price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide such satisfactory evidence, or if the administrative cost of calculating the tax in the opinion of the tax administrator is excessive, the tax administrator may determine the tax by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or electricity used, including any related supplemental services, had been provided by the service supplier that is the primary supplier of gas or electricity within the city. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the city. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.080 Video users’ tax.
A. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using video services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four and eight-tenths percent of the charges made for such services and shall be collected from the service user by the video service supplier, or its billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that video services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part, within the city’s boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax.
B. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, charges for the following:
    1. Regulatory fees and surcharges, franchise fees and access fees (PEG);
    2. Initial installation of equipment necessary for provision and receipt of video services;
    3. Late fees, collection fees, bad debt recoveries, and return check fees;
    4. Activation fees, reactivation fees, and reconnection fees;
    5. Video programming and video services;
    6. Ancillary video programming services (e.g., electronic program guide services, search functions, recording functions, or other interactive services or communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of the video services);
    7. Equipment leases (e.g., remote, recording and/or search devices; converters); and
    8. Service calls, service protection plans, name changes, changes of services, and special services.
C. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the video services.
D. The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to video service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those video services, or charges therefor, that are subject to or not subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.
E. The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the video service supplier, its billing agent, or a reseller of such services. In the case of video service, the service user shall be deemed to be the purchaser of the bulk video service (e.g., an apartment owner), unless such service is resold to individual users, in which case the service user shall be the ultimate purchaser of the video service. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.090 Water users’ tax.
A. There is imposed a tax upon every person using water in the city which is transported and delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such water.
B. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items that are: (1) necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of water service; or (2) currently are or historically have been included in a single or bundled rate for water service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges: water commodity charges (potable and nonpotable); distribution or transmission charges; metering charges; customer charges; fire protection services; late charges; service establishment or reestablishment charges; franchise fees; franchise surcharges; annual and monthly charges; and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of water service; and charges, fees, or surcharges for water services or programs, which are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.
C. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the water services.
D. The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the water service suppliers in the city to identify the various unbundled billing components of water retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency as a condition of providing such water service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such water service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (1) necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of water service; or (2) currently are or historically have been included in a single or bundled rate for water service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.
E. The tax on water service imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the water service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.100 Bundling taxable items.
If any nontaxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier’s books and records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. If the service supplier offers a combination of taxable and nontaxable services, and the charges are separately stated, then for taxation purposes, the values assigned the taxable and nontaxable services shall be based on its books and records kept in the regular course of business and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper valuation and apportionment of taxable and nontaxable charges. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.110 Substantial nexus/minimum contact.
For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this chapter, “substantial nexus” and “minimum contacts” shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the utility users’ tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any telecommunication service (including VoIP) used by a person with a service address in the city, which service is capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that “substantial nexus/minimum contacts” exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this chapter. A service supplier shall be deemed to have sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains or has within the city, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of business of any nature; solicits business in the city by employees, independent contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in the city on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter within the city or distributed from a location within the city; or advertises in newspapers or other periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials distributed in the city by means other than the United States mail; or if there are activities performed in the city on behalf of the service supplier that are significantly associated with the service supplier’s ability to establish and maintain a market in the city for the provision of utility services that are subject to a tax under this chapter. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.120 Duty to collect procedures.
A. Collection by Service Suppliers. The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be performed as follows:
    1. The tax shall be collected by service suppliers insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with, the collection of the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, Section 3.16.160 shall apply.
    2. The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a service user receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period.
B. Filing Return and Payment. Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall file a return to the tax administrator, on forms approved by the tax administrator, on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax collected shall be included with the return and filed with the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7284.6, the tax administrator, and its agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information that is exempt from the disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.130 Collection penalties—Service suppliers.
A. Taxes collected from a service user are delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the tax administrator on the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging moneys between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this chapter shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the city’s account on the following business day.
B. If the person required to collect and/or remit the utility users’ tax fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more services or charges on the customer’s billing) or fails to remit the tax collected on or before the due date, the tax administrator shall attach a penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of fifteen percent of the total tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance, and shall pay interest at the rate of seventy-five one-hundredths percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid.
C. The tax administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of fifteen percent of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the tax administrator.
D. For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest that is accrued under the provisions of this chapter shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.
E. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the tax administrator may, in his or her discretion, modify the due dates of this chapter to be consistent with any uniform standards or procedures that are mutually agreed upon by other public agencies imposing a utility users’ tax, or otherwise legally established, to create a central payment location or mechanism. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.140 Actions to collect.
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, along with any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person’s noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys’ fees. Any tax required to be collected by a service supplier or owed by a service user is an unsecured priority excise tax obligation under 11 USCA Section 507(a)(8)(C). Service suppliers who seek to collect charges for service in bankruptcy proceedings shall also include in any such claim the amount of taxes due the city for those services, unless the tax administrator determines that such duty is in conflict with any federal or state law, rule, or regulation or that such action would be administratively impractical. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.150 Deficiency determination and assessment—Tax application errors.
A. The tax administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or she determines that any person required to pay or collect taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has failed to pay, collect, and/or remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges. Nothing herein shall require that the tax administrator institute proceedings under this section if, in the opinion of the tax administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit.
B. The tax administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate of seventy-five one-hundredths percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the city. Within fourteen calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the matter.
C. If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the city. If the person requests a hearing, the tax administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be scheduled within thirty days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the tax administrator to such person at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the tax administrator desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced.
D. At the time fixed for the hearing, the tax administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the tax administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the tax administrator shall issue a final assessment (or nonassessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to the person owing the tax. The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.16.200. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the city administrator, or designee, pursuant to Section 3.16.200 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.
E. Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the thirtieth day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be fifteen percent on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the rate of seventy-five one-hundredths percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the city seeking payment of a tax assessed under this chapter shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection E.
F. All notices under this chapter may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.160 Administrative remedy—Nonpaying service users.
A. Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. To the extent the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the city with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this chapter. Nothing herein shall require that the tax administrator institute proceedings under this section if, in the opinion of the tax administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit.
B. In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency penalty at the rate of fifteen percent of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay interest at the rate of seventy-five one-hundredths percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.
C. The tax administrator shall notify the nonpaying service user that the tax administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address.
D. If the service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within thirty days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the tax administrator may impose an additional penalty of fifteen percent of the amount of the total tax that is owed. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.170 Additional powers and duties of the tax administrator.
A. The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The tax administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations consistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. The administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this chapter, or increase an existing tax, except as allowed by California Government Code Section 53750(h)(2). A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office. To the extent that the tax administrator determines that the tax imposed under this chapter shall not be collected in full for any period of time from any particular service supplier or service user, that determination shall be considered an exercise of the tax administrator’s discretion to settle disputes and shall not constitute a change in taxing methodology for purposes of Government Code Section 53750 or otherwise. The tax administrator is not authorized to amend the city’s methodology for purposes of Government Code Section 53750 and the city does not waive or abrogate its ability to impose the utility users’ tax in full as a result of promulgating administrative rulings or entering into agreements.
C. Upon a proper showing of good cause, the tax administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby: (1) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or (2) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office, and are voidable by the tax administrator or the city at any time.
D. The tax administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The tax administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review shall not exceed a period of three years next preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from the tax administrator. Upon completion of the audit, the tax administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to Section 3.16.150 for all taxes (and applicable penalties and interest) owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the tax administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the tax administrator to verify compliance with this chapter, the tax administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of correctness.
E. Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the tax administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required pursuant to this chapter for a period of not to exceed forty-five days; provided, that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of seventy-five one-hundredths percent per month, prorated for any portion thereof.
F. The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this chapter.
G. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the tax administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this chapter if the noncollection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the noncollection was in good faith, the tax administrator shall take into consideration the uniqueness of the product or service, industry practice or other precedence. The tax administrator may also participate with other utility users’ tax public agencies in conducting coordinated compliance reviews with the goal of achieving administrative efficiency and uniform tax application determinations, where possible. To encourage full disclosure and ongoing cooperation on annual compliance reviews, the tax administrator, and its agents, may enter into agreements with the tax-collecting service providers and grant prospective-only effect on any changes regarding the taxation of services or charges that were previously deemed by the service provider, in good faith and without gross negligence, to be nontaxable. In determining whether the noncollection was in good faith and without gross negligence, the tax administrator shall take into consideration the uniqueness of the product or service, industry practice or other precedence. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.180 Records.
A. It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he/she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.
B. The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the tax administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the tax administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the tax administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the city on or before the due date; provided, that such person shall reimburse the city for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the city to conduct the inspection.
C. The tax administrator is authorized to execute a nondisclosure agreement approved by the city attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7.
D. If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: (1) provide to the tax administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and (2) upon request of the tax administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the tax administrator, are necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city.
E. If any person subject to record-keeping under this chapter unreasonably denies the tax administrator access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, then the tax administrator may impose a penalty of five hundred dollars on such person for each day following: (1) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or (2) the due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.190 Refunds.
Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter from a person or service supplier, it may be refunded as provided in this section as follows:
A. Written Claim for Refund. The tax administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter from a person or service supplier; provided, that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator has submitted a written claim to the tax administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers unless each member of the class has submitted a written claim under penalty of perjury as provided by this section.
B. Compliance with Claims Act. The filing of a written claim pursuant to Government Code Section 935 is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. Any action brought against the city pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. The tax administrator, or the city council where the claim is in excess of five thousand dollars, shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in Government Code Section 912.4. If the tax administrator/city council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Government Code Section 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the city council on the last day of the period within which the city council was required to act upon the claim as provided in Government Code Section 912.4. The tax administrator shall give notice of the action in a form which substantially complies with that set forth in Government Code Section 913.
C. Refunds to Service Suppliers. Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax administrator may, at his or her discretion, give written permission to a service supplier, who has collected and remitted any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter, to claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due the city upon a subsequent monthly return(s) to the tax administrator; provided, that, prior to taking such credit by the service supplier: (1) such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous collection of said tax; (2) the tax administrator is satisfied that the underlying basis and amount of such credit has been reasonably established; and (3) in the case of an overpayment by a service user to the service supplier that has been remitted to the city, the tax administrator has received proof, to his or her satisfaction, that the overpayment has been refunded by the service supplier to the service user in an amount equal to the requested credit. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.200 Appeals.
A. The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.16.190), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.16.190), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Government Code Section 935(b).) Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.
B. If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.16.190), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, he or she may appeal to the city administrator, or designee, by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fourteen days of the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier.
C. The matter shall be scheduled for hearing before an independent hearing officer selected by the city administrator, or designee, no more than thirty days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the tax administrator, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.
D. Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the city’s files, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within fourteen days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within ninety days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.
E. All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.210 No injunction/writ of mandate.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.220 Notice of changes to chapter.
If a tax under this chapter is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the tax administrator shall follow the notice requirements of California Public Utilities Code Section 799. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.230 Effect of state and federal reference/authorization.
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time; provided, that such reference to a statute herein shall not include any subsequent amendment thereto, or to any subsequent change of interpretation thereto by a state or federal agency or court of law with the duty to interpret such law, to the extent that such amendment or change of interpretation would require voter approval under California law, or to the extent that such change would result in a tax decrease (as a result of excluding all or a part of a utility service, or charge therefor, from taxation). Only to the extent voter approval would otherwise be required or a tax decrease would result, the prior version of the statute (or interpretation) shall remain applicable; for any application or situation that would not require voter approval or result in a decrease of a tax, provisions of the amended statute (or new interpretation) shall be applicable to the maximum possible extent.
To the extent that the city’s authorization to collect or impose any tax imposed under this chapter is expanded or limited as a result of changes in state or federal law, no amendment or modification of this chapter shall be required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax shall be imposed and collected to the full extent of the authorization up to the full amount of the tax imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.240 No increase in tax percentage or change in methodology without voter approval—Amendment or repeal.
This chapter may be repealed or amended by the city council without a vote of the people. However, as required by Chapter XIIIC of the California Constitution, voter approval is required for any amendment provision that would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant to this chapter. The people of the city of San Luis Obispo affirm that the following actions shall not constitute an increase of the rate of a tax:
A. The restoration of the rate of the tax to a rate that is no higher than that set by this chapter, if the city council has acted to reduce the rate of the tax;
B. An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or any definition applicable to the tax, so long as such interpretation or clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification) is not inconsistent with the language of this chapter;
C. The establishment of a class of persons that is exempt or excepted from the tax or the discontinuation of any such exemption or exception (other than the discontinuation of an exemption or exception specifically set forth in this chapter); and
D. The collection of the tax imposed by this chapter, even if the city had, for some period of time, failed to collect the tax. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.250 Remedies cumulative.
All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available under any other provision of law or equity, including but not limited to the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650 et seq.) and the California Unfair Practices Act (Business and Professions Code Section 17070 et seq.), are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

3.16.260 Interaction with prior tax.
A. Collection of Tax by Service Providers. Service providers shall begin to collect the tax imposed by this amended chapter as soon as feasible after the effective date of this chapter, but in no event later than permitted by Section 799 of the California Public Utilities Code.
B. Satisfaction of Tax Obligation by Service Users. Prior to April 1, 2013, any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to this chapter, as it existed prior to its amendment as provided herein, with respect to any charge for a service shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to this chapter as amended herein, with respect to that charge. The intent of this subsection is to prevent the imposition of multiple taxes upon a single utility charge during the transition period from the prior utility users’ tax ordinance to the amended utility users’ tax ordinance (which transition period ends April 1, 2013) and to permit service providers or other persons with an obligation to remit the tax hereunder, during that transition period, to satisfy their collection obligations by collecting either tax.
C. In the event that a final court order should determine that the election enacting this chapter (as amended herein) is invalid for whatever reason, or that any tax imposed under this chapter (as amended herein) is invalid in whole or in part, then the taxes imposed under this chapter, as it existed prior to its amendment as provided herein, shall automatically continue to apply with respect to any service for which the tax levied pursuant to this chapter has been determined to be invalid. Such automatic continuation shall be effective beginning as of the first date of service (or billing date) for which the tax imposed by this chapter is not valid. However, in the event of an invalidation, any tax (other than a tax that is ordered refunded by the court or is otherwise refunded by the city) paid by a person with respect to a service and calculated pursuant to this chapter (as amended herein) shall be deemed to satisfy the tax imposed under this chapter, as it existed prior to its amendment as provided herein, on that service, so long as the tax is paid with respect to a service provided no later than six months subsequent to the date on which the final court order is published. (Ord. 1586 § 1 (part), 2012)

Chapter 3.20 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND

Sections:
3.20.010     Created.
3.20.020     Deposit of money received.
3.20.030     Use of money received.

3.20.010 Created.
To comply with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter I of Division I of the Streets and Highways Code, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.” (Prior code § 2610)

3.20.020 Deposit of money received.
All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways, shall be paid into the fund. (Prior code § 2610.1)

3.20.030 Use of money received.
All moneys in the special gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division I of the Streets and Highways Code. (Prior code § 2610.2)

Chapter 3.24 PROCEDURES FOR PAYMENT OF CLAIMS AND PURCHASES

Sections:
Article I.  General Provisions
    3.24.010     Applicability of provisions.
    3.24.020     Purpose of provisions.
    3.24.030     Purchasing authority designated—Powers and duties.
    3.24.040     Purchasing manual.
    3.24.050     Purchase documents.
    3.24.060     Bidding procedures—Use of not required when.
    3.24.070     Authority to hire consultants.
    3.24.075     Environmentally preferred purchases.
Article II. Open Market Purchase Procedure
    3.24.080     Purchase authorization.
    3.24.090     Quotations—Notice of invitation.
    3.24.100     Quotations—Submission in writing—Recordkeeping.
    3.24.110     Quotations—Number required.
    3.24.120     Quotations—Rejection.
    3.24.130     Award of purchase orders.
Article III. Formal Contract Procedure
    3.24.140     Requirements for purchase.
    3.24.145     Job order contracting.
    3.24.150     Bids—Notice of invitation and submission.
    3.24.160     Bids—Security requirement.
    3.24.170     Bids—Opening and retention.
    3.24.180     Bids—Rejection.
    3.24.185     Bids—None received.
    3.24.187     Bids for construction projects—In excess of limit.
    3.24.190     Contract award.
    3.24.200     Requiring bond of successful bidder.
    3.24.210     Determination of lowest responsible bidder.
Article IV. Payment Procedure
    3.24.220     Payment requirements.
    3.24.230     Warrant preparation—Accounting documents required.
    3.24.240     Payment date.
    3.24.250     Warrants—Finance director to sign—Payment.
    3.24.260     Disbursement record inspection.

Article I. General Provisions

3.24.010 Applicability of provisions.
All expenditures by the city for supplies, services, equipment and public works projects not controlled by the Charter shall be made only in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1618 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2015: Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2950.1)

3.24.020 Purpose of provisions.
A purchasing control system for the city is adopted in order:
A. To secure those items set out in Section 3.24.010 at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality requirements;
B. To ensure effective financial control over expenditures;
C. To clearly define authority and accountability for the purchasing function;
D. To minimize the written documentation, administrative actions and expense of processing purchase transactions;
E. To assure the quality of purchases made on behalf of the city; and
F. To facilitate accurate forecasting and planning of department needs and expenditures. (Ord. 1618 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2015: Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2950.2)

3.24.030 Purchasing authority designated—Powers and duties.
The city administrative officer, or his designated representative(s), shall be the purchasing authority whose functions shall include the following powers and duties:
A. To develop and prescribe, for the departments, such administrative policies, forms and files as may be reasonably necessary for the internal management and operation of these purchasing procedures;
B. To purchase or contract for those items listed in Section 3.24.010 and required by departments in accordance with these purchasing procedures;
C. To negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for purchase of those items listed in Section 3.24.010;
D. To procure the needed quality in supplies, services, equipment and public works projects not controlled by the Charter, at minimum expense;
E. To ensure as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;
F. To consolidate department orders for like items, ensuring quantity discount pricing whenever possible;
G. To develop and maintain department awareness of purchasing and pricing principles, marketing conditions and new products;
H. To inspect supplies and equipment delivered, as well as contractual services performed, to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the orders and contracts; and, in this connection, to have the authority to require chemical, physical or other tests of samples submitted with quotations or bids, or of delivery samplings, which may be necessary to determine quality and conformance with specifications;
I. To establish procedures for, and assign duties to, personnel engaged in receiving, storing and issuing purchased supplies, thereby ensuring that supply levels are consistent with usage requirements;
J. To facilitate the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment among departments as needed; and
K. Subject to Charter Section 906, to sell or exchange surplus supplies and equipment; provided, that the same cannot reasonably be used by any department. (Ord. 1618 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2015: Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2950.3)

3.24.040 Purchasing manual.
Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the city administrative officer shall approve and implement a manual of purchasing policies and procedures and shall make such manual available to the council for inspection. (Ord. 1618 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2015: Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2950.4)

3.24.050 Purchase documents.
All departments shall expend money for those items set forth in Section 3.24.010 only in such manner, at such times and by submission of such purchase documents as the purchasing authority shall prescribe. (Ord. 1618 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2015: Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2950.5)

3.24.060 Bidding procedures—Use of not required when.
Purchase of those items listed in Section 3.24.010 shall be by bid procedures set forth in this chapter. Such procedures may be dispensed with, at the discretion and judgment of the purchasing authority as to the best interests of the city, as follows:
A. When the amount to be expended is less than the bid requirement amount which shall be specified by resolution of the council;
B. When an emergency purchase is made to address a situation that creates an immediate and serious need for equipment, supplies, or services that cannot be met through normal purchasing procedures and where the lack of such equipment, supplies or services would seriously threaten the functioning of city government, the preservation of property, or the health or safety of any person;
C. When the item(s) to be purchased can be obtained from only one vendor or supplier;
D. When supplies or equipment have been uniformly adopted in the city or otherwise standardized;
E. When the purchase will be made cooperatively with one, or more, other units of government, or from a local dealer within the city limits that can provide the same brand, model and configuration of item(s) identified in cooperative purchase agreement(s) at or below the cooperative purchasing net cost within the same terms and conditions;
F. When reasonably necessary for the preservation or protection of public peace, health, safety or welfare of persons or property; or
G. When, given the indeterminate nature of the city’s need, a request for proposal will result in a more favorable and efficient comparison of supplies, equipment and/or services. (Ord. 1618 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2015: Ord. 1608 § 1, 2014; Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2950.6)

3.24.070 Authority to hire consultants.
The restrictions and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to contracts involving the acquisition of professional or specialized services such as, but not limited to, those rendered by architects, attorneys, engineers and other specialized consultants. Selection for such services will be made using one of the following criteria:
A. An evaluation of proposals solicited from capable professionals, and approved by the purchasing authority, whenever the cost of the work to be performed is of an estimated value less than the council specified amount if, in the discretion of the purchasing authority, selection based upon the evaluation of proposals would better serve the interest of the city.
B. An evaluation of proposals solicited from capable professionals, and approved by the council, whenever the cost of the work to be performed is of an estimated value in excess of the amount specified by council resolution.
C. Selection from an approved list of on-call consultants that is established by a formal request for qualifications (RFQ) process. The council shall approve the RFQ, and the purchasing authority is authorized to execute agreements with selected consultants. The finance director is authorized to execute and amend purchase orders for individual consultant services contracts in an amount not to exceed the authorized project budget. On-call consultant lists shall be renewed at least every five years by a new RFQ process. (Ord. 1618 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2015: Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2950.7)

3.24.075 Environmentally preferred purchases.
A. It is the intent of the city council that the city of San Luis Obispo take a leadership role not only in recycling its waste products but also in the purchase of recycled products for use in the delivery of city services. It is the purpose of this section to provide direction to the city administrative officer in the procurement and use of recycled products. For the purpose of this section, “recycled materials” are defined as any materials (e.g., glass, paper, plastic, etc.) that are separated by type, reprocessed by industrial methods, and used as raw materials for the manufacture of new products.
B. It is the policy of the city of San Luis Obispo to purchase and use recycled products whenever possible to the extent that such use does not negatively impact health, safety, or operational efficiency.
C. It is the policy of the city of San Luis Obispo to encourage the purchase of products which can be recycled or reused.
D. The city will purchase and use recycled paper for masthead stationery, envelopes and printing purposes. In addition, recycled paper shall be purchased and used in all copy machines which will accept it. City staff will encourage the copier industry to develop high-speed copiers which will accept recycled paper.
E. City departments shall examine their purchasing specifications and, where feasible, purchase equipment, supplies, and services that result in less harm to the natural environment. This involves the purchase of equipment, supplies, and services in a manner that uses less harmful materials, employs recycled or recovered materials (where appropriate and available), and utilizes techniques intended to result in less impact on the environment than other available methods.
F. It is the policy of the city of San Luis Obispo that city funds shall not be used to purchase single-use plastic bottled beverages of less than twenty-one ounces or single-use plastic drink containers or single-use plastic beverage containers, as provided in Chapter 8.07.
G. A ten percent preference, not to exceed one thousand dollars per contract, may be given to recycled products. The fitness and quality of the recycled product must be at least equal to unrecycled products as determined by the city. The preference percentage shall be based on the lowest bid or price quoted by the supplier or suppliers offering nonrecycled products.
H. Price preferences may be offered in excess of the ten percent ceiling established in this section, if it can be shown that purchase of a recycled product or material will result in greater long-term savings to the city. Award of a bid in excess of the ceiling, however, requires the approval of the city administrative officer or city council as established in the city’s purchasing manual. (Ord. 1644 § 2, 2018: Ord. 1618 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2015: Ord. 1178 § 1, 1990)
Ord. No. 1178 added § 3.24.080, which the editor has renumbered § 3.24.075 since the chapter already contained a § 3.24.080.

Article II. Open Market Purchase Procedure

3.24.080 Purchase authorization.
Purchases of supplies, equipment and contractual services, except those controlled by the Charter, having an estimated value less than that specified by council resolution for bid, may be made by the purchasing authority in the open market without observing the formal contract procedures set out in Article III of this chapter. (Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2951.1)

3.24.090 Quotations—Notice of invitation.
The purchasing authority shall invite, either by verbal or written request, quotations from prospective sellers, vendors, suppliers or contractors. (Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2951.2)

3.24.100 Quotations—Submission in writing—Recordkeeping.
Written quotations shall be submitted to the purchasing authority, who shall keep a record of open market quotations and orders for a period of ninety days after the receipt of such quotations. (Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2951.3)

3.24.110 Quotations—Number required.
Open market purchases shall be based, whenever reasonably possible, on at least three quotations. (Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2951.4)

3.24.120 Quotations—Rejection.
The purchasing authority may reject:
A. Any quotations which fail to meet the specific purchase requirements in any respect; or
B. All quotations, for any reason whatsoever, and may invite new quotations. (Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2951.5)

3.24.130 Award of purchase orders.
Purchase orders shall be awarded by the purchasing authority to the person submitting the lowest responsible quotation, except as follows:
A. If two or more quotations are received for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if, at the discretion of the purchasing authority, the public interest will not permit the delay of inviting new quotations, then the purchasing authority may accept the lower quotation obtained through negotiation with the persons submitting the tie quotations;
B. Sellers, vendors, suppliers and contractors who maintain places of business located within the limit of the city shall be given preference if quality, price, service and all other relevant factors are equal; or
C. If no quotations are received, the purchasing authority may make the required purchase without further notice. (Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2951.6)

Article III. Formal Contract Procedure

3.24.140 Requirements for purchase.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, purchases and contracts for supplies, services, equipment and construction projects, which are equal to or in excess of the bid requirement amount specified by council resolution, shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the procedures prescribed in this article. (Ord. 1435 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2952.1)

3.24.145 Job order contracting.
As provided in Section 901(E) of the Charter, the city may perform maintenance-related construction projects for repair, remodeling or other repetitive work under a unit-price contract for all necessary labor, materials and equipment, subject to the following conditions:
A. Such contracts are secured on a competitive basis in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article;
B. No new construction will be performed under such contracts;
C. The specifications for such contracts provide for unit-price terms for all work that will typically be performed under individual task orders;
D. The specifications for such contracts establish any limits on the amount of individual task orders to be issued under the contract; or on any minimum or maximum cumulative amounts of task orders to be issued under the contract;
E. The council will specify limits on the authority to approve individual task orders by resolution. (Ord. 1435 § 1 (part), 2003)

3.24.150 Bids—Notice of invitation and submission.
A. Notices inviting bids shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
    1. A general description of the item(s) or service(s) to be purchased, or the public work to be constructed or improved;
    2. The location where bid blanks and specifications may be secured;
    3. The time and place assigned for the opening of sealed bids;
    4. The type and character of bidder’s security required, if any; and
    5. The location and deadline for submission of bids.
B. Notices inviting bids shall be made as follows:
    1. For supplies, services and equipment, notices inviting bids shall be published at least once in the official newspaper of the city, with the first publication occurring at least ten calendar days before the date of opening the bids.
    2. For construction projects below an amount specified by council resolution, notices inviting bids shall be mailed to a list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work, at least ten calendar days before the bids are due. The city engineer is responsible for developing and maintaining this list based on the criteria determined by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission (hereinafter referred to as Commission in this chapter). Notices shall also be mailed within ten calendar days before the bids are due to all construction trade journals as required by the Commission. If the city does not have a list of qualified contractors for the particular type of work to be performed, notices inviting bids will only be sent to the construction trade journals as required by the Commission. If the product or service is proprietary in nature and can only be obtained from a certain contractor or contractors, notices inviting bids will only be mailed to such contractor or contractors.
    3. For construction projects above an amount specified by council resolution, notices inviting bids distinctly describing the project be published at least once in the official newspaper of the city, with the first publication occurring at least fourteen calendar days before the date of opening the bids. Notices inviting bids distinctly describing the project shall also be mailed at least thirty calendar days before the date of opening bids to all construction trade journals as required by the Commission.
    4. The city may also give such other notice as it deems appropriate.
C. Sealed bids shall be identified as bids on the envelopes and shall be submitted to the purchasing authority. (Ord. 1435 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 1291 § 1, 1996; Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2952.2)

3.24.160 Bids—Security requirement.
Bidder’s security may be required when deemed necessary by the purchasing authority. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security. However, a successful bidder shall forfeit his or her bid security upon refusal or failure to execute a contract within fifteen days after notice of award of that contract, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The contract may be awarded to the next lowest responsible bidder upon the refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract within the time herein prescribed. (Ord. 1435 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2952.3)

3.24.170 Bids—Opening and retention.
Sealed bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the notice inviting bids. A tabulation of all bids received shall be made available for public inspection until the award of a contract. All bids shall be retained on file for a period of not less than two years. (Ord. 1435 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2952.4)

3.24.180 Bids—Rejection.
The purchasing authority may reject:
A. Any bid that fails to meet the bidding requirements in any respect; or
B. All bids, for any reason whatsoever, and may readvertise for new bids or abandon the purchase;
C. In the case of construction projects, the council may, by passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote, declare that the project can be performed more economically by employees of the city and may have the project done by force account. (Ord. 1435 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2952.5)

3.24.185 Bids—None received.
If no bids are received, the purchase may be made through negotiated contract or other process approved by the purchasing authority, including, in the case of construction projects, performing the work by employees of the city by force account. (Ord. 1435 § 1 (part), 2003)

3.24.187 Bids for construction projects—In excess of limit.
In the event that all bids received for a construction project are more than the maximum allowed under Section 22034(f) of Public Contract Code, and bids were invited pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.24.150(B)(2), the council may, by adoption of a resolution by four-fifths vote, award the contract, in an amount not to exceed the maximum set forth in Section 22034(f) of Public Contract Code, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines that the cost estimate was reasonable. Otherwise, the bids shall be rejected, and if the agency decides to go forward with the project, shall be re-bid in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 3.24.150(B)(3). (Ord. 1435 § 1 (part), 2003)

3.24.190 Contract award.
Subject to the prior approval of the city administrative officer, contracts shall be awarded by the purchasing authority to the lowest responsible bidder, except as follows:
A. If, at the time of bid opening, two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if in the discretion of the purchasing authority the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, then the purchasing authority may accept the one she or he or she chooses or the lowest bid obtained through subsequent negotiation with the tie bidders.
B. Sellers, vendors, suppliers and contractors who maintain places of business located within the limit of the city shall be given preference if quality, price, service and all other factors are equal. (Ord. 1435 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2952.6)

3.24.200 Requiring bond of successful bidder.
The purchasing authority may require as a condition to executing a contract on behalf of the city, a performance bond or a labor and material bond, or both, in such amounts as the purchasing authority shall determine appropriate to protect the best interests of the city. The form and amounts of such bond(s) shall be described in the notice inviting bids. (Ord. 1435 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2952.7)

3.24.210 Determination of lowest responsible bidder.
In addition to the bid or quotation price, criteria for determining the lowest responsible bid or quotation, for the purposes of the Charter and this chapter, shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder (this may include an analysis of previous work performed for the city);
B. The ability of the bidder to perform the contract, or provide the supplies, equipment or services required, within the time specified, without delay or interference;
C. The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance, repair parts and replacement of purchased equipment or supplies;
D. Compliance by the bidder with federal acts, executive orders and state statutes governing nondiscrimination in employment; and
E. The results of any evaluation relating performance and price, such as testing, life-cycle costing, and analysis of service, maintenance and technical data. (Ord. 1435 § 1 (part), 2003: Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2952.8)

Article IV. Payment Procedure

3.24.220 Payment requirements.
All purchases not otherwise provided for in the Charter shall be made by requisition, or other prescribed document, signed by the purchasing authority and paid by warrant signed by the finance director. Payment will only be made upon the satisfaction of the finance director that:
A. Sufficient moneys have been appropriated for the purchase;
B. The expenditure is in accordance with budget authority; and
C. The proposed expenditure is legal. (Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2953.1)

3.24.230 Warrant preparation—Accounting documents required.
The finance department shall prepare a warrant after receiving properly completed accounting documents as prescribed by the finance director and the purchasing authority. Such accounting documents include, but are not limited to, purchase authorizations, purchase orders, receiving reports and vendor invoices. (Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2953.2)

3.24.240 Payment date.
The finance director shall determine and assign the dates of warrant preparation, the frequency of which shall be no less than twice each month. (Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2953.3)

3.24.250 Warrants—Finance director to sign—Payment.
The finance director shall sign each warrant, which shall be honored if there is sufficient money in the city’s account. (Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2953.4)

3.24.260 Disbursement record inspection.
Following each disbursement a copy of the warrant register, including all warrant numbers and dollar amounts, will be made available for inspection by the council and the city administrative officer. (Ord. 954 § 2 (part), 1983: prior code § 2953.5)

Chapter 3.28 GENERAL RESERVE ACCOUNT

Sections:
3.28.010     Established—Minimum required balance.

3.28.010 Established—Minimum required balance.
Within the general fund there shall be established an unrestricted contingencies reserve to be known as the General Reserve Account. Each fiscal year there shall be maintained in this account an amount equal to three percent of the aggregate amount of the approved budget. Each annual budget shall contain a sufficient appropriation of funds which will be added to carry over funds in the account to satisfy the three percent amount. (Prior code § 2640)

Chapter 3.32 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY

Sections:
3.32.010     Defined.
3.32.020     Sale at auction—Notice required.
3.32.030     Destruction.
3.32.040     Donation of bicycles or toys.

3.32.010 Defined.
For the purpose of this chapter, the term “unclaimed property” means any and all property in the possession of the police department for which no claim or demand has been made and property for which no owner has been found. (Prior code § 4280.2)

3.32.020 Sale at auction—Notice required.
Pursuant to Section 2080.4 of the California Civil Code the police department is authorized to sell at public auction to the highest bidder all unclaimed property which has been in the possession of the department for a period of at least three months upon notice of such sale, given by the chief of police at least five days before the time fixed therefor by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. (Ord. 1330 § 1, 1997: Ord. 963 § 1, 1983: prior code § 4280.1)

3.32.030 Destruction.
Any unclaimed property which is not so sold, or which is in a dilapidated or deteriorated condition, may be summarily destroyed by the department after the public auction sale. (Prior code § 4280.3)

3.32.040 Donation of bicycles or toys.
Pursuant to Section 217 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code, any bicycles or toys, or both, in the possession of the police department which have been unclaimed for a period of at least 60 days may, instead of being sold at public auction to the highest bidder, be turned over to the county probation officer, to the county welfare department, or to any charitable or nonprofit organization for use in any program or to any charitable or nonprofit organization which is authorized under its articles of incorporation to participate in a program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency and which is exempt from income taxation under federal or state law, or both, for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. (Ord. 1330 § 2, 1997)

Chapter 3.36 PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS

Sections:
3.36.010     Labor—Prevailing wage.

3.36.010 Labor—Prevailing wage.
In every contract for the performance of labor on public works, eight hours shall constitute a day’s work, and the contractor and all subcontractors under him or her shall pay their employees on the work a salary or wage at least equal to the prevailing salary or wage for the same quality of service rendered to private persons, under similar employment in the city. (Prior code § 7600)

Chapter 3.40 FINANCING OF INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT

Sections:
3.40.010     Findings and determinations.
3.40.020     Definitions.
3.40.030     Powers.
3.40.040     Nonoperation.
3.40.050     Applications for financing.
3.40.060     Acceptance of applications.
3.40.070     Authorization of bonds.
3.40.080     Issuance of bonds.
3.40.090     Terms of bonds.
3.40.100     Trust agreement.
3.40.110     Personal liability.
3.40.120     Refunding bonds.
3.40.130     Repayment of bonds.
3.40.140     Authority to assist projects.
3.40.150     Financing agreements.
3.40.160     Trust funds.
3.40.170     Liberal construction.
3.40.180     Supplemental and additional powers.
3.40.190     Actions to determine validity of bonds and proceedings.
3.40.200     Amendment of chapter.

3.40.010 Findings and determinations.
The council finds and determines as follows:
A. The full employment of residents of the city and the prevention of unemployment and underemployment of such residents, serves a vital and compelling public interest of the city and promotes the public health, safety and welfare of the city by reducing the incidence of crime, improving the mental and physical health and well-being of the city’s residents’ alleviating the financial drain upon limited public and private resources for welfare programs and unemployment assistance, and enhancing the financial resources of the city.
B. The encouragement of industrial and commercial development within the city serves a vital and compelling public interest of the city and promotes the public health, safety and welfare of the city by increasing the employment of residents of the city, increasing the tax and revenue base and thereby enhancing the financial resources of the city, and preventing physical deterioration and abandonment of industrial and commercial areas within the city. In addition, the city’s participation in the financing of such development serves the public interest by ensuring that such development will reflect the needs and objectives of the community more so than if such development were undertaken without city participation.
C. Encouraging industrial and commercial development pursuant to this chapter (l) will promote health, safety and welfare of the city, including those public interests enumerated above, and will improve the social, moral economic and physical condition of the community thereby, and (2) constitutes a municipal affair of the city, a valid exercise of the police powers of the city, and a public purpose in which the city has a peculiar and unique interest. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.020 Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter
A. “Acquisition” and its variants means acquisition, construction, improvement, furnishing, equipping, remodeling, repair, reconstruction or rehabilitation.
B. “Administrative expenses” means all reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the city in the administration of the provisions of this chapter with respect to a particular project and the financing thereof, including without limitation compensation to city agents, employees and staff, fees and expenses of paying agents, trustees, bond counsel and financing consultants, and costs of printing and advertising.
C. “Bonds” means any bonds, notes, interim certificates, debentures or other obligations issued by the city pursuant to this chapter, which are payable exclusively from revenues and other funds permitted by this chapter, and which are “industrial development bonds” within the meaning of Section 103(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, or any similar provision of such Code then in effect.
D. “City” means the city of San Luis Obispo, California, a chartered city in the state existing under and exercising powers pursuant to the City Charter and the constitution of the state.
E. “City Charter” means the Charter of the city, as amended from time to time.
F. “Council” means the city council of the city.
G. “Costs” means, with reference to a project, any or all of the following costs incurred for the acquisition thereof:
    1. Obligations of the participating party incurred for labor and materials in connection with the acquisition of the project;
    2. The cost of acquisition of any property, whether real or personal and improved or unimproved, including franchise rights and other intangible property, and any interests therein, required for the acquisition of the project;
    3. The cost of demolishing, removing or relocating any building or structure, and the cost of making relocation assistance payments required by law;
    4. The cost of contract bonds and of insurance of all kinds that may be required or necessary during the course of the acquisition of the project;
    5. All costs of engineering, legal and consultant services, including the costs of the participating party for surveys, estimates, plans and specifications and preliminary investigation therefor and for supervising construction, as well as for the performance of all other duties required by or consequent upon the proper acquisition of the project;
    6. All costs incurred in connection with proceedings by the participating party necessary to comply with the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, as amended;
    7. All amounts required to fund any reserve funds for bonds and any interest on bonds becoming due and payable during a period not exceeding the period of acquisition of the project and twelve months thereafter;
    8. All administrative expenses;
    9. All costs which the participating party shall be required to pay, under the terms of any contract or contracts, for the acquisition of the project;
    10. The refinancing of any existing indebtedness secured by an interest in any real property comprising any portion of the project, so long as and to the extent that such refinancing does not cause interest on the bonds to become taxable under Section 103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended; and
    11. Any sums required to reimburse the participating party for advances made for any of the above items or for any other costs incurred and for work done which are properly chargeable to the project.
H. “Exempt organization” means an entity exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended.
I. “Finance” and its variants means the lending of moneys or any other thing of value, or the purchase of loans or the entering into of leases or installment sale agreements, for the purpose of (i) paying or otherwise providing for or assisting the payment of any or all of the costs of a project pursuant to this chapter, or (ii) providing funds to be used as working capital or otherwise for general expenditures of exempt organizations pursuant to this chapter.
J. “Participating party” means any person, corporation, partnership, firm or other entity or group of entities requiring financing for the acquisition of a project pursuant to this chapter.
K. “Project” means real property located within the city and improved with an industrial or commercial structure, and all property in connection therewith or incidental thereto, including machinery, equipment and furnishings, the acquisition of which is financed or otherwise assisted pursuant to this chapter.
L. “Ordinance” means Ordinance No. 1047, codified in this chapter, passed and adopted by the council on October 15, 1985, pursuant to the city Charter, as amended from time to time.
M. “Revenues” means, with respect to a project, all amounts received as repayment of principal, interest and all other charges received for, and all other income and revenue (including the proceeds of insurance) derived by, the city in connection with such project, and any receipts derived from the investment of such income or revenues, including moneys deposited in a sinking, redemption or reserve fund or other fund to secure the bonds or to provide for the payment of the principal of or interest on the bonds and such other moneys as the council may in its discretion make available therefor.
N. “State” means the state of California. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.030 Powers.
The city is authorized and empowered:
A. To determine the location and character of any project to be financed under the provisions of this chapter, and to finance such projects.
B. To issue bonds (i) for the purpose of financing or otherwise assisting the acquisition of projects authorized by this chapter, or (ii) for the purpose of providing funds to be used as working capital or otherwise to finance general expenditures of exempt organizations, or (iii) for the purpose of funding or refunding bonds.
C. To fix fees, charges and interest rates for financing any project, and to revise such fees, charges and interest rates from time to time, and to collect interest and principal on any loan made to a participating party together with such fees and charges incurred in such financing, and to contract with any person, partnership, association, corporation or public agency with respect thereto.
D. To hold deeds of trust as security for financing any project and to pledge the same as security for repayment of bonds issued therefor
E. To establish the terms and conditions for the financing of any project undertaken pursuant to this chapter.
F. To require that the full amount owed on any loan for the financing of a project pursuant to this chapter shall be due and payable upon sale or other transfer of ownership of such project.
G. To acquire, by deed, purchase, lease, contract, gift, devise, or otherwise, any real or personal property, structures, rights, rights-of-way, franchises, easements, mortgages and other interests in property located within the state necessary or convenient for the financing or acquisition of a project, upon such terms and conditions as it deems advisable, and to lease, sell or dispose of the same in such manner as may be necessary or desirable to carry out the objects and purposes of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be construed in any way to authorize any exercise of the power of eminent domain with respect to any project.
H. To employ or contract for such engineering, architectural, accounting, collection, economic feasibility or other services in connection with the servicing of loans made to participating parties, as may be necessary in the judgment of the council for the successful financing of a project. The city may pay the reasonable costs of consulting engineers, architects, accountants, construction experts and economic feasibility experts, if, in the judgment of the council, such services are necessary to the successful financing of a project and if the city is not able to provide such services. The city may employ, contract for, and fix the compensation of financing consultants, bond counsel and other advisers as may be necessary in its judgment to provide for the issuance and sale of bonds.
I. In addition to all other powers specifically granted in this chapter, to do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.040 Nonoperation.
The city shall not have the power to operate any project as a business. The city shall take no more action with respect to any project than is necessary to promote the public interests of the city recited in Section 3.40.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.050 Applications for financing.
Participating parties may apply for financing pursuant to this chapter by contacting the community development director or other officer or employee of the city designated by the community development director. Each applicant shall supply to the satisfaction of the community development director or such officer or employee of the participating party and the feasibility of the proposed project, including an estimate of the maximum amount of financing to be required, a description or itemization of the costs of the proposed project, and a written agreement to pay all administrative expenses for the proposed project. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any financing approved by resolution of the council adopted prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.060 Acceptance of applications.
Upon receipt of an application containing all required information, agreements and undertakings, the council shall at such time as it deems convenient review such application and any staff recommendations with respect thereto. If the council chooses to approve any application for financing under this chapter, it shall adopt a resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds and/or accepting and approving such application and the participation of the city in the financing of such project, subject to the provisions of this chapter and the conclusion of all proceedings undertaken to consummate such financing to the satisfaction of the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any financing approved by resolution of the council adopted prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.070 Authorization of bonds.
The bonds may be issued as serial bonds or as term bonds, or the council, in its discretion, may issue bonds of both types. The bonds shall be authorized by resolution of the council and shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, bear interest at such fixed or variable rate or rates, be payable at such time or times, be in such denominations, be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable in lawful money of the United States of America, at such place or places, and be subject to such terms of redemption as the resolution or resolutions of the council may provide. The bonds may be sold at either a public or private sale and for such prices as the council shall determine. Pending preparation of the definitive bonds, the city may issue interim receipts, certificates, or temporary bonds, which shall be exchanged for such definitive bonds. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.080 Issuance of bonds.
The bonds may be issued as serial bonds or as term bonds, or the council, in its discretion, may issue bonds of both types. The bonds shall be authorized by resolution of the council and shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, bear interest at such fixed or variable rate or rates, be payable at such time or times, be in such denominations, be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable in lawful money of the United States of America, at such place or places, and be subject to such terms of redemption as the resolution or resolutions of the council may provide. The bonds may be sold at either a public or private sale and for such prices as the council shall determine. Pending preparation of the definitive bonds, the city may issue interim receipts, certificates, or temporary bonds, which shall be exchanged for such definitive bonds. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.090 Terms of bonds.
Any resolution or resolutions authorizing any bonds or any issue of bonds may contain provisions respecting any of the following terms and conditions, which shall be a part of the contract with the holders of the bonds:
A. The pledge of all or any part of the revenues, subject to such agreements with bondholders as may then exist.
B. The interest and principal to be received and other charges to be charged and the amounts to be raised each year thereby, and the use and disposition of the revenues.
C. The setting aside of reserves or sinking funds and the regulation and disposition thereof.
D. Limitations on the purposes to which the proceeds of a sale of any issue of bonds, then or thereafter issued, may be applied, and pledging such proceeds to secure the payment of the bonds or any issue of bonds.
E. Limitations on the issuance of additional bonds, the terms upon which additional bonds may be issued and secured, and the refunding of outstanding bonds.
F. The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be given.
G. Specification of the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute a default in the duties of the city to holders of its obligations, and providing the rights and remedies of such holders in the event of default.
H. The mortgaging of land, improvements or other assets owned by a participating party for the purpose of securing the bondholders.
I. Such other terms and conditions pertaining to the issuance of the bonds as are deemed advisable by the council. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.100 Trust agreement.
In the discretion of the council, any bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter may be secured by a trust agreement or indenture by and between the city and a corporate trustee or trustees, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or without the state. Such trust agreement or the indenture may pledge or assign the revenues to be received or proceeds of any contract or contracts pledged, and may convey or mortgage any property. Such trust agreement or indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including such provisions as may be included in any resolution or resolutions of the council authorizing the issuance of bonds pursuant to Section 3.40.030 of this chapter. Any bank or trust company doing business under the laws of the state which may act as depository of the proceeds of bonds or of revenues or other moneys may furnish such indemnity bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the city. Any such trust agreement or indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee or trustees, and may restrict the individual right of action by bondholders. In addition to the foregoing, any such trust agreement or indenture may contain such other provisions as the council may deem reasonable and proper for the security of bondholders. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.110 Personal liability.
Neither the members of the council nor any person executing the bonds shall be liable personally on the bonds or be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance thereof. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.120 Refunding bonds.
The council may provide for the issuance of bonds any portion of which is to be used for the purpose of refunding outstanding bonds, including the payment of the principal thereof and interest and redemption premiums, if any, thereon. The proceeds of bonds issued to refund any outstanding bonds may, in the discretion of the city council, be applied to the retirement of such outstanding bonds at maturity, or the redemption (on any redemption date) or purchase of such outstanding bonds prior to maturity, upon such terms and subject to such conditions as the city council shall deem advisable. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.130 Repayment of bonds.
Revenues shall be the sole source of funds pledged by the city for repayment of bonds issued under this chapter. Bonds issued under this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute a debt or liability of the city or a pledge of the faith and credit of the city but shall be payable solely from revenues. All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to the following effect:
Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the City of San Luis Obispo is pledged to the payment of the principal of or interest on this bond.
The issuance of bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the council to levy or pledge any form of taxation or to make any appropriation for their payment. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.140 Authority to assist projects.
The city may provide financing to any participating party for, or otherwise assist the acquisition of, duly approved projects pursuant to this chapter. At the discretion of the city council the financial assistance provided under this chapter may take any form deemed advisable for the successful financing of the project, including without limitation in the form of a loan, lease or installment sale. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.150 Financing agreements.
The city may enter into agreements with any participating party with respect to the financing of a project, which agreements may provide that the architectural and engineering design of the project shall be subject to such standards as may be established by the city and that the acquisition of the project shall be subject to such supervision as the city deems necessary. The terms and conditions of such agreements may be as mutually agreed upon, but shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. Any such agreement may provide the means or methods by which any mortgage taken by the city shall be discharged, and it may contain a covenant by the participating party to complete the project whether or not bond proceeds are sufficient therefor, and such other terms and conditions as the city may require. The city is authorized to fix, revise, charge and collect interest and principal and all other rates, fees, rents, installment purchase payments and charges with respect to the financing of a project. Such rates, fees, rents, installment purchase payments, charges and interest shall be fixed and adjusted so that the aggregate thereof will provide funds sufficient with other revenues and moneys which it is anticipated will be available therefor, if any, to do all of the following
A. Pay the principal of and interest on outstanding bonds issued to finance such project, as the same shall become due and payable.
B. Create and maintain reserves required or provided for in any resolution authorizing such bonds. A sufficient amount of the revenues derived from the project may be set aside at such regular intervals as may be provided by the resolution or trust agreement in a sinking or other similar fund, which shall be pledged to, and charged with, the payment of the principal of and interest on such bonds as the same shall become due, and the redemption price or the purchase price of bonds retired by all or purchase as therein provided. Such pledge shall be valid and binding from the time the pledge is made. The rates, fees, interest and other charges, revenues or moneys so pledged and thereafter received by the city shall immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act, and the lien of any such pledge shall be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract or otherwise against the city, irrespective of whether such parties have notice thereof. Neither the resolution, the trust agreement nor any agreement by which a pledge is created need be filed or recorded except in the records of the city. The use and disposition of moneys to the credit of such sinking or other similar fund shall be subject to the provisions of the resolution or trust agreement authorizing the issuance of such bonds.
C. Pay administrative expenses to the extent not paid from bond proceeds. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.160 Trust funds.
All moneys received pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, whether proceeds from the sale of bonds or revenues, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely for the purposes of this chapter. Any bank or trust company in which such moneys are deposited shall act as trustee of such moneys and shall hold and apply the same for the purposes specified in this chapter, subject to the terms of the resolution or trust agreement authorizing the bonds. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.170 Liberal construction.
This chapter, being necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the city and its residents, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. Furthermore, the council declares that this chapter is an exercise of the power granted to the city by the city Charter and the Constitution of the state and is an exercise by the city of its powers as to municipal affairs and its police powers, and this chapter shall be liberally construed to uphold its validity under the laws of the state. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.180 Supplemental and additional powers.
This chapter shall be deemed to provide a complete, additional and alternative method for doing the things authorized thereby, and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to the powers conferred by other laws. The issuance of bonds under the provisions of this chapter need not comply with the requirements of any other law applicable to the issuance of bonds. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.190 Actions to determine validity of bonds and proceedings.
An action may be brought pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860 of Title 10 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure) to determine the validity of bonds and the legality and validity of all proceedings previously taken and proposed to be taken for the authorization, issuance, sale and delivery of the bonds and for the payment of the principal thereof and interest thereon. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

3.40.200 Amendment of chapter.
This chapter shall not be amended so as to have a material, adverse effect upon the rights of the holders of any outstanding bonds theretofore issued under this chapter, or the rights of participating parties with respect to whom projects have theretofore been financed under this chapter, without the written consent of such bondholders and participating parties; provided, however, that this chapter may amended at any time (a) to make such provisions for the purpose of curing any ambiguity, or of curing, correcting or supplementing any defective provisions contained in this chapter, as the city may deem necessary or desirable; or (b) if such amendment does not materially impair or adversely affect the interests of any such bondholder or participating party in the opinion of the council; or (c) if such amendments apply solely to bonds not theretofore issued under this chapter or participating parties with respect to whom projects have not theretofore been financed under this chapter. (Ord. 1047 (part), 1985)

Chapter 3.42 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT BOARD

Sections:
3.42.010     Declaration of public uses and purposes.
3.42.020     Municipal affair.
3.42.030     Effect of chapter upon other law.
3.42.040     Definitions.
3.42.050     Establishment of board.
3.42.060     Powers of the authority.
3.42.070     Revenue bonds.
3.42.080     Validating proceedings.
3.42.090     Liberal construction.
3.42.100     Partial invalidity.

3.42.010 Declaration of public uses and purposes.
The council finds and determines that the construction, acquisition, maintenance and improvement of public facilities and improvements within the city and the performance of all undertakings incidental or advantageous thereto are public purposes for which public money may be spent and private property acquired, and are governmental functions. (Ord. 1059 § 1 (part), 1986)

3.42.020 Municipal affair.
The council finds and determines that the activities set forth in Section 3.42.010 are municipal affairs, necessary and appropriate to a municipal corporation and the general welfare of its inhabitants, and are not prohibited by the Constitution of the state nor by the City Charter. (Ord. 1059 § 1 (part), 1986)

3.42.030 Effect of chapter upon other law.
This chapter shall not affect any other provision of law relating to the same or a similar subject but provides an alternative method of procedure governing the subject to which it relates; and it shall not abridge, modify or otherwise affect the right of the city to exercise any power given to it by the Constitution or any other law. (Ord. 1059 § 1 (part), 1986)

3.42.040 Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter.
A. “Board” means the public body established pursuant to Section 3.42.050 of this chapter.
B. “Bonds” means any revenue bonds issued by the authority pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
C. “City” means the city of San Luis Obispo.
D. “Chapter” means this chapter, as originally adopted or as subsequently amended.
E. “Project” means the construction, acquisition, maintenance or improvement of public facilities and improvements authorized by this chapter.
F. “Public facilities and improvements” means any physical structure of a public nature and use which public entities are traditionally authorized to construct, acquire, operate, maintain and improve in the furtherance of public purposes, including interests in real property, equipment, furnishings and other appurtenances which are incidental thereto.
G. “State” means the state of California. (Ord. 1059 § 1 (part), 1986)

3.42.050 Establishment of board.
A. There is hereby created and established within the city a public body corporate and politic known as the city capital improvement board, a public facilities financing authority.
B. The board shall hold meetings at such times as it shall determine. The concurring votes of three members of the governing body of the board shall be required for the taking of action.
C. The members of the council shall act ex officio as the governing body of the board. At its organizational meeting the board shall adopt bylaws governing the conduct of its affairs in any manner deemed advisable by the board and not inconsistent with the terms of this chapter. Such bylaws may be amended from time to time by the governing body of the board.
D. At least once annually the board shall prepare and make available to interested members of the public a statement of all its financial affairs, audited by independent certified public accountants.
E. The council may order the dissolution of the board if the board has no outstanding indebtedness and is not a party to any outstanding material contracts, and if the unanimous written consent of the members of the board is first obtained. (Ord. 1059 § 1 (part), 1986)

3.42.060 Powers of the authority.
A. Corporate Powers. The board may:
    1. Sue and be sued, have a seal and make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary or convenient to the exercise of its powers.
    2. Make, and from time to time amend and repeal, bylaws and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter to carry into effect the powers and purposes of this chapter.
    3. Select and appoint or remove such permanent and temporary officers, agents, counsel and employees, as it requires, and may determine their qualifications, duties and compensation. The powers of the board under this subsection are subject to all limitations and rights applicable to similar employment by the city, unless by resolution the council otherwise determines.
B. Acquisition and Disposal of Property – Facilities-Insurance. The board may:
    1. Purchase, lease, obtain option upon, acquire by gift, grant, bequest, devise or otherwise, any real or personal property within the city, or any interest in, or improvements on, such property.
    2. Sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, encumber (by mortgage, deed of trust, or otherwise) or otherwise dispose of any real or personal property or any interest in such property.
    3. Insure any of its real or personal property or operations against risks or hazards.
C. Maintenance and Management. The board may acquire, construct, rent, lease, maintain, repair, manage and operate all or any portion of any real and personal property, including the leasing of the operation of the property, and the leasing for commercial purposes of surplus space or space which it is not economic to use for public purposes. Leases may be negotiated without competitive bidding or awarded after competitive bidding in such manner as may be established by the board.
D. Construction, Acquisition, Maintenance and Improvement of Public Facilities and Improvements. The board may do any act to construct, acquire, maintain and improve public facilities and improvements within the city, to devote such facilities and improvements to uses and activities consistent with the public purposes of this chapter and to acquire and construct such facilities and improvements on real property owned, controlled or operated by it, or on property leased by it from the city, as may be necessary or appropriate to such uses and activities.
E. Receipt and Expenditures of Funds. The board may receive, control and order the expenditure of any and all money and funds pertaining to public facilities and improvements or related properties, including, but not limited to:
    1. All revenue derived from operations of the board;
    2. All money appropriated or made available by the city for such purpose;
    3. The proceeds of all financial aid or assistance by the state or the federal government;
    4. The proceeds of all bonds issued pursuant to this chapter,
    5. The proceeds of all bonds or other obligations issued by the city for public facilities or improvements.
F. Investments. The board may invest funds held in reserve or sinking funds, or funds not required for immediate disbursement, in property or securities in which cities may legally invest funds subject to their control under the laws of the state. No such investment shall be made in contravention of any covenant or agreement with the holders of the bonds of the authority issued and outstanding.
G. Borrowing. The board may borrow money or accept financial or other assistance from the city, the state, the federal government, or any other source for or in aid of any public facility or improvements within the city, and to such ends may comply with any conditions attached thereto.
H. Exercise of Powers. The board may exercise all or any part or combination of the powers granted by this chapter
I. Necessary or Convenient Acts. The board may do and perform any and all other acts and things necessary, convenient, desirable or appropriate to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
J. Use of Services and Facilities of City. In order that there may be no unnecessary duplication of effort or expense, the board may provide for the furnishing of services by, and the use of facilities of, any department, office or agency of the city in lieu of, or in conjunction with, the direct provision by the board of services and the use of facilities through employment or purchase or other means. The furnishing of such services and the use of such facilities of any such department, office or agency shall be upon such terms and conditions as may be approved by the board and the council. (Ord. 1059 § 1 (part), 1986)

3.42.070 Revenue bonds.
A. Power to Borrow and Issue Bonds – Nature of Bonds. The board shall have the power to borrow money to provide funds for any project and to issue in its name revenue bonds to evidence the indebtedness created by such borrowing. The bonds of each issue shall constitute special obligations, and evidence a special indebtedness, of the authority, and shall be a charge upon and payable solely for such revenues and funds as are specified therein and in the proceedings for their issuance. Such bonds shall not constitute obligations nor evidence any indebtedness of the city.
B. Recitals. All such bonds shall recite upon their face, in substance, that they constitute special obligations, and evidence a special indebtedness, of the board, payable, both as principal and interest, and as to any premiums upon the redemption of any thereof, solely from such revenues and funds as are specified therein and in the proceedings for their issuance, and shall also recite upon their face that they are issued under this chapter.
C. Types of Bonds – Sources of Payment. The board may issue such types of bonds as it determines, including bonds on which the principal and interest are payable:
    1. Exclusively from the income and revenue of the facilities or improvements financed with the proceeds of the bonds, or with such proceeds and financial assistance from the state or federal governments or from any other source in aid of such projects.
    2. Exclusively from the income and revenue of certain designated facilities or improvements, whether or not such facilities were financed in whole or in part with the proceeds of the bonds, and including income or revenue from any future extension, betterment or addition to any such facilities thereafter to be established.
    3. From its revenues generally, including revenue from the leasing of public facilities and improvements owned or leased to it.
    4. From any contributions or other financial assistance from the city, the state or federal governments, or from any other source.
    5. From any combination of these sources.
D. Terms and Conditions. Except as limited by express provision of this chapter, the board, by resolution, or by trust indenture, contract or other agreement with or for the benefit of the bondholders, may determine all the terms and conditions of each issue, series or division of bonds and of their sale and issuance, and all matters necessary or appropriate in connection with the bonds.
E. Contract with Bondholders. The board may provide that any resolution, trust agreement or indenture adopted or entered into in connection with the authorization of any bonds shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds, not subject to repeal, and not subject to any modification other than to the extent and in a manner provided in any such resolution.
F. Covenants and Agreements. The board may provide for such covenants and agreements on the part of the board as it deems necessary or advisable for the better security of any bonds.
G. Provisions for Security and Marketability. The board may provide for such other acts and matters as it may deem to be necessary, convenient or desirable to secure the bonds or to make them more marketable.
H. Issuance and Sale of Bonds. 
    1. The bonds may be issued and sold as the board determines and directs, at public or private sale, at or below their par value and at a rate of interest not to exceed the rate determined by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance thereof. The bonds shall be payable at the times and in the amounts determined by the board in such resolution.
    2. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the bonds may also be issued directly to the seller of land, improvements or property acquired for board purposes, as all or part of the purchase price thereof, on such terms as may be established by the agreement for acquisition. (Ord. 1059 § 1 (part), 1986)

3.42.080 Validating proceedings.
An action to determine the validity of any bonds issued by the board under this chapter or of any contracts entered into by the board under this chapter may be brought pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860) of Title 10 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 1059 § 1 (part), 1986)

3.42.090 Liberal construction.
This chapter, being necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the city and its residents, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. Furthermore, the council declares that this chapter is an exercise of the power granted to the city by the City Charter and the Constitution of the state and is an exercise by the city of its powers as to municipal affairs and its police powers, and this chapter shall be liberally construed to uphold its validity under the laws of the state. (Ord. 1059 § 1 (part), 1986)

3.42.100 Partial invalidity.
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be held illegal or unenforceable, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The council declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each and every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter and authorized the proceedings authorized to be taken pursuant thereto irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter may be held illegal, invalid or unenforceable. (Ord. 1059 § 1 (part), 1986)

Chapter 3.50 FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY INSPECTIONS

Sections:
3.50.010     Multi-dwelling properties – Fees.

3.50.010 Multi-dwelling properties – Fees.
A. In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17921, the city will annually conduct fire and life safety inspections of multi-dwelling properties containing three or more dwelling units, including apartments, hotels, motels, lodging houses and congregate residences.
B. As provided in California Health and Safety Code Section 13146, the council will set fees by resolution to recover the reasonable costs incurred by the city in performing fire and life safety inspections of multi-dwelling properties. These fees are not incident to the ownership of property but are necessary to recover the costs reasonably incurred by the city in providing fire and life safety inspections as mandated by the state of California.
C. These fees will be collected via the secured property tax roll. (Ord. 1472 § 1, 2005)

Title 4 FEES

Chapters:
4.20         Water Service
4.30         Parking in-Lieu Fees for the Central Commercial Zone
4.56         Development Impact Fees

Chapter 4.20 WATER SERVICE

Sections:
4.20.140     Water and wastewater development impact fees.

4.20.140 Water and wastewater development impact fees.
A. Purpose. In order to implement the goals and objectives of the San Luis Obispo general plan, and to provide adequate water supply and treatment facilities, and wastewater collection and treatment facilities, to serve new development in the city of San Luis Obispo and to mitigate the impacts of that new development, certain public facilities and improvements must be, or had to be, constructed. The city council has determined that development impact fees are needed in order to finance these facilities and improvements and to pay for new development’s fair share of the construction costs of these facilities and improvements. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the city council has found the fee to be consistent with the city’s general plan land use ordinance and policies and, pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city’s housing needs as established in the housing element of the said general plan land use ordinance.
B. Water and Wastewater Development Impact Fees. 
    1. A water development impact fee and a wastewater development impact fee is hereby established as a condition of any new development for which any of the following approvals or permits is required:
        a. Approvals of land divisions pursuant to Title 16 of this code, including approval of lot line adjustments, certificates of compliance, parcel maps, tract maps and condominium conversions;
        b. Land use approvals pursuant to Title 17 of this code, including rezonings or the approval of development plans, site plans, minor use permits, variances, but excepting approval of San Luis Obispo general plan/land use ordinance amendments;
        c. For the issuance of any building permit;
        d. For connection to city water and wastewater services; and
        e. All other approvals of real property development, which approvals are subject to the jurisdiction of the city of San Luis Obispo and which approvals are subject to the exercise of the discretion of the city council, planning commission, or community development director. For purposes of this chapter, new development includes any change of use, water demand, or occupancy which increases the established city water or wastewater service requirements of a development.
    2. The said water and wastewater development impact fees are established in order to pay for needed facilities and improvements reasonably related to new development within the city. From time to time, the city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the development impact fees, the specific public improvement to be financed and their estimated cost, describe the reasonable relationship between the fees and the various types of new developments, and set forth the time of payment of the fees. Said resolution shall provide for a method of adjusting the amount of the development impact fees, on an annual basis to account for changes in the cost of construction or other considerations affecting the reasonable relationship between the fees and the cost of facilities and improvements on which the fees are based.
        a. For any development other than residential, the resolution shall provide for payment of fees at the time of building permit issuance.
        b. For residential development, the resolution shall provide for the payment of fees at the time of building permit issuance, except where the provisions of Section 66007 of the California Government Code require the collection of fees to be delayed until the time of final inspection or issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
    3. The city council shall, at least once every five years, review the basis for water and wastewater development impact fees to determine whether said fee is still reasonably related to the impacts of development, and whether the facilities and improvements for which the fees are charged are still needed.
C. Limited Use of Fees. The revenues raised by payment of the water and wastewater development impact fees shall be placed in a separate account along with any interest earnings on that account, and shall be used solely to:
    1. Pay for the design and construction, including construction management, of water and wastewater facilities described in resolutions adopted pursuant to subsection B of this section, or to reimburse the city for funds advanced from other sources to pay for said design and construction.
    2. Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted to install portions of said facilities or improvements pursuant to subsection D of this section. See Section 16.44.091 of this code for appropriate procedure.
D. Developer Construction of Facilities. Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a public facility, which facility is determined by the city to have supplemental size, length or capacity over that needed for the impacts of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer or a credit against the fee which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this section on the development project shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvement needed to provide services or mitigate the need for the facility or the burdens created by the development.
E. Fee Adjustments. 
    1. When any new development replaces an existing development, the development impact fees shall be based on the service requirements of the new development, less the service requirements of the development which it replaces. If the site of the new development was previously occupied by a development which no longer exists, and for which a demolition permit was issued by the city after October 4, 1991, the development impact fees shall be reduced in the same manner; provided, that city services for previous development can be verified on the basis of building permits, utility billings or similar documentary evidence.
    2. Each development is independent, and no reductions to development impact fees will be transferable to another development, nor will excess be refunded.
    3. Any person whose new development is subject to water or wastewater development impact fees may appeal to the city council for a reduction or adjustment of those fees, or a waiver of those fees, based on the absence of any reasonable relationship between the impacts of that new development and either the amount of the fees or the type of facilities or improvements funded by the fees. The appeal shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk, together with any required appeal fee, within the ten days following notification that the fees are to be imposed. The appeal shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the appeal at an appeal hearing to be held within sixty days after the filing of the appeal. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The decision of the city council on the appeal shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in the permitted type or intensity of land use within the approved development project shall invalidate the reduction, adjustment, or waiver of the fees.
F. Unexpended Development Impact Fee Revenues. 
    1. Notwithstanding subsection (B)(3) of this section, whenever any development impact fee, or portion of a development impact fee, remains unexpended or uncommitted five or more years after deposit of the fee, the city council shall make findings once each fiscal year with respect to the unexpended amount. The city council shall identify the purpose for which the fee is to be used, and demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. The findings required by this section need be made only for monies in the possession of the city, and need not be made with respect to any letters of credit, bonds or other items given to secure payment of the fee at a future date.
    2. The city shall refund to the then-current owner or owners of the new development project or projects, on a prorated basis, the unexpended or uncommitted portion of the development impact fees for which need cannot be demonstrated pursuant to this section. The city may refund the unexpended or uncommitted revenue by direct payment by providing a temporary suspension of development impact fees or by any other means consistent with the intent of this section. The determination of the means by which those fees are to be refunded is a legislative act.
    3. If the city council determines that the administrative costs of refunding unexpended or uncommitted development impact fees pursuant to this section exceed the amount to be refunded, the city council, after a public hearing, notice of which has been published pursuant to Section 6061 of the California Government Code and posted in three prominent places with the area of the new development project, may determine that the said fees shall be allocated for some other purpose for which development impact fees are collected and which serves the new development project on which the fees were originally imposed. (Ord. 1428 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1200 § 1, 1991)
Section 1 of Ord. 1200 added § 4.20.040, which the editor has redesignated § 4.20.140 since the chapter already contained a § 4.20.040.

Chapter 4.30 PARKING IN-LIEU FEES FOR THE CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE

Sections:
4.30.010     Purpose.
4.30.015     Parking in-lieu fee area.
4.30.020     Calculating fees.
4.30.030     Change or cessation of use.
4.30.040     Ownership change—Dividing or merging properties.

4.30.010 Purpose.
This chapter establishes fees in lieu of providing on-site parking spaces within the parking in-lieu fee area as established by council through resolution, as provided in the zoning regulations (Section 17.16.060 of this code). Fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall become part of the parking fund and shall be used solely for the development or maintenance of parking that satisfies the demand requirements of new development projects within the parking in-lieu fee area. (Ord. 1422 § 2, 2002: Ord. 1101 § 3 (part), 1987)

4.30.015 Parking in-lieu fee area.
Properties located within the area enclosed by a bold solid line on the parking in-lieu fee area map may pay parking in-lieu fees as established by council, in lieu of providing required on-site parking spaces as outlined in Sections 17.16.060 and 17.42.020 of this code.

[IMAGE: <4.30.015.png>]
(Ord. 1487 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1422 § 3, 2002)

4.30.020 Calculating fees.
A. Amount of Fees. The amount of the fee for new construction additions to existing buildings and changes in occupancy shall be established by resolution of the city council.
B. The number of spaces required by the change in occupancy shall be the difference between the number required by the new use and the number required by the previous occupancy.
C. The demolition or removal of all or a portion of an existing building and its replacement with another structure of equal or less than the floor area of the original building shall not be considered new construction for purposes of this chapter. However, all floor area in an amount beyond that contained in the original building shall be considered an addition and fees shall be calculated accordingly. Changes in occupancy which require additional parking spaces and which occur in new construction or an addition within two years of final inspection of that new construction or addition shall be treated as new construction or addition for purposes of this chapter.
D. The per-space fee for new construction, additions or changes in occupancy must be paid by the following method:
In a lump sum, prior to the issuance of construction permits for the structure or occupancy for which the parking is required or prior to the issuance of a city business license for the activity for which the parking is required, if no construction permit is required. (Ord. 1411 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1101 § 3 (part), 1987)

4.30.030 Change or cessation of use.
Once a property is subject to an obligation for in-lieu parking fees, the following shall apply if the use is changed or discontinued:
A. If a structure is enlarged or a use is replaced with a use for which more parking is required according to the zoning regulations, the additional parking requirement may be met by paying additional in-lieu fees, as provided in Section 4.30.020 of this chapter.
B. If a structure is reduced in area, or wholly or partially becomes vacant, or a use is replaced with a use for which less parking is required according to the zoning regulations, there shall be no change in the obligation for parking in-lieu fees. There shall be no refund of a lump-sum payment nor an abatement of installment payments. Once satisfied, the obligation for parking in-lieu fees shall be deemed to meet the parking requirement for any structure or use in the same location having a parking requirement equal to or less than that for which the in-lieu fee amount was previously determined.
C. If a structure is destroyed, upon the property owner’s request the city shall refund the lump-sum payment or cancel the obligation for following installment payments. Any future structure or use at the same location would thereafter be required to meet the parking requirement as provided in the zoning regulations, which may include payment of a lump-sum in-lieu fee or commencing at the beginning of the installment payment schedule.
D. If a structure is replaced by a permanent structure intended for uses requiring fewer parking spaces than those in the previous structure, according to the zoning regulations, the city, upon the property owner’s request, shall refund the difference between the lump-sum payment for the previous structure and the lump-sum payment which would be due for the replacement structure or cancel the obligation for the proportionate number of spaces covered by installment payments. (Ord. 1101 § 3 (part), 1987)

4.30.040 Ownership change—Dividing or merging properties.
A change of ownership or the dividing or merging of properties shall not affect an obligation for parking in-lieu fees or a determination that parking requirements have been met according to fees paid for a particular use. (Ord. 1101 § 3 (part), 1987)

Chapter 4.56 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES

Sections:
4.56.010     Purpose.
4.56.020     Definitions.
4.56.030     Fees—Imposition and application.
4.56.040     Fees to be set by resolution.
4.56.050     Payment of fees.
4.56.060     Protests.
4.56.070     Exemptions.
4.56.080     Credits and reimbursement.
4.56.090     Disposition and use of fees.
4.56.100     Refunds.

4.56.010 Purpose.
The council declares that the fees required to be paid by this chapter are established for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare, and implementing the policies of the general plan, by providing adequate public facilities to support orderly development. (Ord. 1663 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

4.56.020 Definitions.
Unless otherwise required by the context, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter:
“Commercial development” means the development or use of land for any retail, office, lodging, service commercial or other business purpose.
“Council” means the city council of the city of San Luis Obispo.
“Development” or “development project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of development, and includes a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction, but not a permit to operate. Development or development project shall include: (1) approvals of land divisions pursuant to Title 16, including approval of lot line adjustments, certificates of compliance, parcel maps, tract maps and condominium conversions; (2) land use approvals pursuant to Title 17, including rezonings or the approval of development plans, site plans, minor use permits, variances, but excepting approval of San Luis Obispo general plan/land use ordinance amendments; (3) for the issuance of any occupancy permit or final building inspection; and (4) all other approvals of real property development, which approvals are subject to the jurisdiction of the city of San Luis Obispo and which approvals are subject to the exercise of the discretion of the city council, planning commission, or community development director. For purposes of this chapter, new development includes any change of use or occupancy which increases the traffic service requirements of a development.
“Dwelling unit” means a structure, or portion of a structure, that is used for separate residential occupancy by an individual, a family or group of unrelated individuals.
“Impact fee” means a monetary exaction charged to the applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a part of the cost of the public facilities related to the development project. This definition does not include fees specified in Government Code Section 66477, or fees for processing applications for permits or approvals.
“Imposition of fees” occurs when they are imposed or levied on a specific development.
“Multifamily residential development” means development or use of land for residential purposes involving more than one dwelling unit in a single structure.
“Public facilities” means public improvements, public services or community amenities.
“Single-family residential” means development or use of land for residential purposes involving no more than one dwelling unit in a single structure. (Ord. 1663 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

4.56.030 Fees—Imposition and application.
This chapter establishes development impact fees which are imposed as a condition of approval upon all development projects for which a building permit is issued on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Those impact fees are established for the following public facilities:
A. General government impact fee;
B. Fire impact fee;
C. Parkland in-lieu fee;
D. Parks and recreation development impact fee;
E. Police impact fee; and
F. Transportation impact fees (citywide and designated subareas).
Water and wastewater impact fees shall be governed by Title 13. These impact fees are established in order to pay for the capital costs of public facilities reasonably related to the needs of new development in the city. At least once every five years, the council shall review the basis for the impact fees to determine whether the fees are still reasonably related to the needs of new development. In establishing these fees, the council has considered the effect of the fees with respect to the city’s housing needs as established in the housing element of the general plan. (Ord. 1663 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

4.56.040 Fees to be set by resolution.
The amount of fee assessments shall be determined by resolution adopted by the city council. Fees shall be adjusted annually by modifying the adopted value up or down in conformance with the California Construction Cost Index as published by the California Department of General Services. The factor for the adjustment of the fees shall be calculated and established each July by the finance director, utilizing the following formula:
Factor = 1 + ((Current Index - Base Index for Date of Adoption) / (Base Index for Date of Adoption)) (Ord. 1663 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

4.56.050 Payment of fees.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 66007 of the Government Code, impact fees shall be paid to the city at the time a building permit is issued. In cases where payment of all or part of the required fee is deferred at the time of building permit issuance, the community development director may require that the applicant, at the applicant’s expense, execute a contract with the city to pay all deferred impact fees prior to final inspection and/or issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project. The contract shall specify the amount of the unpaid fee and a legal description of the property affected. It shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall constitute a lien for the payment of the fees, which shall be enforceable against the successors in interest of the property owner. When impact fees are paid in full, the city, at the expense of the applicant or property owner, shall execute a release of any lien securing those impact fees. (Ord. 1663 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

4.56.060 Protests.
Any party subject to the fees established by this chapter may protest the imposition of those fees by meeting all of the following requirements:
A. Tendering any required payment in full or providing satisfactory evidence of arrangements to pay the fee when due or ensure performance of the conditions necessary to meet the requirements of the imposition of the fee.
B. Serving written notice of protest on the city council, which notice shall contain all of the following information:
    1. A statement that the required payment is tendered, or will be tendered when due, under protest;
    2. A statement informing the city council of the factual elements of the dispute and the legal theory forming the basis for the protest.
C. Serving the written notice of protest, no later than ninety days after the date of the imposition of the fees.
The city council shall consider that protest at a hearing to be held within sixty days after serving the written notice of protest. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1663 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

4.56.070 Exemptions.
The fees imposed under this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. The United States or to any agency or instrumentality thereof, the state of California or any county or other political subdivision of the state of California;
B. Remodeling or alteration of an existing residential building, but only if the number of dwelling units is not increased or the use changed;
C. That portion of a structure that existed before the addition of dwelling units or the enlargement of floor area in a nonresidential structure. If a structure is destroyed or demolished and replaced within two years from the date of demolition, the impact fees shall be based on the service requirements of the new development less the service requirements of the development which it replaced. (Ord. 1663 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

4.56.080 Credits and reimbursement.
If the applicant for approval of any development project is required by the city, as a condition of approval, to construct facilities, the cost of which has been used in the calculation of impact fees which apply to that project, the applicant may receive a credit against those impact fees, up to the amount charged for the same type of facility. If the cost of the improvements constructed by the applicant exceeds the amount of the impact fees charged to the development project for the same type of facility, the excess cost may be reimbursed to the applicant from other impact fee revenues within a reasonable time. To qualify for reimbursement, the applicant must enter into a reimbursement agreement with the city, and any such agreement must specify the amount to be reimbursed and the approximate schedule of the reimbursement. (Ord. 1663 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

4.56.090 Disposition and use of fees.
The director of financial services shall establish a separate fund or account for each type of facility listed in Section 4.56.030. All impact fees collected by the city shall be deposited in the fund or account established for the specific type of facility for which the fee is collected. Any interest earned on funds deposited in a fund or account shall be deposited in that fund or account.
Funds deposited in those accounts shall be used only to pay for design and construction, including construction administration, of projects identified in resolutions or other formal city council action adopted pursuant to Section 4.56.030 as the basis for the impact fees, or for reimbursements as provided in Section 4.56.080. (Ord. 1663 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

4.56.100 Refunds.
If impact fees collected by the city have not been expended or designated for the intended purpose within five years following their collection, the city shall either refund those fees as provided in Section 66001 of the Government Code, or make findings as required by that section to retain the fees. The refund provision of this chapter shall apply only to moneys in possession of the city and need not be made with respect to any bonds, letters of credit or other items given to secure payment at a future date. (Ord. 1663 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

Title 5 LICENSES, PERMITS, AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:
5.01         Business License Program
5.04         Repealed
5.08         Mechanical Amusement Devices
5.10         Cannabis Business Tax
5.12         Repealed
5.16         Solicitors and Peddlers
5.20         Taxicabs
5.24         Passenger Stages
5.32         Bingo
5.36         Service Stations
5.40         Repealed
5.44         Mobile Home Park Rent Stabilization
5.45         Mobile Home Park Conversion
5.48         Sales on Streets and Sidewalks
5.50         Sidewalk Cafes
5.52         Electronic Game Amusement Centers
5.56         Massage Establishments and Massage Technicians
5.60         Posting
5.64         Public Dances
5.68         Cardrooms
5.72         Provisions Applicable to Holders of State Video Franchises
5.76         Repealed
5.80         Parades and Assemblies
5.84         Filming Regulations

Chapter 5.01 BUSINESS LICENSE PROGRAM

Sections:
Article I.  General Provisions
    5.01.101     Purpose.
    5.01.102     Business license required.
    5.01.103     Definitions.
    5.01.104     Illegal occupations.
    5.01.105     Planning and building regulations.
    5.01.106     Exemptions.
Article II. Fees
    5.01.201     Fees for initial applications and renewals.
Article III. Application and Renewal
    5.01.301     Business license initial applications.
    5.01.302     Business license renewals.
Article IV. Business License Issuance
    5.01.401     Content.
    5.01.402     Posting and keeping.
    5.01.403     Duplicates.
    5.01.404     Branch establishments.
    5.01.405     Change of location.
Article V.  Administration
    5.01.501     Finance director adjustment powers.
    5.01.502     Debt to city.
    5.01.503     Delinquencies and penalties.
    5.01.504     Enforcement.
    5.01.505     Evidence of doing business.
    5.01.506     Remedies cumulative.
    5.01.507     Revocation of issued or renewed license.

Article I. General Provisions

5.01.101 Purpose.
The purpose of the city’s business license regulations is to provide for necessary regulation of lawful businesses being conducted within the city in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. While due diligence will be exercised in reasonably assuring compliance with all city policies, regulations and ordinances before issuing a business license, the primary focus of the city’s business license regulations is to provide reasonable assurance that businesses operating in the city are doing so in compliance with the city’s planning and building policies, regulations and ordinances; in compliance with the city’s business tax provisions as set forth in Chapter 3.01; and in compliance with the city’s storm water quality ordinance, set forth in Chapter 12.08. (Ord. 1543 § 3, 2010: Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.102 Business license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business in the city not otherwise exempt without first having procured a business license from the city and complied with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.103 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
A. “Business” shall mean and include professions, trades, vocations, rentals, leases, enterprises, establishments and occupations, and all and every kind of calling, any of which is conducted for the purpose of earning in whole, or in part, a profit or livelihood, whether or not a profit or a livelihood actually is earned thereby, whether paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise, and whether or not the business has a fixed place of business in the city.
B. “Finance director” shall mean the individual designated by the city administrative officer to issue business licenses pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The finance director may designate others to perform these duties on her or his behalf.
C. “Person” shall mean and include all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint-stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts trust, business and other common law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than an employee.
D. “Sworn statement” shall mean an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths or a declaration or certification made under the penalty of perjury. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.104 Illegal occupations.
A business license issued pursuant to this chapter does not authorize, permit or allow the license holder to do any act or conduct any business of any kind which is otherwise prohibited by city policies, regulations or ordinances; or any state or federal statute, law, rule, order or regulation. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.105 Planning and building regulations.
Before issuing a business license, the finance director shall exercise due diligence in providing reasonable assurance that the business is in compliance with city planning and building policies, regulations and ordinances. This will include establishing procedures as needed to ensure appropriate review by staff in the city’s department of community development before issuing or renewing business licenses. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.106 Exemptions.
The following persons and organizations are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Minors Under the Age of Eighteen. Businesses owned and conducted by minors under the age of eighteen years shall be exempt from the business license provisions of this chapter where all of the following conditions exist and legal documentation is provided to support that:
    1. All persons engaged in the operation of the business are under the age of eighteen years.
    2. All persons engaged in the operation of the business have a bona fide ownership interest in the business.
B. Charitable, Religious and Nonprofit Organizations. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the issuance of a business license to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity of any institution or organization recognized by a tax board of the state with a “Statement of Domestic Nonprofit Organization” or the Internal Revenue Service of the United States, which is conducted wholly for the benefit of charitable, religious or nonprofit purposes, and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person.
The exemption provisions of this section shall not be construed to extend to any person, business, corporation, or organization receiving a fee, wage, stipend, salary, remuneration, compensation, or pay for the performance of any business, occupation or activity related to exempt organization activities. Any such person, business, corporation or organization shall be subject to the business license provisions of this chapter and shall obtain a business license prior to any business, occupation or activity being undertaken.
C. Conflicts with Federal and State Laws or Contractual Agreements. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to require a person to obtain a business license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with the applicable statutes, laws or constitution of the United States or the state of California or other contractual obligations or franchise agreements. The finance director may develop administrative guidelines concerning exemptions, apportionment and any other matters which she or he determines as necessary for the lawful and effective implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

Article II. Fees

5.01.201 Fees for initial applications and renewals.
Fees for processing applications for initial issuance and renewal of business licenses will be set by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

Article III. Application and Renewal

5.01.301 Business license initial applications.
Every person required to have a business license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall make a written application to the finance director and submit the following information:
A. The nature or kind of business for which the business license is requested.
B. The place where the business is to be conducted and, if the business is not to be conducted at a permanent location, the residence address, identified as such, of the owners of the business.
C. If the application is made for the issuance of a business license to a person to do business under a fictitious name, the names, social security numbers, and residence addresses of the owners of the business.
D. If the application is made for the issuance of a business license to a corporation or partnership, the names, franchise tax number, and residence addresses of the officers or partners thereof.
E. Any further information that the finance director may require to enable the issuance of the business license.
The finance director will not issue the business license unless the applicant has paid the appropriate fee as required under this chapter as well as the business tax amount due under Chapter 3.01 of the municipal code. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.302 Business license renewals.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all business licenses required by the provisions of this chapter shall be renewed on July 1st of each year. Any fees due in order to process the renewal shall be paid by July 31st of each year, and will be delinquent after July 31st.
No renewal of a business license shall be processed or issued until payment in full of all current and delinquent business license fees as well as current and delinquent business tax amounts due under Chapter 3.01 of the Municipal Code, including accrued interest and applicable penalties thereon is received by the city. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to ensure renewal of the business license. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

Article IV. Business License Issuance

5.01.401 Content.
Each business license shall state upon the face thereof the following:
A. Name of the person to whom the business license is issued.
B. Type of business.
C. Location or address of the business.
D. Date of the expiration of the business license.
E. Possession of the business license does not authorize, permit or allow the person to do any act which such person would not otherwise be lawfully entitled to do. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.402 Posting and keeping.
All business licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be posted and kept in the following manner:
A. Any persons transacting and carrying on business at a fixed location in the city shall keep such business license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.
B. Any persons transacting and carrying on business, but not operating at a fixed location in the city, shall keep such business license upon them at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.403 Duplicates.
A duplicate business license may be issued by the finance director to replace any business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which business license has been lost or destroyed, upon the filing of a statement of such fact and the payment of a duplicate fee set by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.404 Branch establishments.
A separate business license shall be issued for each branch establishment or location of business; provided, however, warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with, and incidental to, a business licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments; and provided, further, any person conducting two or more types of businesses at the same location and under the same management, or at different locations, but which businesses use a single set or integrated set of books and records, may elect to pay only one business tax calculated on all the gross receipts of the businesses, except that a fee set by resolution of the council shall be paid upon issuance for each additional branch or location. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.405 Change of location.
No business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable; provided, however, where a business license is issued for a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such person, upon an application therefor and the payment of a fee set by resolution of the council, may have the business license reissued for transacting and carrying on of such business at some other location to which it is to be moved, subject to the same terms and conditions as the original license. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

Article V. Administration

5.01.501 Finance director adjustment powers.
The finance director shall have the power, for good cause shown and documented by the finance director as a permanent record, to:
A. Extend the time for filing any required sworn statement.
B. Waive or reduce any penalties which would otherwise have accrued.
C. Adjust the amount of the business license due.
D. Make refunds or pro-rations of license fees paid. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.502 Debt to city.
The amount of any business license and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. A suit may be brought against any person to enforce the collection of the debt described in this chapter in any court of competent jurisdiction. The conviction of any person for transacting any business without a business license shall not excuse or exempt such person from payment of any license due or unpaid at the time of such conviction, and nothing herein shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.503 Delinquencies and penalties.
For failure to pay the amount of the business license required by the provisions of this chapter prior to the delinquency date, the finance director shall add a penalty. The amount of this penalty shall be set by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.504 Enforcement.
The finance director and police chief shall enforce the provisions of this chapter as follows:
A. Duties of the Finance Director and Chief of Police. It shall be the duty of the finance director to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in such enforcement as may from time to time be required by the finance director.
B. Inspections. The finance director, in the exercise of the duties imposed by the provisions of this chapter, and acting through deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall have the right to enter and examine all places of business free of charge during normal business hours to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with.
C. Penalty for Violation. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter by transacting and carrying on any business in the city without first having procured a business license from the city or without complying with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and is subject to punishment as provided for in Chapter 1.12 of the municipal code. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.505 Evidence of doing business.
When any person, by the use of a sign, circular, card, telephone book, newspaper, other publication or advertising media, shall advertise, hold out or represent that such person is in business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a government agency indicating that such person is conducting a business in the city, and such person fails to deny, by a sworn statement given to the finance director or designee, that such person is not conducting a business in the city after being requested to do so by the finance director or designee, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is conducting a business in the city. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.506 Remedies cumulative.
All remedies prescribed by the provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

5.01.507 Revocation of issued or renewed license.
The finance director is authorized to revoke any issued business license whenever she or he receives information that would be sufficient grounds to deny issuance of a license under the provisions of this chapter.
A. Notice. The license holder must be informed in writing of the finance director’s intention to revoke the business license at least fifteen calendar days in advance of the proposed effective date of revocation, during which time the holder of the license may contest the proposed revocation before the finance director. The finance director’s notice shall state the reason for the proposed revocation.
B. No Refund of Fees. Upon the revocation of a license as provided in this section, no part of the license fee paid therefor shall be returned.
C. Surrender of License. Whenever a license is revoked, the license holder shall render to the finance director any license document previously issued by the city. (Ord. 1474 § 1 (part), 2005)

Chapter 5.04 REPEALED*
*Chapter 5.04, “Business Licenses Generally,” was repealed by § 1 of Ord. 1202. The prior history for the chapter included prior code §§ 6100 – 6100.22, 6100.24 – 6100.27, 6100.296100.31, 6100.33 – 6100.49, and Ords. 964, 987 and 1171.

Chapter 5.08 MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES

Sections:
5.08.010     Definitions.
5.08.020     License required.
5.08.030     Criminal conduct—Ineligibility for city licenses and permits.
5.08.040     Fee for license and permit.
5.08.050     Repealed.
5.08.060     Relocation—Notification.
5.08.070     License—Application—Term.
5.08.080     License—Renewal.
5.08.090     Amusement devices deemed a nuisance when—Impoundment.
5.08.100     Regulations.
5.08.110     Automatic payoff devices prohibited.
5.08.120     Slot machines or gambling devices prohibited.
5.08.130     Additional regulations.

5.08.010 Definitions.
As used in the ordinance codified in this chapter, the following words shall have the following respective meanings:
A. “Location owner” means every person not engaged in the business of renting out or placing mechanical amusement devices, but who owns, uses and operates not more than two such mechanical amusement devices.
B. “Mechanical amusement device” means any table, board, machine, device or apparatus fitted for use by the public, the operation of which is permitted, controlled, allowed or made possible by the deposit or insertion of any coin, plate, disc, slug or key into any slot, crevice or opening, or by the payment of any fee or fees, and which operates, or which may be operated for use as a game, contest or amusement or which may be used for any such game, contest or amusement, but which table, board, machine, device or apparatus does not contain a payoff device and which does not return or vend any article of merchandise or any money, coin, check or token.
C. “Operator” means any person engaged in the business of renting out or placing mechanical amusement devices in various locations within the city; and every person who owns, uses and operates more than two mechanical amusement devices. (Prior code § 6110)

5.08.020 License required.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in business in the city as an operator or as a location owner, or to rent out or place any mechanical amusement device or maintain to be operated any mechanical amusement device, whether such person be a resident of the city or not, without first having secured the licenses required by this chapter. (Prior code § 6110.13)

5.08.030 Criminal conduct—Ineligibility for city licenses and permits.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, conviction (including a plea of guilty or nolo contendere) of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving a crime of moral turpitude or conduct related to the nature of the permit requested, shall be prima facie disqualification of an applicant.
B. The city licensing authority, however, may disregard such conviction if it is found and determined by such licensing authority that mitigating circumstances exist. In making such determination, the city licensing authority shall consider the following factors:
    1. The type of business license or permit for which the person is applying;
    2. The nature and seriousness of the offense;
    3. The circumstances surrounding the conviction;
    4. The length of time elapsed since the conviction;
    5. The age of the person at the time of the conviction;
    6. The presence or absence of rehabilitation or efforts at rehabilitation;
    7. Contributing social or environmental conditions.
C. The city licensing authority shall give notice of disqualification to an applicant disqualified under this section. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered personally or mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application.
D. An applicant who is disqualified for a city permit under this section may appeal such determination of disqualification. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk within ten days of the date of the notice of disqualification. The council shall hear and determine the appeal within ninety days after it is filed. The determination of the council on the appeal shall be final. (Ord. 1202 § 4, 1991)
Prior to its repeal by § 3 of Ord. 1202, § 5.08.030 was entitled “License Fee – Occupational” and was derived from prior code § 6110.1.

5.08.040 Fee for license and permit.
Application for a license or permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by the council. The fee shall be in an amount sufficient fully to defray administrative cost incurred in the processing of an application, and shall not be in lieu of other fees or taxes, including business taxes, required by this code. (Ord. 1202 § 6, 1991)
Prior to its repeal by § 5 of Ord. 1202, § 5.08.040 was entitled “License fee – Location” and was derived from prior code, § 6110.2.

5.08.050 Repealed.
Repealed.

5.08.060 Relocation—Notification.
Any mechanical amusement device licensed hereunder may be relocated at premises other than those listed in the yearly application upon prior written notification to the city clerk of such relocation. (Prior code § 6110.6)

5.08.070 License—Application—Term.
All licenses issued under the terms of this chapter shall be on an annual basis from January 1st through December 31st of each calendar year. An application for such licenses shall be filed each year and such application shall state the number and locations of machines or devices rented out, placed or owned, and each such machine located in the city shall have securely affixed, in a conspicuous place on the machine, the name, address and telephone number of the licensee. (Prior code § 6110.8)

5.08.080 License—Renewal.
Application for the renewal of any license required by this chapter shall be made in the same manner as for an original license. (Prior code § 6110.9)

5.08.090 Amusement devices deemed a nuisance when—Impoundment.
A. Any mechanical amusement device operated or maintained to be operated in violation of any law of the state, or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed to be a public nuisance, and any such mechanical amusement device so operated or maintained to be operated shall be impounded by the police department or any member thereof.
B. If any such mechanical amusement device so impounded is one which may be legally operated under the provisions of this chapter and is seized for the failure of the owner or operator to secure the proper license, such mechanical amusement device shall not be released until a license for such mechanical amusement device has been obtained and the fee therefor paid, together with a penalty of five dollars.
C. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall determine that any mechanical amusement device or the use or operation thereof violates, or has violated any law of the state, or any ordinance of the city, such mechanical amusement device shall be confiscated by the chief of police and shall be dealt with as provided by the judgment or order of the court. (Prior code § 6110.10)

5.08.100 Regulations.
Any and all mechanical amusement devices licensed under this chapter shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. No person shall install or operate any such mechanical amusement device within three hundred feet of the nearest property line of any public playground or public or private school of elementary or high school grades, and in use as such playground or school.
B. No person shall use or operate any mechanical amusement device for any purpose whatever, except for the purpose of amusement.
C. No person shall use any such mechanical amusement device for the purpose of gambling.
D. No person in direct charge or supervision of any such mechanical amusement device, or in charge of the premises where the same is installed and being operated shall pay off in money, merchandise, tokens or other thing or things of value, any winner that may be determined by the operation of any mechanical amusement device.
E. No person in direct charge or supervision of any such mechanical amusement device, or in charge of the premises where the same is installed and being operated, shall permit any person under the age of eighteen years of age to engage in the playing of any mechanical amusement device. (Prior code § 6110.11)

5.08.110 Automatic payoff devices prohibited.
No person shall use any mechanical amusement device which has built into it, or attached to it, any device or mechanism known as an automatic payoff, and which device or mechanism operates in such manner as to automatically return, vend or pay out money, coins, checks or tokens when a winning score or combination has been obtained by the action of such mechanical amusement device. (Prior code § 6110.12)

5.08.120 Slot machines or gambling devices prohibited.
This chapter shall not be construed to permit the licensing of any slot machine or gambling device declared illegal by the Penal Code of the state; nor shall any license issued under the terms hereof permit the operation, possession or use of any slot machine or gambling device declared illegal by the Penal Code of the state. (Prior code § 6110.14)

5.08.130 Additional regulations.
The provisions of this chapter are in addition to regulations set out in Chapter 5.52 of this code and, insofar as possible, these provisions shall be construed so as to reconcile them with those regulations. In the event of irreconcilable conflict, however, the provisions of Chapter 5.52 shall prevail. (Ord. 946 § 2, 1983: prior code § 6110.15)

Chapter 5.10 CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX

Sections:
5.10.010     Title.
5.10.020     Authority and purpose.
5.10.030     Intent.
5.10.040     Definitions.
5.10.045     Registration of cannabis business.
5.10.050     Tax imposed.
5.10.060     Reporting and remittance of tax.
5.10.070     Payments and communications—Timely remittance.
5.10.080     Payment—When taxes deemed delinquent.
5.10.090     Notice not required by the city.
5.10.100     Penalties and interest.
5.10.110     Refunds and credits.
5.10.120     Refunds and procedures.
5.10.130     Personal cultivation not taxed.
5.10.140     Administration of the tax.
5.10.150     Appeal procedure.
5.10.160     Enforcement—Action to collect.
5.10.170     Apportionment.
5.10.180     Constitutionality and legality.
5.10.190     Audit and examination of premises and records.
5.10.200     Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees or charges.
5.10.210     Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business.
5.10.220     Deficiency determinations.
5.10.230     Failure to report—Nonpayment, fraud.
5.10.240     Tax assessment—Notice requirements.
5.10.250     Tax assessment—Hearing, application and determination.
5.10.260     Relief from taxes—Disaster relief.
5.10.270     Conviction for violation—Taxes not waived.
5.10.280     Violation deemed misdemeanor.
5.10.290     Severability.
5.10.300     Remedies cumulative.
5.10.310     Amendment or repeal.
5.10.320     Enforcement consistent with business license tax.

5.10.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the cannabis business tax ordinance. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.020 Authority and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a tax, for revenue purposes, pursuant to Section 203 of the city charter and Sections 37101 and 37100.5 of the California Government Code, upon persons who engage in cannabis business in the city.
The cannabis business tax is a general tax enacted solely to raise revenue for general governmental purposes of the city and not for regulation. All of the proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the city’s general fund and be available for any lawful municipal purpose in the discretion of the city. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.030 Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to levy a tax on all cannabis businesses that operate in the city, regardless of whether such business would have been legal at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter was adopted. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to authorize or permit any business activity that would not otherwise be legal or permissible under laws applicable to the activity at the time the activity is undertaken. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.040 Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below when used in this chapter:
A. “Business” shall include all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the city, including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling, or livelihood, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, but shall not include the services rendered by an employee to his or her employer.
B. “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means cannabis as defined by Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, by Section 26001(f) of the Business and Professions Code, and by other state law.
C. “Cannabis product” means raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, an edible product, or a topical product. “Cannabis product” also means marijuana products as defined by Section 11018.1 of the California Health and Safety Code and by other state law.
D. “Canopy” means all areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant whether contiguous or noncontiguous on any one site. When plants occupy multiple horizontal planes (as when plants are placed on shelving above other plants) each plane shall be counted as a separate canopy area.
E. “Cannabis business” means any business activity involving cannabis, including but not limited to cultivating, transporting, distributing, manufacturing, compounding, converting, processing, preparing, storing, packaging, delivering, testing, dispensing, retailing and wholesaling of cannabis, of cannabis products or of ancillary products and accessories, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, whether for medical or recreational use, and whether or not such business is licensed by the state.
F. “Cannabis business tax” or “business tax” means the tax due pursuant to this chapter for engaging in cannabis business in the city.
G. “City manager” means the city manager of the city under Section 703 of the charter or his or her designee under Section 1.08.070.
H. “Commercial cannabis cultivation” means cultivation in the course of conducting a cannabis business. “Commercial cannabis cultivation” does not include personal medical cannabis cultivation or cultivation for personal recreational use as authorized by the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (MAUCRSA) for which the individual receives no compensation whatsoever.
I. “City permit” means a permit issued by the city to a person to authorize that person to operate or engage in a cannabis business.
J. “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis and includes, but is not limited to, the operation of a nursery.
K. “Delivery” means the transfer for any form of compensation of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer or caregiver at a location that is not a dispensary.
L. “Dispensary” means a place at which cannabis, cannabis products, or accessories for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in combination, for retail sale, including an establishment that engages in delivery, whether or not from a fixed place of business.
M. “Distributor” means a person engaged in procuring cannabis and/or cannabis products for sale to a dispensary or other point of retail sale. “Distribution” means engaging in that conduct.
N. “Employee” means each and every person engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, member of the owner’s family, partner, associate, agent, manager or solicitor, and each and every other person employed or working in such business for a wage, salary, commission, barter or any other form of compensation.
O. “Engaged in business as a cannabis business” means the commencing, conducting, operating, managing or carrying on of a cannabis business, whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee, or otherwise, whether operating from a fixed location in the city or coming into the city from an outside location to engage in such activities. A person shall be deemed engaged in business within the city if:
    1. Such person or person’s employee maintains a fixed place of business within the city for the benefit or partial benefit of such person;
    2. Such person or person’s employee owns or leases real property within the city for business purposes;
    3. Such person or person’s employee regularly maintains a stock of tangible personal property in the city for sale in the ordinary course of business;
    4. Such person or person’s employee regularly conducts solicitation of business within the city; or
    5. Such person or person’s employee performs work or renders services in the city.
The foregoing specified activities shall not be a limitation on the meaning of “engaged in business.”
P. “Evidence of doing business” means evidence such as, without limitation, use of signs, circulars, cards or any other advertising media, including the use of internet or telephone solicitation, or representation to a government agency or to the public that such person is engaged in a cannabis business in the city.
Q. “Calendar year” means January 1st through December 31st of the following calendar year.
R. “Gross receipts,” except as otherwise specifically provided, means, whether designated a sales price, royalty, rent, commission, dividend, or other designation, the total amount (including all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature) received or payable for sales of goods, wares or merchandise or for the performance of any act or service of any nature for which a charge is made or credit allowed (whether such service, act or employment is done as part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or not), without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or any other expense whatsoever. However, the following shall be excluded from the definition of gross receipts:
    1. Cash discounts where allowed and taken on sales;
    2. Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;
    3. Such part of the sale price of any property returned by purchasers to the seller as refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances or return of refundable deposits previously included in gross receipts;
    4. Receipts derived from the occasional sale of used, obsolete or surplus trade fixtures, machinery or other equipment used by the taxpayer in the regular course of the taxpayer’s business;
    5. Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or units of the same business;
    6. Whenever there are included within the gross receipts amounts which reflect sales for which credit is extended and such amount proved uncollectible in a subsequent year, those amounts may be excluded from the gross receipts in the year they prove to be uncollectible; provided, however, if the whole or portion of such amounts excluded as uncollectible are subsequently collected they shall be included in the amount of gross receipts for the period when they are recovered;
    7. Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded when in excess of one dollar;
    8. Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee and to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected. These agents or trustees must provide the finance department with the names and the addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them. This exclusion shall not apply to any fees, percentages, or other payments retained by the agent or trustees;
    9. Retail sales of t-shirts, sweaters, hats, stickers, key chains, bags, books, posters, rolling papers, cannabis accessories such as pipes, pipe screen, vape pen batteries (without cannabis) or other personal tangible property which the tax administrator has excluded in writing by issuing an administrative ruling per Section 5.10.140 shall not be subject to the cannabis business tax under this chapter. However, any retail sales not subject to this chapter as a result of the administrative ruling shall be subject to the appropriate business tax under Chapter 5.01 or any other chapter or title as determined by the tax administrator.
S. “Manufacturer” means a person who engages in the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis.
T. “Nursery” means a facility or part of a facility that is used only for producing clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis.
U. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, collective, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, whether organized as a nonprofit or for-profit entity, and includes the plural as well as the singular number.
V. “Sale” means and includes any sale, exchange, or barter.
W. “State” means the state of California.
X. “Tax administrator” means the finance director of the city of San Luis Obispo or his or her designee.
Y. “Testing laboratory” means a cannabis business that (1) offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products, (2) offers no service other than such tests, (3) sells no products, excepting only testing supplies and materials, (4) is accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in the cannabis industry in the state and (5) is licensed by the Bureau of Cannabis Control. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.045 Registration of cannabis business.
A. All persons engaging in a cannabis business, whether an existing, newly established or acquired business, shall register with the tax administrator’s office by the later of:
    1. Thirty days after commencing operation; or
    2. January 1, 2019, and shall annually renew such registration on or before the anniversary of the initial registration for that business.
B. Registrants shall furnish to the tax administrator a statement sworn under penalty of perjury, upon a form provided by the tax administrator, setting forth:
    1. Every name under which the business engages in commercial cannabis activity in the city;
    2. The names and addresses of every person who is an owner, principal or manager of the business;
    3. The nature or kind of all business activity to be conducted;
    4. The place or places, whether or not in the city, where such business is to be conducted; and
    5. Any further information which the tax administrator may require to administer the tax under this chapter.
C. Registrants shall pay an annual registration fee in an amount established from time to time by resolution of the city to recover the city’s costs to implement the registration requirement of this section, and the other provisions of this chapter, other than the duty to pay tax when due. As a regulatory fee, such fee shall be limited to the city’s reasonable costs for those activities. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.050 Tax imposed.
A. Beginning January 1, 2019, there is imposed upon each person who is engaged in business as a cannabis business a cannabis business tax, whether the business has been issued a permit to operate lawfully in the city or is operating unlawfully.
B. The initial rate of the cannabis business tax shall be as follows, unless adjusted:
    1. For every person who is engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation in the city:
        a. Seven dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility.
        For purposes of this chapter, the square feet of canopy space for a business shall be rebuttably presumed to be the maximum square footage of canopy allowed by the business’s city permit for commercial cannabis cultivation, or, in the absence of a city permit, the square footage shall be the maximum square footage of canopy for commercial cannabis cultivation allowed by the business’s state license. Should a city permit be issued to a business which cultivates only for certain months of the year, the city shall prorate the tax as to sufficiently reflect the period in which cultivation is occurring at the business. In no case shall canopy square footage which is authorized by the city commercial cannabis permit, but not utilized for cultivation, be deducted for the purpose of determining the tax for cultivation, unless the tax administrator is informed in writing that such space will not be used and authorizes such reduction for the purpose of relief from the tax prior to the period for which the space will not be used.
    2. For every person who engages in the operation of a testing laboratory: one percent of gross receipts.
    3. For every person who engages in the retail sales of cannabis as a retailer (dispensary) or non-storefront retailer (delivery) or microbusiness (retail sales): six percent of gross receipts.
    4. For every person who engages in a cannabis distribution business: two percent of gross receipts.
    5. For every person who engages in a cannabis manufacturing, processing, microbusiness (nonretail), or any other type of cannabis business not described in subsection (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of this section: two and one-half percent of gross receipts.
C. The city council may, by resolution or ordinance, adjust the rate of the cannabis business tax. However, in no event may the city council set any adjusted rate that exceeds the maximum rate calculated pursuant to subsection D of this section for the date on which the adjusted rate will commence.
D. The maximum rate shall be calculated as follows:
    1. For every person who is engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation in the city:
        a. Through January 1, 2021, the maximum rate shall be:
            i. Ten dollars annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility.
        b. On January 1, 2022, and on each January 1st thereafter, the maximum annual tax rate per square foot of each type of canopy space shall increase by the percentage change between January of the calendar year prior to such increase and January of the calendar year of the increase in the Consumer Price Index (“CPI”) for all urban consumers in the Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim area as published by the United States Government Bureau of Labor Statistics. However, no CPI adjustment resulting in a decrease of any tax imposed by this subsection shall be made.
    2. For every person who engages in the operation of a testing laboratory, the maximum tax rate shall not exceed two and one-half percent of gross receipts.
    3. For every person who engages in the retail sales of cannabis as a retailer (dispensary) or non-storefront retailer (delivery business), or microbusiness (retail sales activity), the maximum tax rate shall not exceed ten percent of gross receipts.
    4. For every person who engages in a cannabis distribution business, the maximum tax rate shall not exceed three percent of gross receipts.
    5. For every person who engages in a cannabis manufacturing, processing, microbusiness (nonretail activity) or any other type of cannabis business not described in subsection (D)(1), (D)(2), (D)(3) or (D)(4) of this section, the maximum tax rate shall not exceed four percent of gross receipts. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.060 Reporting and remittance of tax.
A. The cannabis business tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid, in arrears, on a monthly basis. For commercial cannabis cultivation, the tax due for each month shall be based on the square footage of the business’s canopy space during the month and the rate shall be twelve percent of the applicable annual rate. For all other cannabis businesses activities, the tax due for each month shall be based on the gross receipts for the month.
B. Each person owing cannabis business tax for a month shall, no later than the last day of the following month, file with the tax administrator a statement of the tax owed for that month and the basis for calculating that tax. The tax administrator may require that the statement be submitted on a form prescribed by the tax administrator. The tax for each month shall be due and payable on that same date as the statement for the month is due.
C. Upon cessation of a cannabis business, tax statements and payments shall be immediately due for all months up to the month during which cessation occurred.
D. The tax administrator may, at his or her discretion, establish shorter report and payment periods for any taxpayer as the tax administrator deems necessary to ensure collection of the tax. The tax administrator may also require that a deposit, to be applied against the taxes for a month, be made by a taxpayer at the beginning of that month. In no event shall the deposit required by the tax administrator exceed the tax amount he or she projects will be owed by the taxpayer for the month. The tax administrator may require that a taxpayer make payments via a cashier’s check, money order, wire transfer, or similar instrument. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.070 Payments and communications—Timely remittance.
Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication is due, it must be received by the tax administrator on or before the final due date. A postmark will not be accepted as timely remittance. If the due date would fall on a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, the due date shall be the next regular business day on which the city is open to the public. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.080 Payment—When taxes deemed delinquent.
Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this chapter, the taxes required to be paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the due date as specified in Sections 5.10.060 and 5.10.070. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.090 Notice not required by the city.
Failure of the tax administrator to send a notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.100 Penalties and interest.
A. Any person who fails or refuses to pay any cannabis business tax required to be paid pursuant to this chapter on or before the due date shall pay penalties and interest as follows:
    1. A penalty equal to ten percent of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax calculated from the due date of the tax at the rate of one percent per month.
    2. If the tax remains unpaid for a period exceeding one calendar month beyond the due date, an additional penalty equal to twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax, plus interest at the rate of one percent per month on the unpaid tax and on the unpaid penalties.
    3. Interest shall be applied at the rate of one percent per month on the first day of the month for the full month and will continue to accrue monthly on the tax and penalty until the balance is paid in full.
B. Whenever a check or electronic payment is submitted in payment of a cannabis business tax and the payment is subsequently returned unpaid by the bank for any reason, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus any fees, penalties and interest as provided for in this section, and any other amount allowed under state law. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.110 Refunds and credits.
A. No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter, except as provided in Section 5.10.120.
B. No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter shall be made because of the discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of a business. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.120 Refunds and procedures.
A. Whenever the amount of any cannabis business tax, penalty or interest has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded to the claimant who paid the tax; provided, that a written claim for refund is filed with the tax administrator within one year of the date the tax was originally due and payable.
B. The tax administrator, his or her designee or any other city officer charged with the administration of this chapter shall have the right to examine and audit all the books and business records of the claimant in order to determine the eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No claim for refund shall be allowed if the claimant refuses to allow such examination of claimant’s books and business records after request by the tax administrator to do so.
C. In the event that the cannabis business tax was erroneously paid, and the error is attributable to the city, upon a timely claim the city shall refund the amount of tax erroneously paid in the year preceding the date the claim was received. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.130 Personal cultivation not taxed.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to personal cannabis cultivation as defined in the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act. This chapter shall not apply to personal use of cannabis that is specifically exempted from the city or state licensing requirements, that meets the definition of personal use or equivalent terminology under state law, and for which the individual receives no compensation whatsoever related to that personal use. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.140 Administration of the tax.
A. It shall be the duty of the tax administrator to collect the taxes, penalties, fees, and perform the duties required by this chapter.
B. For purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter generally, the tax administrator may from time to time promulgate such administrative interpretations, rules, and procedures consistent with the purpose, intent, and express terms of this chapter as he or she deems necessary to implement or clarify such provisions or aid in enforcement. He or she shall give notice of those regulations in the manner required by law for publication of ordinances of the city council and the regulations shall take effect thirty days after such notice unless otherwise provided in a particular regulation.
C. The tax administrator may take such administrative actions as needed to administer the tax, including but not limited to:
    1. Provide to all cannabis business taxpayers forms for the reporting of the tax;
    2. Provide information to any taxpayer concerning the provisions of this chapter;
    3. Receive and record all taxes remitted to the city as provided in this chapter;
    4. Maintain records of taxpayer reports and taxes collected pursuant to this chapter;
    5. Assess penalties and interest to taxpayers pursuant to this chapter;
    6. Determine amounts owed and enforce collection pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.150 Appeal procedure.
Any taxpayer aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of tax, interest, penalties and fees, if any, due under this chapter may appeal to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within thirty days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city clerk, or his or her designee, shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk, or his or her designee, shall give notice in writing to such operator at the last known place of address. The finding of the city manager shall be final and conclusive as to the city, but subject to judicial review under Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed by this chapter for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of the notice. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.160 Enforcement—Action to collect.
Any taxes, penalties and/or fees required to be paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such debt. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.170 Apportionment.
If a business subject to the tax is operating both within and outside the city, it is the intent of the city to apply the cannabis business tax so that the measure of the tax fairly reflects the proportion of the taxed activity actually carried on in the city. To the extent federal or state law requires that any tax due from any taxpayer be apportioned, the taxpayer may propose an apportionment on his or her tax return. The tax administrator may accept or reject that apportionment and, if the latter, shall establish an appropriate apportionment on such evidence as is provided by the taxpayer or otherwise available to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may promulgate administrative procedures for apportionment as he or she finds useful or necessary. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.180 Constitutionality and legality.
A. This tax is intended to be applied consistently with the United States and California Constitutions, state law and the city charter. The tax shall not be applied so as to cause an undue burden upon interstate commerce, a violation of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitution of the United States or the state of California, to constitute a special tax, or to cause a violation of any other provision of applicable law.
B. The taxes imposed under this chapter are excises on the privilege of engaging in commercial cannabis activity in the city. They are not sales or use taxes and shall not be calculated or assessed as such. Nevertheless, at the option of a cannabis business, the tax may be separately identified on invoices, receipts and other evidences of transactions. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.190 Audit and examination of premises and records.
A. For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of cannabis business tax owed or verifying any representations made by any taxpayer to the city in support of his or her tax calculation, the tax administrator shall have the power to inspect any location where commercial cannabis cultivation or commercial business activity occurs, whether or not located in the city, and to audit and examine all books and records (including, but not limited to, bookkeeping records, state and federal income tax returns, and other records relating to the gross receipts of the business) of persons engaged in cannabis businesses. In conducting such investigation, the tax administrator shall have the power to inspect any equipment, such as computers or point of sale machines, that may contain such records.
B. It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable to pay to the city, which records the tax administrator or his/her designee shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.200 Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees or charges.
A. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any requirements for any permit or license required by, under or by virtue of any provision of any other chapter of this code or any other ordinance or resolution of the city, nor be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any tax, fee or other charge imposed, assessed or required by, under or by virtue of any other chapter of this code or any other ordinance or resolution of the city. Any references made or contained in any other chapter of this code to any licenses, license taxes, fees, or charges, or to any schedule of license fees, shall be deemed to refer to the licenses, license taxes, fees or charges, or schedule of license fees, provided for in other chapters of this code unless the context is plain that another meaning is intended.
B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a cannabis business shall not be required to pay the license fee required by Chapter 5.01 so long as all of the business’s activities within the city that would require payment of a license fee are subject to the cannabis business tax.
C. The tax administrator may revoke or refuse to renew the license required by Chapter 5.01 for any business that is delinquent in the payment of any tax due pursuant to this chapter or that fails to make a deposit required by the tax administrator pursuant to Section 5.10.060. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.210 Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business.
A. The payment of a cannabis business tax required by this chapter, and its acceptance by the city, shall not entitle any person to carry on any cannabis business unless the person has complied with all of the requirements of this code and all other applicable state and local laws.
B. No tax paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business, or any business in violation of any local or state law, although businesses illegal under other law are nevertheless subject to tax under this chapter according to its terms. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.220 Deficiency determinations.
If the tax administrator is not satisfied that any statement filed as required under the provisions of this chapter is correct, or that the amount of tax is correctly computed, he or she may compute and determine the amount to be paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained in the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession within three years of the date the tax was originally due and payable. One or more deficiency determinations of the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made. When a person discontinues engaging in a business, a deficiency determination may be made at any time within three years thereafter as to any liability arising from engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due. Whenever a deficiency determination is made, a notice shall be given to the person concerned in the same manner as notices of assessment are given under Section 5.10.240. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.230 Failure to report—Nonpayment, fraud.
A. Under any of the following circumstances, the tax administrator may make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a person under this chapter at any time:
    1. If the person has not filed a complete statement required under the provisions of this chapter;
    2. If the person has not paid the tax due under the provisions of this chapter;
    3. If the person has not, after demand by the tax administrator, filed a corrected statement, or furnished to the tax administrator adequate substantiation of the information contained in a statement already filed, or paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter; or
    4. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any business tax due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to penalties and interest otherwise stated in this chapter and any other penalties allowed by law.
B. The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any tax known by the tax administrator to be due or estimated by the tax administrator, after consideration of all information within the tax administrator’s knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person assessed, to be due under each applicable section of this chapter and shall include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the date of the notice of assessment. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.240 Tax assessment—Notice requirements.
The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by personal delivery, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the business or to such other address as he or she shall register with the tax administrator for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this chapter; or, should the person have no address registered with the tax administrator for such purpose, then to such person’s last known address. For the purposes of this section, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.250 Tax assessment—Hearing, application and determination.
Within thirty days after the date of service the person may apply in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the assessment. If application for a hearing before the city is not made within the time herein prescribed, the tax assessed by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive. Within thirty days of the receipt of any such application for hearing, the tax administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before him or her no later than thirty days after the receipt of the application, unless a later date is agreed to by the tax administrator and the person requesting the hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given by the tax administrator to the person requesting such hearing not later than five days prior to such hearing. At such hearing said applicant may appear and offer evidence why the assessment as made by the tax administrator should not be confirmed and fixed as the tax due. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine and reassess the proper tax to be charged and shall give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in Section 5.10.240 for giving notice of assessment. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.260 Relief from taxes—Disaster relief.
A. If a business is unable to comply with any tax requirement due to a disaster, the business may notify the tax administrator of this inability to comply and request relief from the tax requirement;
B. The tax administrator, in its sole discretion, may provide relief from the cannabis business tax requirement for businesses whose operations have been impacted by a disaster if such tax liability does not exceed five thousand dollars. If such tax liability is five thousand one dollars or more then such relief shall only be approved by the city manager;
C. Temporary relief from the cannabis tax may be relieved for a reasonable amount of time as determined by the tax administrator in order to allow the cannabis business time to recover from the disaster;
D. The tax administrator may require that certain conditions be followed in order for a cannabis business to receive temporary relief from the cannabis business tax requirement;
E. A cannabis business shall not be subject to an enforcement action for a violation of a cannabis business requirement in which the licensee has received temporary relief from the tax administrator;
F. For purposes of this section, “disaster” means fire, flood, storm, tidal wave, earthquake, or similar public calamity, whether or not resulting from natural causes.
    1. The cannabis business must notify the tax administrator in writing of a request for temporary relief from imposition of the tax requirement pursuant to subsection A of this section, indicating clearly why disaster relief is requested, the time period for which the relief is requested, and the reasons relief is needed for the specified amount of time;
    2. The cannabis business agrees to grant the tax collector or his/her designee access to the location where the cannabis business has been impacted due to a disaster. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.270 Conviction for violation—Taxes not waived.
The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any state law requiring the payment of all taxes. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.280 Violation deemed misdemeanor.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable under Chapter 1.12 unless the tax administrator provides by regulation that violation of a particular provision of this chapter ought to be enforced as an infraction or if the city attorney determines in his or her discretion that a particular violation ought to be enforced as an infraction in the interests of justice. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.290 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstance, is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, unenforceable or otherwise void, that determination shall have no effect on any other provision of this chapter or the application of this chapter to any other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions hereof are severable. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.300 Remedies cumulative.
All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available under any other provision of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code and any other provision of law or equity are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter; provided only that the city not recover any sum due under this chapter, including penalties and interest, more than once. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.310 Amendment or repeal.
This chapter may be repealed or amended by the city council without a vote of the people to the extent allowed by law. However, as required by Article XIII C of the California Constitution, voter approval is required for any amendment that would increase the maximum rates of any tax established pursuant to this chapter. The people of the city of San Luis Obispo affirm that the following actions shall not constitute an increase of the rate of a tax:
A. The restoration of a tax to a rate or amount that is no higher than that set by this chapter;
B. An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or any definition applicable to the tax, so long as interpretation or clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification) is not inconsistent with the language of this chapter; or
C. The collection of the tax imposed by this chapter even if the city had, for some period of time, failed to collect the tax. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

5.10.320 Enforcement consistent with business license tax.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the taxes due under this chapter may be enforced in the manner provided by Chapter 5.01 and any policy or regulation adopted or implement pursuant to that chapter. (Ord. 1659 § 1 (part), 2018)

Chapter 5.12 CONTRACTORS
(Repealed by Ord. 1202)

Chapter 5.16 SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS

Sections:
5.16.010     Permit—Required.
5.16.020     Petition for permit—Contents.
5.16.030     Permit—Determination.
5.16.040     Prohibited conduct.
5.16.050     Permit—Suspension, revocation.
5.16.060     Fee for permit.
5.16.070     Exceptions.
5.16.080     Criminal conduct—Ineligibility for city licenses and permits.

5.16.010 Permit—Required.
Except as provided in Section 10.36.120, no person shall stand or maintain any cart, wagon, automobile or other vehicle on or in the public streets of the city for the purpose of selling or offering for sale from or in the cart, wagon, automobile or other vehicle any peanuts, popcorn, candy, soft drinks, ice cream, sandwiches, or other food, goods, wares and merchandise that are lawful under both federal and state law, except upon permit from the chief of police. (Ord. 1594 § 3 (part), 2014)

5.16.020 Petition for permit—Contents.
A. Whenever any person desires to stand or maintain any such wagon, cart, automobile or other vehicle for mobile vending purposes, the person shall submit an application for a permit on the form prescribed by the chief of police. The application shall set forth the name of the person desiring such permit, the character of the business to be conducted, the general location where and the hours during which it is proposed to stand and maintain such cart, wagon, automobile or other vehicle, and any other information sought by the chief of police to determine compliance with this chapter.
B. Neither the filing of any application for a permit, nor the payment of an application fee, shall authorize the vending from or the operation or management of a vending cart, wagon, automobile or other vehicle until such permit has been granted. (Ord. 1594 § 3 (part), 2014)

5.16.030 Permit—Determination.
A. The chief of police or his or her designated representative shall grant the permit only if he or she finds that all of the following requirements have been met and that applicant accepts his or her liability as set forth in subsection B of this section:
    1. The required fees have been paid;
    2. The applicant has obtained all other applicable federal, state, county and city permits or licenses, and is in good standing with the applicable issuing authority;
    3. To the extent that the applicant may vend on private property, the applicant has obtained written permission of the private property owner and any applicable land use permits;
    4. The application conforms in all respect to the provisions of this chapter;
    5. The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application;
    6. The applicant, if an individual, or any of the directors, officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, or profit interest holder, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed business of vending from a vehicle, or a natural person employed or contracted with to be a driver is not disqualified from holding a city permit or license under Section 5.08.030;
    7. The applicant has complied with Section 12.36.030, if the applicant intends to vend or operate within the boundaries set forth in Section 12.36.020;
    8. The goods and/or services the applicant proposes to offer or sell from the vehicle are legal under both state and federal law.
B. Insurance and Indemnification Provisions. 
    1. Each permittee is solely responsible for any damage or liability occurring by reason of anything done or omitted to be done by the permittee or his or her agent, employee, servant or subcontractor, or in connection with any work, authority or jurisdiction delegated under any permit issued as a result of an application; and each permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, employees or servants from any and all loss and liability, including cost of defense and attorney fees, resulting from any claims made by reason of or in connection with any work done under the authority of or as a result of any permit issued under this chapter.
    2. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, drive, operate or cause or permit to be driven or operated any food vending vehicle in the city for vending purposes unless such person has submitted with his application for permit a motor vehicle liability insurance policy, covering each food vending vehicle, issued by a solvent corporation holding a certificate of authority to do insurance business in the state, which policy shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this chapter.
    3. The required motor vehicle liability policy shall insure the owner, driver, and any other person using or responsible for the use of any food vending vehicle with the consent, expressed or implied, of such owner, driver or person against loss from the liability imposed upon such owner, driver or person by law for injury to, or death of, any person, or damage to property going out of the maintenance, operation or ownership of any food vending vehicle, in an amount of one million dollars, combined single limit, no aggregate.
    4. Every insurance policy and every certificate of motor vehicle liability insurance filed within the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall contain the following endorsements:
        a. This policy shall inure to, and be for the benefit and protection of, anyone who shall sustain any damages or injury, or to the heirs, personal representatives, administrators, executors or assigns of any such person who may be so damaged or injured or suffer death, by reason of the operation of the motor vehicle or from the defective condition thereof. Liability under this policy shall in no manner be abrogated or abated by the death or dissolution of the feasor or the insured.
        b. There is continuing liability up to the full amount of the policy, notwithstanding any action or recovery thereon.
        c. No cancellation or reduction in coverage of this policy for any reason whatsoever shall become effective until the expiration of thirty days after written notice of such cancellation or reduction in coverage shall have been given to the chief of police. Said period of thirty days to commence running from the date said notice is actually received in the office of the chief of police.
C. If the chief of police or his or her designated representative finds that all of the requirements set forth in this section have not been met, he or she shall deny the application for a vendor’s permit. In the event the application for the permit is denied by the chief of police or his designated representative, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Any applicant whose application for a permit under this section has been denied may appeal such denial to the city council as provided by Chapter 1.20. (Ord. 1594 § 3 (part), 2014)

5.16.040 Prohibited conduct.
A. No person shall vend from a vending vehicle which is stopped, parked or standing on any public street, alley or highway:
    1. Within a posted elementary or middle school zone while children are going to or leaving the school, and during school hours;
    2. When the vending vehicle is parked in violation of any other provision of this code or the California Vehicle Code;
    3. Within any marked commercial loading zone;
    4. When any part of the vending vehicle is open to prospective customers other than on the side of the vehicle that is positioned opposite the adjoining travel lanes of the street, alley or highway;
    5. When the vending vehicle is not stopped, parked or standing on the right side of the street, alley or highway;
    6. When the prospective customer is standing or sitting in another vehicle;
    7. When the prospective customer is located in that portion of the street, alley or highway which is open to vehicular traffic;
    8. Within the boundaries set forth in Section 12.36.020 unless the vendor has complied with Section 12.36.030;
    9. Within any residential zone between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m.;
    10. When the posted speed limit on the public street, alley, or highway is greater than thirty-five miles per hour;
    11. Unless otherwise authorized or restricted as part of the permit, within a distance as established in the table below from any of the following facilities: intersections, midblock pedestrian crossings, driveways, or bus stops:
    +---------------------+------------------------+
    | Roadway Speed Limit | Distance from Facility |
    +---------------------+------------------------+
    | 20 mph              | 125'                   |
    +---------------------+------------------------+
    | 25 mph              | 150'                   |
    +---------------------+------------------------+
    | 30 mph              | 200'                   |
    +---------------------+------------------------+
    | 35 mph              | 250'                   |
    +---------------------+------------------------+
    12. On any public sidewalk or pathway.
B. No person shall back a vending vehicle to make or attempt to make a sale.
C. No vending vehicle shall be operated in any one location for longer than the posted parking time limit.
D. Vending is prohibited out of the front, rear, or traffic side of the vehicle.
E. Tables and chairs are not allowed in the public right-of-way.
F. Lighting shall comply with the California Vehicle Code and the city’s municipal code (Chapter 17.23).
G. Except as required to ensure the safe operation of the vending vehicle while being operated on any public or private street, alley, or highway or public property, no person on a vending vehicle shall operate any horns, sound amplification systems or other sound-producing devices or music systems which can be heard outside of the vending vehicle when such vehicle is moving, stopped, standing, or parked for purposes of advertisement when such vehicle is being operated as a vending vehicle on any public or private street, alley or highway or on public property.
H. All vending vehicles shall be equipped with solid waste containers large enough to contain all solid waste generated by the operation of such vehicle, and the operator of the vending vehicle shall pick up all solid waste generated by such operation within a fifty-foot radius of the vehicle before such vehicle is moved.
I. Mobile vending on private property requires permission from the property owner and an administrative use permit approval (Section 17.08.010). Mobile vending on city property requires city approval in conjunction with a special event. (Ord. 1594 § 3 (part), 2014)

5.16.050 Permit—Suspension, revocation.
A. Any permit may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police or his or her designated representative for any of the following reasons:
    1. Falsehood of any information supplied by the permittee upon which issuance of the permit was based;
    2. Failure of the permittee to notify the chief of police within two weeks of any change occurring subsequent to the issuance of the permit in the information supplied by the permittee upon which issuance of the permit was based;
    3. Failure of the permittee or of any employees or subcontractors of the permittee to comply with the regulations set forth;
    4. A finding by the chief of police that issuance of the permit or continued operation under the permit presents a threat to the public safety.
B. In the event the chief of police or his or her designated representative finds that any of the above grounds for permit revocation or suspension exist:
    1. Written notice of proposed revocation or suspension of the permit shall be mailed to the permittee specifying the ground or grounds on which such proposed revocation or suspension is based.
    2. The permittee shall be given no less than fifteen days from the date of mailing of said notice in which to deliver a response in writing to the chief of police. Any response shall specify any and all facts or information the permittee believes should be considered by the chief of police prior to any revocation or suspension of the permit.
    3. If permittee does not timely respond to the notice provided, the revocation or suspension of the permit shall become effective on the sixteenth day following mailing of the notice.
    4. If a timely response is received, the chief of police shall consider all information provided by the permittee and shall mail the final decision on any proposed revocation or suspension to the permittee within ten days of receipt of permittee’s response.
    5. Any permittee whose application for a vendor’s or operator’s permit has been denied, revoked, or suspended may appeal the chief of police’s determination to the city council as provided by Chapter 1.20. (Ord. 1594 § 3 (part), 2014)

5.16.060 Fee for permit.
Application for a permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by the council. The fee shall be in an amount sufficient fully to defray administrative cost incurred in the processing of an application, and shall not be in lieu of other fees or taxes, including business taxes, required by this code. (Ord. 1594 § 3 (part), 2014)

5.16.070 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to peddlers who travel along the streets of the city and who do not allow such cart, wagon, automobile or other vehicle to stand for a longer period than actually necessary to complete a sale as provided in Section 10.36.120. (Ord. 1594 § 3 (part), 2014)

5.16.080 Criminal conduct—Ineligibility for city licenses and permits.
The provisions of Section 5.08.030 shall be applicable to this chapter. (Ord. 1594 § 3 (part), 2014)

Chapter 5.20 TAXICABS

Sections:
5.20.010     Definitions.
5.20.020     Certificate of public convenience and necessity required and taxicab permit required.
5.20.030     Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Application.
5.20.040     Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Council’s determination for need required.
5.20.050     Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Hearing and investigation to determine need.
5.20.055     Criminal conduct—Ineligibility for city licenses and permits.
5.20.060     Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Hearing—Council’s determination—Award of additional permits.
5.20.070     Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Compliance with requirements required prior to issuance.
5.20.080     Application for additional taxicabs—Granting.
5.20.090     Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Owners before enactment of provisions.
5.20.100     Service required on a twenty-four-hour basis per day.
5.20.110     Replacing taxicabs—Notification.
5.20.120     Certificate and permit—Transfer.
5.20.130     Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Revocation, suspension.
5.20.140     License—Application and renewal.
5.20.150     Rate schedules approval.
5.20.160     Rate changes—Hearing.
5.20.170     Rates—Deregulation.
5.20.180     Vehicle identification.
5.20.190     Equipment maintenance and inspection.
5.20.200     Operating regulations.
5.20.210     Driver’s permit required—Application.
5.20.220     Renewal of driver’s permit.
5.20.230     Revocation of driver’s permit.
5.20.240     Driver’s permit application denial or driver’s permit revocation—Appeal.
5.20.245     Reapplication upon positive test for controlled substances and alcohol.
5.20.250     Return of driver’s permit upon termination of employment.
5.20.260     Taxicab stands.
5.20.270     Liability insurance.
5.20.280     Taximeter—Required.
5.20.290     Taximeter rates.
5.20.300     Refusal to pay fare.
5.20.310     Violation of provisions—Permit revocation.

5.20.010 Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall respectively mean:
A. “Certificate holder” means any person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued under the provisions of this chapter and which certificate has not been revoked.
B. “Driver” means every person in charge of, or operating, any passenger-carrying or motor-propelled vehicle, as herein defined, either as agent, employee, or otherwise, of owner, as owner, or under the direction of the owner, as herein defined.
C. “Street” means any piece commonly used for the purpose of public travel.
D. “Taxicab” means any motor-propelled vehicle used for the transportation of passengers who direct the route to be traveled over the streets and not operated over a fixed route for compensation.
E. “Taxicab stand” means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in the city which has been designated by the council as reserved exclusively for the use of a holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity.
F. “Taxicab permit” means an authorization issued to a holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to operate a taxicab within the city. (Prior code § 6240)

5.20.020 Certificate of public convenience and necessity required and taxicab permit required.
No person shall engage in the business of operating any vehicle defined in Section 5.20.010 within the city without first having obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the council and a taxicab permit for the operation of each vehicle authorized under such certificate of public convenience and necessity from the director of public works. (Ord. 1524 § 2, 2009)

5.20.030 Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Application.
All persons applying to the council for a certificate of public convenience and necessity to operate one or more taxicabs shall file with the council a sworn application in a form stating as follows:
A. The name and address of the owner or person applying; if a partnership, the name of each partner; if a corporation, the names of the directors and principal officers;
B. The number of vehicles proposed to be operated for taxi service;
C. The designated number of each taxicab to be operated;
D. A description of the proposed color scheme, insignia, trade style, and any other distinguishing characteristics of the proposed taxicab design;
E. Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a permit;
F. Proposed rates to be charged;
G. Such further information as the council requires. (Prior code § 6240.2)

5.20.040 Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Council’s determination for need required.
No certificate of public convenience and necessity for the operation of any taxicab shall be granted until the council shall, after hearing, declare by resolution that the public convenience and necessity require the issuance of such certificate. (Prior code § 6240.3)

5.20.050 Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Hearing and investigation to determine need.
In determining whether the public convenience and necessity require the operation of a taxicab, or taxicabs, for which application is made, the council shall hold such public hearing as may be necessary in its discretion to determine that fact. Before any application is acted upon, the public works department shall cause an investigation to be made and shall report the findings, in writing, to the council on the following:
A. The demand of the public for additional taxicab service;
B. The adequacy of existing mass transportation and taxicab service;
C. The financial responsibility and experience of the applicant;
D. The number, kind and type of equipment and the color scheme to be used;
E. The effect which such additional taxicab service may have upon traffic congestion and parking;
F. Whether the additional taxicab service will result in a greater hazard to the public;
G. Such other relevant facts as the council may deem advisable or necessary. (Ord. 1524 § 3, 2009)

5.20.055 Criminal conduct—Ineligibility for city licenses and permits.
The provisions of Section 5.08.030 shall be applicable to this chapter. (Ord. 1202 § 16, 1991)

5.20.060 Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Hearing—Council’s determination—Award of additional permits.
If the council determines that the public convenience and necessity requires additional service, it shall then determine the number of taxicab permits which shall be necessary to furnish such services. The council may award such additional taxicab permits to existing holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity or to any new applicants who are qualified for issuance of certificates of public convenience and necessity. (Prior code § 6240.5)

5.20.070 Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Compliance with requirements required prior to issuance.
No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued to any person who shall not have fully complied with all the requirements of this chapter necessary to be complied with before the commencement of operation of the proposed service. (Prior code § 6240.6)

5.20.080 Application for additional taxicabs—Granting.
Any holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity may make application to the director of public works for such additional taxicab permits as he or she may desire. The director of public works shall notify the other certificate holders of such application and, if no objections are filed within ten days, the applicant shall be granted such taxicab permit or taxicab permits as requested without necessity of a hearing or investigation as provided in Section 5.20.050. If, however, protests are filed, then such taxicab permits shall be granted or denied only in accordance with the provisions of Sections 5.20.050 and 5.20.060. (Ord. 1524 § 4, 2009)

5.20.090 Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Owners before enactment of provisions.
Every owner operating a licensed taxicab prior to the nineteenth day of December, 1951, shall be presumed, in the absence of any contrary evidence and finding of the council, to have established a prima facie evidence of public convenience and necessity for the licensing of the taxicab or taxicabs actually in operation, and the council, upon application received not later than fifteen days after the nineteenth day of December, 1951, shall grant a certificate of public convenience and necessity to such owner for the operation of taxicabs. Every owner obtaining a certificate as aforesaid shall be entitled to the number of taxicab permits held by such owner that were in force on the day prior to the nineteenth day of December, 1951. (Prior code § 6240.8)

5.20.100 Service required on a twenty-four-hour basis per day.
All persons holding certificates of public convenience and necessity shall regularly and daily operate their taxicabs on a twenty-four-hour basis during each day of the license year. (Prior code § 6240.9)

5.20.110 Replacing taxicabs—Notification.
Whenever a certificate holder replaces a taxicab for which a permit has been issued, he or she shall file with the director of public works the name, type, year of manufacture, serial number and motor number of the vehicle abandoned and the vehicle to be placed in use. The director of public works shall, as a matter of right, authorize the replacement of such vehicle under the existing permit. (Ord. 1524 § 5, 2009)

5.20.120 Certificate and permit—Transfer.
Any person having a certificate of public convenience and necessity for the operation of taxicabs shall be authorized by the council to transfer the certificate of public convenience, taxicab permits and taxicab stands issued pursuant thereto, unless after a hearing held for the purpose the council shall find that such proposed transferee is not a person of good moral character or that the transferee does not possess sufficient financial responsibility to meet the requirements of a holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity under this chapter. The hearing shall be held within thirty days after the holder of the certificate of public convenience and necessity gives notice in writing to the city clerk of the intended transfer. (Prior code § 6240.11)

5.20.130 Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Revocation, suspension.
The certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be suspended or revoked by the council upon the following grounds:
A. The owner wilfully fails to operate the vehicles under permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
B. The taxicab or taxicabs are operated at a rate of fare other than that approved by the council;
C. The company shall abandon its operation of all vehicles for a period of thirty days. Acts of God, labor disputes and other acts beyond the control of the certificate holder shall not be an abandonment within the meaning of this section. No suspension shall be made effective until a hearing has been had before the council, at which the certificate holders may be present and represented by counsel. The certificate holder shall have not less than ten days’ notice by registered mail of the hearing. (Prior code § 6240.12)

5.20.140 License—Application and renewal.
Any application for a license to operate a taxi shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by the council. The application fee charged hereunder shall be in sufficient amounts to fully defray administrative costs incurred in the processing of an application and are not made in lieu of any other fees or taxes required under this code. A license to operate a taxi shall be renewed annually. (Ord. 1202 § 18, 1991: prior code § 6240.13)
Prior to its repeal by § 17 of Ord. 1202, § 5.20.140 was entitled “Certificate holders’ registration and license fees” and was derived from prior code § 6240.13.

5.20.150 Rate schedules approval.
The rate schedule of every owner operating a licensed taxicab or taxicabs prior to the nineteenth day of December, 1951, and who under the provisions of this chapter, was granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity and whose rates were, on the nineteenth day of December, 1971, on file with the clerk and approved prior to the nineteenth day of December 1951, by the council, are approved. (Prior code § 6240.14)

5.20.160 Rate changes—Hearing.
The council, upon its own motion, or upon application of a certificate holder, may set, establish, change, modify or amend the schedule of rates to be charged by all vehicles operated by each holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity under the provisions of this chapter. No rates shall be set, established, changed, modified or amended without a hearing before the council. Notice of such hearing shall be given to each certificate holder, in writing, by the city clerk, at least five days before the hearing, and the council may give such other notice as it shall deem necessary. (Prior code § 6240.15(a))

5.20.170 Rates—Deregulation.
Nothing herein shall prohibit the council from deregulating taxi rates. The council may by resolution provide for the deregulation of taxi rates. No resolution authorizing deregulation of rates shall be adopted without a hearing before the council. Notice of such hearing shall be given to each certificate holder in writing by the city clerk at least five days before the hearing and the council may give such other notice as it shall deem necessary. Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the resolution of deregulation, any certificate holder may establish, change, modify or amend the schedule of rates to be charged by all vehicles operated by each holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity under the provisions of this chapter, following posting of such change, modifications or amendments to the taximeter rates in each vehicle in such a place as to be in view of all passengers thirty days prior to such taximeter rates taking effect. All changes, modifications or amendments to the schedule of rates shall be filed with the city clerk and director of public works thirty days prior to such rates taking effect.
A. A resolution of deregulation shall expressly provide such limitations and conditions as the council shall deem appropriate.
B. A resolution of deregulation may be revoked, and taxi rates reestablished by the council, upon its own motion or upon application of a certificate holder. No resolution of deregulation of taxi rates shall be revoked and no taxi rates reestablished by the council without a hearing before the council after notice as set out herein. (Ord. 1524 § 6, 2009)

5.20.180 Vehicle identification.
A. Every taxicab shall have permanently printed or placed on each side of such taxicab the name of the owner or the fictitious name under which the owner operates, together with the telephone number of the owner or company. All of such lettering shall be in letters of not less than two and one-quarter inches in height and not less than five-sixteenths of an inch stroke. In addition thereto, every taxicab shall have printed or placed upon the exterior of such taxicab in conspicuous letters of at least three and one-half inches in height and not less than one-half-inch stroke, of a color in contrast to the color of the taxicab, the number of such taxicab and which numbering shall be printed or placed in the following locations:
    1. In front center of taxicab on metal above windshield;
    2. One number on each side of taxicab; and
    3. One number on each side of outside rear of taxicab.
B. All taxicabs shall conform to the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia approved by the director of public works.
C. No person shall imitate any color scheme, monogram or insignia used by any other holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity which has been approved by the director of public works. (Ord. 1524 § 7, 2009)

5.20.190 Equipment maintenance and inspection.
A. Before a permit is issued to any owner, the taxicab for which such permit is requested shall be delivered to a place designated by the council for inspection, and the council shall designate agents to inspect such taxicab or taxicabs, and their equipment, to ascertain whether such taxicab complies with the provisions of this chapter, all cost thereof to be paid by cab owner.
B. The chief of police, or any member of the police department under his or her direction, shall have the right, at any time after displaying proper identification, to enter into or upon any certificated taxicab for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated.
C. Any taxicab which is found, after any such inspection, to be unsafe or in any way unsuitable for taxicab service shall be immediately ordered out of service, and before again being placed in service, proof must be furnished to the chief of police that it is in a safe condition.
D. The interior of every taxicab shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once in every twenty-four hours. (Prior code § 6240.17)

5.20.200 Operating regulations.
A. A permitted taxicab company shall comply with the requirements set forth in Government Code Section 53075.5(h)(1) through (9).
B. 
    1. It shall be unlawful to operate a taxicab without a valid permit to operate issued by the city of San Luis Obispo where the taxicab company is substantially located within the city of San Luis Obispo.
    2. The minimum fine for violation of subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be five thousand dollars and may be imposed administratively by the city of San Luis Obispo.
C. Any driver employed to transport passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry his or her passenger to his or her destination safely and expeditiously.
D. No driver of any licensed taxicab shall prejudice, disadvantage, or require different rates or provide different service to a person because of race, national origin, religion, color, ancestry, physical disability, medical condition, occupation, marital status or change in marital status, sex or any characteristic listed or defined in Government Code Section 11135.
E. No driver of any licensed taxicab shall refuse any person prompt taxi service in the city at any time while such taxicab is on the public streets ready for service, unless taxicab is already engaged in the carrying of one or more passengers or is en route to answer a call for taxicab service; provided further, that nothing in this subsection shall require any owner or driver to furnish taxicab service to any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics, or to any person who is insane or who is a known criminal.
F. Every driver, upon request, shall give a correct receipt for the amount of payment received.
G. No driver of any taxicab shall accept, take into his or her vehicle or transport any larger number of passengers than the rates covering the seating capacity of his or her vehicle.
H. No driver shall permit any taxicab to remain standing in any established taxicab stand, unless the cab is attended by a driver or operator, except when assisting passengers to load or unload, or when answering the telephone.
I. No driver shall carry any passenger other than paying passengers or persons authorized by or on company business.
J. Every driver shall at all times display his or her driver’s permit and picture in a conspicuous place in the taxicab which he or she is operating.
K. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be cause for the revocation of the permit of the driver guilty of such violation. (Ord. 1675 § 1, 2020: prior code § 6240.18)

5.20.210 Driver’s permit required—Application.
A. No person shall drive or operate any of the vehicles mentioned in Section 5.20.010 without first obtaining a permit in writing to do so from the chief of police, or any person designated by the chief. The permit issued will entitle the driver to work for only those employers whose names appear on the permit. A new permit will be required for each subsequent employment; provided, however, that no application shall be necessary other than a ratification of change of employment and proof of a negative test as specified in subsection (C)(4) of this section.
B. Any application for a driver’s permit shall be accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the council. The application fee shall be used to defray, in whole or in part, the city and/or state costs of investigation and review of the application.
C. Applicants for such permits shall file applications with the chief of police. The application shall contain the following information together with two photographs of the applicant:
    1. Name, marital status, age, residence, last previous address, and the length of residence at such last address and in the city;
    2. The names and addresses of two residents of the city acquainted with the applicant;
    3. Complete fingerprinting of applicant;
    4. Proof of a negative test for controlled substances and for alcohol which complies with the requirements set forth in Government Code Section 53075.5;
    5. The name of the driver’s employer or prospective employer;
    6. All criminal convictions.
D. The application will not be processed by the chief of police or his or her designee until the application is complete and all of the required information has been submitted.
E. No permit shall be issued to any of the following persons:
    1. Any person under the age of twenty-one years;
    2. Any person not a citizen of the United States or who has not lawfully declared his or her intention to become such;
    3. Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
    4. Any person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor crime involving any of the following: sexual offense; weapons offense; robbery; manslaughter; moral turpitude; pandering; using, possessing, selling or transporting narcotics; or imparting information for obtaining narcotics;
    5. Any person who, within the past seven years from the date of the application, or during the processing of said application, has been convicted of driving a vehicle recklessly or while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotics;
    6. Any person not possessing a valid chauffeur’s license issued by the state;
    7. Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter or any similar ordinance of another public agency;
    8. Any person who has made a material misstatement or omission in the permit application;
    9. Any person who has had one or more convictions of misdemeanor hit and run within the past three years, or two or more convictions of misdemeanor hit and run within the past seven years;
    10. Any person who has had two or more moving violations as set forth in the Vehicle Code of the state occurring during any twelve-month period within the past three years, or three or more total violations during the past three years;
    11. Any person who has displayed a pattern of criminal conduct or driving violations that would indicate they would pose a danger to the safety of passengers or other motorists if granted a driver’s permit.
F. Any person whose application has been denied may appeal that denial in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 5.20.240. (Ord. 1524 § 8, 2009)

5.20.220 Renewal of driver’s permit.
A driver’s permit shall be renewed annually. The renewal fee shall be set by resolution of the council and shall be used to defray, in whole or in part, the city and/or state costs of investigation of the renewal. Prior to renewal, each driver shall submit proof of a negative test for controlled substances and for alcohol which complies with the requirements set forth in Government Code Section 53075.5. The driver’s permit shall be renewed unless any of the grounds for revocation set forth in Section 5.20.230 exist. (Ord. 1298 § 1, 1996)

5.20.230 Revocation of driver’s permit.
The chief of police may revoke or refuse to renew an operator’s license if the driver or applicant has since the granting of his or her permit:
A. Been convicted of a felony;
B. Been convicted of a misdemeanor crime involving any of the following: sexual offense; weapons offense; robbery; manslaughter; moral turpitude; pandering; using, possessing, selling or transporting narcotics; or imparting information for obtaining narcotics;
C. Been convicted of driving recklessly or while under the influence of liquors or narcotics;
D. Had his or her state driver’s or chauffeur’s license revoked or suspended;
E. Had one or more convictions of misdemeanor hit and run within the past three years, or two or more convictions of misdemeanor hit and run, within the past seven years;
F. Had two or more moving violations as set forth in the Vehicle Code of the state occurring during any twelve-month period within the past three years, or three or more total violations during the past three years;
G. Displayed a pattern of criminal conduct or driving violations that would indicate they pose a danger to the safety of passengers or other motorists;
H. Failed to submit proof of a negative test for controlled substances and alcohol as required in Section 5.20.210;
I. Been convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1524 § 9, 2009)

5.20.240 Driver’s permit application denial or driver’s permit revocation—Appeal.
Any person whose application for a driver’s permit has been denied or any driver whose permit has been revoked pursuant to Section 5.20.230 by the chief of police may, within ten days of such revocation, file an appeal from such denial or revocation with the council, and a hearing shall be held before the council on such revocation. If, in the opinion of the council, the denial or revocation is not justified from the evidence submitted to it at such hearing, the permit shall be issued or reinstated. If, upon the hearing, it shall appear that good cause exists therefor, the council shall affirm the action of the chief of police and order the denial or permanent revocation of the permit. The action of the council on such a revocation shall be final and conclusive. Pending such hearing, it is unlawful for such person or driver to operate a taxicab within the city. (Ord. 1298 § 1, 1996; prior code § 6240.23)

5.20.245 Reapplication upon positive test for controlled substances and alcohol.
Any person whose permit application is denied or whose permit is revoked based on his or her failure to submit proof of a negative test for controlled substances and alcohol may reapply for a driver’s permit after a period of one year from the date of the permit denial or revocation. Evidence of the absence of drug dependency from a substance abuse professional and proof of a negative drug and alcohol test will be required prior to reapplication. (Ord. 1298 § 1, 1996)

5.20.250 Return of driver’s permit upon termination of employment.
The employer shall notify the chief of police of the driver’s termination of employment with the listed employer and shall return the driver’s permit to the chief of police. The driver’s permit shall become null and void upon the driver’s termination of employment. (Ord. 1675 § 2, 2020: Ord. 1298 § 1, 1996)

5.20.260 Taxicab stands.
A. The director of public works or his or her designee may designate taxicab stands on public streets for use by certificate holders. The director of public works or his or her designee may move, add or eliminate taxicab stands as he or she deems appropiate.
B. No owner or driver of any taxicab shall park the same on any public street in the central traffic district for the purpose of soliciting business, other than at the stands designated by the director of public works or his or her designee.
C. The taxicab stands shall be designated by signs or other appropriate markings, as directed by director of public works or his or her designee. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2005: prior code § 6240.24)

5.20.270 Liability insurance.
A. The motor vehicle liability policy required by this section shall insure the owner and any other person using or responsible for the use of any such vehicle, with the consent, express or implied, of the owner against loss from the liability imposed upon such owner by law for injury to, or death of, any person, or damage to property, growing out of the maintenance, operation or ownership of any public motor vehicle to the amount or limit of five hundred thousand dollars, exclusive of interest and costs on account of injury to, or death of, any one person; of one million dollars, exclusive of interest and costs, on account of any one accident resulting in damage to property of, an injury to, or death of, more than one person.
B. The motor vehicle liability policy shall insure to the benefit of any and all persons suffering loss or damage either to person or property as herein provided, and the liability of the insurance carrier shall be in no manner abrogated or abated by the death of the tortfeasor or the owner.
Every certificate required under the provisions of this chapter shall certify that the motor vehicle liability policy or policies therein cited shall not be cancelled except upon ten days’ prior written notice thereof to the council. The motor vehicle liability insurance shall be a continuing liability up to the full moment thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon, and the certificates thereof shall so certify. All motor vehicle liability policies and all certificates thereof shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney in any and all matters and if at any time, in the judgment of the council, the motor vehicle liability policies are not sufficient for any cause, the council may require the owner of such public motor vehicle who filed the same to replace the motor vehicle policies within ten days with other policies in accordance with the provisions of this section. If the owner fails to replace the motor vehicle policies within the ten-day period with good and sufficient policies, as set out in this section, then at the termination of the period the owner’s permit issued under this chapter shall be by such failure automatically suspended until such time as the requirement is complied with, and the chief of police shall enforce such suspension. (Ord. 1484 § 5, 2005; prior code § 6240.25)

5.20.280 Taximeter—Required.
All taxicabs operated under the authority of this chapter shall, within thirty days after written notice by the city, be equipped with meters fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times of the day or night; and after sundown the face of the meter shall be illuminated, the accuracy of meters to be installed shall be tested, approved and sealed by the county department of weights and measures at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording. The taxi company may use any type of device or technology reviewed by the Division of Measurement Standards to calculate fares, including using global positioning system metering; provided, that the device or technology complies with Business and Professions Code Section 12500.5 and with regulations established pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 12107. Each meter shall have a flag or approved device to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag or device into a recording position when employed and into a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip. The meter shall be subject to inspection from time to time and upon discovery of any inaccuracies therein, the taxi shall be kept off the highway until the meter is repaired or replaced. (Ord. 1675 § 3, 2020: prior code § 6240.28)

5.20.290 Taximeter rates.
Meters will be set to show rates adopted or amended by the council by resolution, which shall include a minimum and mileage rate, standby charges and types of receipts, if any, to be delivered to passengers. If required by the resolution, rate cards setting forth the authorized rates shall be displayed in each taxi in such a place as to be in view of all passengers. (Prior code § 6240.29)

5.20.300 Refusal to pay fare.
Except where credit is intended, no person shall fail or refuse to pay at the end of the trip or the termination or discharge of service, the regular fare for the public passenger vehicle for hire he or she has hired, and upon conviction for violation thereof, in addition to any other penalty provided for in this code, he or she shall be compelled to pay to the driver of the vehicle an amount equal to the legal fare and in case any bail required is forfeited, the amount of the legal fare shall be paid to the driver from such amount forfeited, and the court or judge before whom the case is heard shall order the same to be paid from the treasury of the city. (Prior code § 6240.27)

5.20.310 Violation of provisions—Permit revocation.
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, in addition to any other penalty provided by this code, have the permit to him or her revoked. (Prior code § 6240.26)

Chapter 5.24 PASSENGER STAGES

Sections:
5.24.010     Franchise—Council’s authority to grant.
5.24.020     Applicability of provisions.
5.24.030     Franchise permit required.
5.24.040     Vehicle requirements.
5.24.050     Drivers.
5.24.060     Fares.
5.24.070     Audits and passenger data.
5.24.080     Performance bond required.
5.24.090     Workmen’s compensation insurance required for employees.
5.24.100     Public liability insurance required.
5.24.110     Franchise Transfer.
5.24.120     Franchise Suspension or revocation.
5.24.130     Advertising on vehicles—Restrictions.
5.24.140     Charter buses permitted—Conditions.

5.24.010 Franchise—Council’s authority to grant.
The council may, subject to restrictions of state law, by ordinance grant such nonexclusive franchises as it deems appropriate for the operation of “passenger stages” by “passenger stage corporations,” as such terms are defined in the California Public Utilities Code, all other laws, and any and all terms, conditions and agreement which the council deems appropriate and necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 965 § 1, 1983: prior code § 6250)

5.24.020 Applicability of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the operation of passenger stages or taxicabs otherwise licensed or permitted by the California Public Utilities Commission, other public agencies or the city. (Prior code § 6250.11)

5.24.030 Franchise permit required.
It is unlawful for any passenger stage corporation to engage in the business of operating passenger stages within the city without then holding a valid franchise permit therefor. (Prior code § 6250.10)

5.24.040 Vehicle requirements.
All vehicles used as passenger stages shall meet the requirements of the California Public Utilities Commission and the Motor Carrier Safety Regulations in Title 13 of the California Administrative Code. Each franchisee shall provide sufficient standby vehicles to assure service at all times. All vehicles shall be washed regularly and the interior shall be kept in a clean condition at all times. (Prior code § 6250.1)

5.24.050 Drivers.
A. Each driver of a passenger stage vehicle shall possess a valid California State Driver’s License for each type of vehicle driven by him or her. In addition, each such driver shall comply with all city standards, requirements and permits then in effect for taxicab drivers within the city.
B. All drivers shall be uniformed and English speaking, with an overall neat appearance, and shall be courteous and helpful within the city.
C. Each driver shall at all times display his or her driver’s permit and picture in a conspicuous place in the vehicle driven by him or her. (Prior code § 6250.2)

5.24.060 Fares.
Each passenger shall pay such fare as may be required by a fare schedule agreed upon from time to time by the city and the franchisee. A locked registering fare box shall be provided in each vehicle. (Prior code § 6250.3)

5.24.070 Audits and passenger data.
Each franchisee shall permit the city to audit the company books on a regular basis and shall cooperate with the city in the collection of data concerning passenger usage. (Prior code § 6250.4)

5.24.080 Performance bond required.
Each franchisee shall furnish and maintain a cash or surety bond payable to the city in the amount required by the city and conditioned upon the faithful performance of its franchise teens. (Prior code § 6250.5)

5.24.090 Workmen’s compensation insurance required for employees.
Each franchisee shall provide full Workmen’s Compensation Insurance for all eligible employees. (Prior code § 6250.6)

5.24.100 Public liability insurance required.
Each franchisee shall maintain public liability insurance in such amount and subject to such conditions as may be required by the city. (Prior code § 6250.7)

5.24.110 Franchise Transfer.
A passenger stage franchise shall not be transferred or assigned without the consent of the city, which consent shall not be withheld unreasonably. (Prior code § 6250.8)

5.24.120 Franchise Suspension or revocation.
A. A passenger stage franchise may be suspended or revoked, at the discretion of the council, upon any one of the following grounds:
    1. Wilful failure to maintain and operate vehicles in accordance with all applicable requirements;
    2. Abandonment of all operation of vehicles for a period of five days or more, Acts of God, labor disputes and other acts beyond the control of the franchisee shall not constitute an abandonment within the meaning of this section:
    3. Wilful failure to provide audits, data and reports required by the city:
    4. Cancellation of bonds or insurance, or failure to comply with all conditions of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
B. No suspension or revocation shall be made effective until a hearing has been held before the council, at which time the franchisee may be present and represented by counsel. The franchisee shall be given at least ten days’ notice of the hearing. (Prior code § 6250.9)

5.24.130 Advertising on vehicles—Restrictions.
Advertising shall not be permitted upon any passenger stage vehicle operating under an arrangement whereby the city contributes a subsidy directly or indirectly to the operation of the vehicles; provided, however, that advertising encouraging public use of public transit systems, advertising of events endorsed, aided or sponsored by the city, or public service announcements, may be displayed at such times and in such format as may be approved by the city. (Prior code § 6250.12)

5.24.140 Charter buses permitted—Conditions.
Franchisee may operate separate charter buses provided the charter does not interfere with the operation and meets with all terms of this franchise. (Prior code § 6250.13)

Chapter 5.32 BINGO

Sections:
5.32.010     Title.
5.32.020     Definitions.
5.32.030     License—Required.
5.32.040     License—Eligible organizations designated.
5.32.050     License—Application—Form—Term.
5.32.060     Applicant qualifications.
5.32.070     License—Application—Contents.
5.32.080     License—Contents.
5.32.090     License—Application—Change of facts—Notification required.
5.32.100     License—Summary suspension pending opportunity for hearing—Continuation constitutes misdemeanor—Revocation.
5.32.110     Maximum amount of prize.
5.32.120     Keeping of profits or proceeds in separate fund or account.
5.32.130     Financial interest in licensee only.
5.32.140     Exclusive operation by licensee.
5.32.150     Games open to public.
5.32.160     Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
5.32.170     Games conducted only on licensee’s property.
5.32.180     Minor’s participation prohibited.
5.32.190     Hours of operation.
5.32.200     Participant’s presence required.
5.32.210     Receipt or payment of profits by person constitutes a misdemeanor under state law.
5.32.230     City may enjoin violation.

5.32.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “bingo game regulations of the city.” (Prior code § 4500)

5.32.020 Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter
A. “Bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conforms to numbers of symbols selected at random. Bingo includes cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. The winning cards shall not be known prior to the games by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo games. All such preprinted cards shall bear the legend, “For sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California Law and pursuant to local ordinance.”
B. “Eligible organizations” means those organizations described in Section 5.32.040. (Prior code § 4501)

5.32.030 License—Required.
It is unlawful for any person, individual, partnership, corporation, trust or community chest to hold, operate, maintain or conduct, or to knowingly allow to be held, operated, maintained or conducted upon his, her or its property, a bingo game or games, as defined in Section 5.32.020, in the city, unless it shall first obtain, in the manner and pursuant to the conditions prescribed in this chapter, a license from the director of finance to operate, maintain or conduct such bingo game or games. The license shall be issued only to eligible organizations described in Section 5.32.040. (Prior code § 4502)

5.32.040 License—Eligible organizations designated.
A. The following organizations are eligible to apply to the city for a license to conduct bingo games in the city under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal code of the state and the provisions of this chapter.
    1. Nonprofit organizations exempted from the payment of the ban and corporations tax by Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(3), 23701(g) and 23701(1) of the Revenue and Taxation Code:
    2. Mobile home park associations; and
    3. Senior citizens’ organizations.
B. None of the organizations mentioned in subsection A of this section shall be eligible to obtain a license to conduct bingo games unless the proceeds of such games are used only for charitable purposes. (Prior code § 4503)

5.32.050 License—Application—Form—Term.
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such license to conduct bingo games in the city shall file an application therefor in writing in the office of the finance director on a form to be provided by the finance director. The application shall be signed under penalty of perjury by at least two officers, including the presiding officer of the corporation or community chest and the trustee of any trust. The license issued shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance, subject to renewal and annual fee. (Prior code § 4504)

5.32.060 Applicant qualifications.
No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.32.040 and its application conforms to all applicable laws of this state and all provisions of this code. (Prior code § 4505)

5.32.070 License—Application—Contents.
The application for a license shall contain the following:
A. The name and address of the applicant organization;
B. A statement by the applicant that it is an eligible organization as described in Section 5.32.040;
C. A certificate or determination of exemption under Section 23701 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or a letter of good standing from the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board in Sacramento showing exemption under Section 23701. If the eligibility for a bingo license is not determined by Section 23701 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, then the applicant shall submit such documents as required by the director of finance;
D. The exact location and street address of the property to be used by the applicant for conducting the bingo game;
E. A statement by the applicant that the property described in subsection D of this section is (1) owned by the applicant, or is leased by the applicant, or the use of the property has been donated to the applicant, and (2) that the property is used by the applicant for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized;
F. The proposed days of the week and hours of the day during which bingo games will be conducted;
G. A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct the bingo games in strict compliance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city upon violation of any such provisions;
H. The annual license fee fixed by the council by resolution shall accompany the application;
I. A statement that the applicant agrees that the city, through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit the applicant’s records described in Section 5.32.130. (Ord. 928 § 1, 1982: prior code § 4506))

5.32.080 License—Contents.
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified, under the law, to conduct bingo games in the city, the director of finance shall issue a license to the applicant, which shall contain the following information:
A. The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued;
B. The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted;
C. The occupancy capacity of the room in which the bingo games are to be conducted;
D. The date of the expiration of such license;
E. Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4507)

5.32.090 License—Application—Change of facts—Notification required.
The applicant and/or licensee shall notify the director of finance in writing of any change in the facts set forth in the application and accompanying documents within five days after such change. (Prior code § 4508)

5.32.100 License—Summary suspension pending opportunity for hearing—Continuation constitutes misdemeanor—Revocation.
A. Whenever it appears to the director of finance that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, he or she may summarily suspend the license and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game. The suspension shall be effective upon service in the manner prescribed, upon the licensee of the suspension order described in subsection C of this section. The suspension order shall be served by posting a copy of the order at the address described in the license as the location designated for conducting the bingo games and by depositing a copy of the suspension order in the United States mail, directed to the licensee at the address given in the application.
B. Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension thereof, under subsection A of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1.12.020.
C. The order issued under subsection A of this section shall also notify the licensee of the grounds for the suspension and shall inform it that it shall have fourteen calendar days from the date of service of such order to request a hearing before the council to determine whether such license shall be revoked. Failure to request’ in writing, such hearing within the fourteen days, shall result in a revocation of the license. Upon the revocation, the licensee shall be notified of such fact by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to the licensee at the address given in the application.
D. Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked pursuant to subsections A, B and C of this section shall have the right, within fourteen calendar days after service of the suspension order or revocation order to file a written request for hearing to the council. Such request shall state the specific ground or grounds upon which the licensee contends the license should not be revoked. The council shall hold a hearing regarding the possible revocation of the bingo license within thirty calendar days after receipt by the city of the request for hearing, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall cause the appellant to be given at least ten calendar days written notice of such hearing. At the hearing, the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of the appeal. All such testimony, whether written or oral, shall be given under penalty of perjury. The determination of the council on the appeal shall be final. At the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall make findings supporting its decision whether the license should be revoked.
E. Any organization whose license is revoked pursuant to subsection C of this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the council, on appeal, determines to set aside the revocation. (Prior code § 4509)

5.32.110 Maximum amount of prize.
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. (Prior code § 4510)

5.32.120 Keeping of profits or proceeds in separate fund or account.
A. With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporations tax by Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes.
B. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this section, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Proceeds are the receipts of bingo games conducted by organizations not within subsection A of this section. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:
    1. Such proceeds may be used for prizes;
    2. A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or one thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment and security personnel;
    3. Such proceeds may be used to pay license fees;
    4. If the monthly gross receipts from bingo games conducted by an organization within this subsection exceed five thousand dollars, at least ten percent of the proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes not related to the conducting of bingo games; the balance shall be used for prizes, rental of property, overhead, administrative expenses and payment of license fees, subject to the Limitations specified in subsection A2 of this section.
C. The licensee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and expenses which are authorized by this chapter.
D. The city, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such record at any reasonable time and the licensee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such record available. (Ord. 1090 § 1, 1987: Ord. 928 § 2, 1982: prior code § 4511)

5.32.130 Financial interest in licensee only.
No individual corporation, partnership or other legal entity, except the licensee, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. (Prior code § 4512)

5.32.140 Exclusive operation by licensee.
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. (Prior code § 4513)

5.32.150 Games open to public.
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of the licensee organization. (Prior code § 4514)

5.32.160 Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the building official in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. The licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (Prior code § 4515)

5.32.170 Games conducted only on licensee’s property.
A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or on property the use of which is donated to the licensee, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased or used by the organization be owned or leased or used exclusively by such organization. The license issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office or as a place for performance of the purposes for which the license is organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this chapter, when it again owns or leases property, or uses property that is donated to the licensee, for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. (Ord. 928 § 3, 1982: prior code § 4516)

5.32.180 Minor’s participation prohibited.
No person under the age of twenty-one years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Prior code § 4517)

5.32.190 Hours of operation.
No licensee shall conduct any bingo game more than six hours out of any twenty-four-hour period. No bingo game shall be conducted before ten a.m., nor after two a.m. of any day. (Prior code § 4518)

5.32.200 Participant’s presence required.
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Prior code § 4519)

5.32.210 Receipt or payment of profits by person constitutes a misdemeanor under state law.
It shall be a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code of the state for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter; provided, security personnel employed by the licensee may be paid from the revenues of bingo games subject to the limitations specified in Section 5.32.120 of this chapter. A violation of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. (Ord. 1090 § 2, 1987: Ord. 928 § 4, 1982: prior code § 4520)

5.32.230 City may enjoin violation.
The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this chapter. (Prior code § 4521)

Chapter 5.36 SERVICE STATIONS

Sections:
5.36.010     Gasoline prices—Posting required.
5.36.020     Repealed.

5.36.010 Gasoline prices—Posting required.
A. Every person, firm, partnership, association, trustee or corporation which owns, operates, manages, leases or rents a gasoline service station or other facility offering for sale, selling or otherwise dispensing gasoline to the public from such a facility abutting or adjacent to a street or highway shall post or cause to be posted or displayed and maintained at the premises at least one sign which is clearly visible from all traffic lanes in each direction on such street or highway.
B. Each sign shall be readable from the traffic lanes and shall indicate thereof the actual price per gallon, including all taxes, at which each grade of gasoline is currently being offered for sale, sold or otherwise dispensed, if at all, at the facility on the date.
C. Each sign posted, displayed or maintained pursuant to the requirements of this section shall be consistent with the provisions of the city’s sign ordinance. (Ord. 966 § 1, 1983: prior code § 4288)

5.36.020 Alcoholic beverages—Sale prohibited—Exceptions.
Repealed by Ord. 1446. (Ord. 915 § 1, 1982: prior code § 4290)

Chapter 5.40 REPEALED*
*Chapter 5.40, “Adult Entertainment Establishments,” §§ 5.40.010 – 5.40.170, derived from Ord. 925 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code §§ 4800 – 4815, and Ord. 967 § 1, 1983: prior code § 4816 was repealed by Emergency Interim Ord. No. 1281 § 1, 1995. Subsequently, Ord. 1281 was repealed by Ord. 1286 and “Adult Entertainment Establishments” was set out in Chapter 17.95 of this code.

Chapter 5.44 MOBILE HOME PARK RENT STABILIZATION*

Sections:
5.44.010     Purpose and intent.
5.44.020     Definitions.
5.44.030     Exemptions.
5.44.040     Mobile home park owner exemptions under Section 5.44.030(F).
5.44.050     City council—Powers and duties.
5.44.060     Base space rent—Determination—Allowable increases without hearing.
5.44.070     Application for rent adjustment—Fee—Contents—Notice of request—Hearing.
5.44.080     Application for rent adjustment—Conduct of hearing.
5.44.090     Application for rent adjustment—valuation—Relevant factors.
5.44.100     Application for rent adjustment—Hearing—Determination.
5.44.110     Application for rent adjustment—Hearing—Appeal.
5.44.120     Rent increases not made in conformity with provisions—Tenant’s right to refuse to pay.
5.44.130     Actions brought to recover possession of mobile home space—Retaliatory eviction grounds for denial.
5.44.140     Owner to provide tenants with copy of this chapter.
5.44.141     Amendment.
5.44.142     Severability.
*Prior history: Ords. 923, 1020, 1077, 1079 and 1091; prior code §§ 4800 through 4802, 4804 through 4809 and 4811 through 4813.

5.44.010 Purpose and intent.
A. There is presently within the city and the surrounding areas a shortage of spaces for the location of mobile homes. Because of this shortage, there is a very low vacancy rate, and rents have been for several years, and are presently, rising rapidly and causing concern among a substantial number of San Luis Obispo residents.
B. Mobile home tenants, forced by the lack of suitable alternative housing, have had to pay the rent increases and thereby suffer a further reduction in their standard of living.
C. Because of the high cost and impracticability of moving mobile homes, the potential for damage resulting therefrom, the requirements relating to the installation of mobile homes, including permits, landscaping and site preparation, the lack of alternative homesites for mobile home residents, and the substantial investment of mobile home owners in such homes, this council finds and declares it necessary to protect the owners and occupiers of mobile homes from unreasonable rent increases, while at the same time recognizing the need of park owners to receive a suitable profit on their property with rental income sufficient to cover increases in costs of repair, maintenance, insurance, utilities, employee services, additional amenities, and other costs of operation, and to receive a fair return on their property.
D. This council finds that the present low vacancy rate and frequent increases are particularly hard upon and unfair to residents of mobile home parks within the city. Large numbers of these residents are senior citizens and others on fixed incomes who installed their mobile homes in the city when the present inflationary rent increases could not reasonably have been foreseen.
E. Tenants in mobile home parks desiring to sell their mobile homes may have difficulty finding buyers because, upon a change of ownership, the park owner is able to raise the rent without regard to the city’s mobile home rent stabilization ordinance.
F. This council finds that it is in the best interests of the citizens of the City of San Luis Obispo to assist those who are seeking to sell their mobile homes and those who are seeking to buy such homes to have the same fair rental protection as is afforded to those who remain in their mobile homes without sale. This council finds that the vacancy control provisions originally included in the mobile home rent stabilization ordinance when it was approved by the voters was an effective and beneficial provision for the people of San Luis Obispo living in mobile home parks, and should be reinstated. This council further finds that provisions allowing annual rent increases together with provisions allowing rent increases upon a showing of necessity protect the park owner’s right to a fair return on investment, thus eliminating the need for rent increases above ten percent upon change of ownership.
G. However, this council recognizes that a rent stabilization ordinance must be fair and equitable for all parties and must provide appropriate incentives for mobile home park operators to continue their parks profitably, as well as to attract additional investors for new parks. (Ord. 1226 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:
A. “Capital improvements” means those improvements, not previously located in the mobile home park, that materially add to the value of the property and appreciably prolong its useful life or adapt it to new uses, and which may be amortized over the useful life of the improvement in accordance with the Internal Revenue Code and regulations issued pursuant thereto; provided, that this definition shall be limited to capital improvements approved by more than fifty percent of the tenants in the affected park.
B. “Mobile home park” means an area of land which rents spaces for mobile home dwelling units.
C. “Mobile home park owner” or “owner” means the owner, lessor, operator or manager of a mobile home park.
D. “Mobile home tenant” or “tenant” means any person entitled to occupy a mobile home within a mobile home park pursuant to ownership of the mobile home or under a rental or lease agreement with the owner of the mobile home.
E. “Rehabilitation work” means any renovation or repair work completed on or in a mobile home park performed in order to comply with the direction or order of a public agency or public utility, or to maintain existing improvements in a safe and usable condition, or to repair damage resulting from fire, earthquake or other casualty.
F. “Space rent” means the consideration, including any security deposits, bonuses, benefits or gratuities, demanded or received in connection with the use and occupancy of a mobile home space in a mobile home park, or for housing services provided, but exclusive of any amount paid for the use of a mobile home dwelling unit.
G. “Change of ownership” means the sale, rental transfer, or exchange of a mobile home subject to the provisions of this chapter, excepting the transfer to tenant’s spouse by gift, bequest or devise.
H. “Hearing officer” means the duly appointed hearing officer selected from a panel of qualified hearing officers. A hearing officer shall have no financial interest in either a mobile home park or a mobile home nor have been a resident of nor reside in a mobile home park.
I. “Appellate panel” means a panel of three qualified hearing officers. A panelist shall have no financial interest in either a mobile home park or a mobile home nor have been a resident of nor reside in a mobile home park.
J. “CPI” means the Consumer Price Index (1967 = 100) All Items, All Urban Consumers, for the Los Angeles/Long Beach/Riverside standard metropolitan statistical area published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of Labor. If the CPI is not hereafter published, then any substitute index, or, if none, then the index most closely resembling the CPI shall become the new CPI.
K. “Qualified Hearing Officer.” The city administrative officer shall maintain a list of available qualified hearing officers. Qualified hearing officers shall be persons experienced in financial and accounting methods with knowledge of mediation process and rules of evidence. (Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.030 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following tenancies in mobile home parks:
A. Mobile home park spaces rented for nonresidential uses;
B. Mobile home parks managed or operated by the United States Government, the state of California, or the county of San Luis Obispo;
C. Tenancies which do not exceed an occupancy of twenty days and which do not contemplate an occupancy of more than twenty days;
D. Tenancies for which any federal or state law or regulation specifically prohibits rent regulation;
E. Tenancies covered by leases or contracts which provide for a tenancy of more than a year, but only for the duration of such lease or contract. Upon the expiration of or other termination of any such lease or contract, this chapter shall immediately be applicable to the tenancy. No rent increases other than that allowed under the provisions of the lease shall be allowed during the duration of such a lease or contract.
F. Spaces in a mobile home park which sells lots for factory-built or manufactured housing, or which provides condominium ownership of such lots, but only when the dwelling unit and the underlying interest in the space it is located upon are in the same ownership. (Ord. 1228 § 1, 1992: Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.040 Mobile home park owner exemptions under Section 5.44.030(F).
A. Any mobile home park owner claiming an exemption under Section 5.44.030(F) shall comply with the following requirements and procedures:
    1. Such mobile home park owner shall file with the city clerk a statement setting forth the basic facts upon which the claim for exemption rests, such as total number of spaces, number on long-term leases, identity of spaces on long term leases, expiration date for each long-term lease and any other information determined necessary by the city administrative officer to evaluate the claim.
    2. The statement shall include a listing, by space number and name, of each tenant not on a long-term lease and who would be affected by the claim of exemption. In addition, the owner shall provide proof of service that all tenants have been notified of the claim of exemption and of the fact that a tenant may file an objection within thirty days.
    3. The statements required to be filed above shall be confidential and not public records unless and until a hearing officer determines otherwise as necessary to conduct a hearing as set forth in subsections (D) or (F) of this section.
B. An objection to the claim of exemption may be filed with the city clerk within thirty days after the notice of claim has been served. The objection shall state the grounds of the objection. The only acceptable grounds for objection is that the owner in fact does not have two-thirds of the spaces in the park on long-term leases.
C. If an acceptable and timely objection is received the owner and the tenant(s) filing the objection shall meet and confer to negotiate in good faith and attempt to reach an agreement. If no agreement is reached within thirty days of the date of filing of the objection, the owner shall within ten days notify the city administrative officer that an agreement or resolution to the objection has not been reached. The city administrative officer shall proceed to select a hearing officer as set forth in Section 5.44.070(E).
D. The hearing officer shall set and conduct a hearing as set forth in subsections (E) and (G) of Section 5.44.070. The hearing officer shall determine whether the claim of exemption is valid, taking into account all relevant evidence, facts and circumstances necessary to come to a decision.
E. The hearing officer’s charges shall be paid by the city.
F. An appeal may be taken from a decision of the hearing officer as set forth in Section 5.44.110, including the obligation for the costs of the appellate panel as set forth in subsection (D) thereof. (Ord. 1146 § 1, 1989)

5.44.050 City council—Powers and duties.
Within the limitations provided by law and in addition to any other powers and duties the council has, the city council shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To meet from time to time as required to receive, investigate, hold hearings on, and pass upon the issues relating to mobile home park rent stabilization as set forth in this chapter;
B. To direct staff to make or conduct such independent hearings or investigations as may be appropriate to obtain such information as is necessary for the council to carry out its duties;
C. To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind administrative rules, as it deems appropriate to effectuate the purposes and policies of this chapter. (Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.060 Base space rent—Determination—Allowable increases without hearing.
A. The “base space rent” for purposes of this chapter shall be the monthly space rent charged as of March 15, 1982 plus any increases otherwise allowed, pursuant to this chapter. The maximum monthly space rent for any space under a lease, upon expiration of the lease, shall be no more than the rent charged in the last month of said lease. In parks where there is an exemption because 66.67 percent of the spaces are governed by a lease with an initial term of no less than one year, then the maximum monthly space rent shall be the space rent designated in leases for comparable spaces. A schedule of current rents in the park shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the park.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the maximum monthly space rent may be increased no more than once a year based on the percentage change in the CPI, or nine percent, whichever is less, calculated as follows:
    1. The maximum monthly space rent may be increased at a rate equal to one hundred percent of the CPI up to five percent and seventy-five percent of the CPI in excess of five percent calculated as follows:
        a. The change in space rent shall be calculated by dividing the ending CPI index by the beginning CPI index.
        b. If the resulting quotient is less than 1.05, then it shall be multiplied by the space rent. The resulting product shall be the new space rent.
        c. If the resulting quotient is greater than 1.05, then the difference between the resulting product and 1.05 shall be multiplied by seventy-five percent. The resulting product shall be multiplied by the space rent and that product shall be added to the sum derived from Section 5.44.060(B)(1)(b) above. The sum shall be the new space rent.
        d. The beginning CPI index shall be the index for the month used as the ending index for the last CPI adjustment.
        e. The ending CPI index shall be the index for the month twelve months after the beginning index.
    2. At least every two months the city administrative officer shall publish, by means of an advertisement or similar notice in the newspaper, the percentage change of the CPI allowed under this subsection B for the twelve-month period immediately preceding the month for which CPI information has been most recently published by the appropriate federal agency.
    3. It is the intention of this subsection B to allow for automatic increases in space rent based on changes in the cost of living as measured by the CPI. The limitations on such increases are intended to minimize the immediate impact drastic changes in the CPI might have on residents. The limitations are not intended to prevent ultimate adjustments to allow owners to receive a fair return on their property.
C. The maximum monthly space rent of a tenant may be increased by the owner when there is a change of ownership affecting a mobile home. However, such increase shall not exceed ten percent of the then existing space rent and may not be relied upon any more often than once in any thirty-six-month period as the basis to increase rent. In the event of change of ownership resulting from subletting of the mobile home space as may be allowed by state law, should such become state law, then upon any such subletting the space rent may be increased up to ten percent of the then existing space rent. In the event of change of ownership resulting from vacation of the space, then the space rent may be adjusted to fair market rent in the community. Nothing in this paragraph shall preclude an adjustment as may otherwise be provided for in this chapter.
D. No owner shall either (1) demand, accept or retain a rent of or from a tenant in excess of the maximum rent permitted by this chapter, or (2) effect a prohibited rent increase by a reduction of general park facilities and services. However, an owner may modify the nature of park services if reasonable allowance is provided to the tenant. For example, if the owner elects to submeter water so that tenants pay for water consumed by them, then tenants shall receive a reasonable reduction from their base space rent.
E. Space rent may be automatically adjusted based on increases or decreases in expenses for common area utilities, new government-mandated services, garbage service and cable television, where applicable, excluding capital improvements or ongoing maintenance costs. The space rent may be adjusted by dividing the total increase or decrease in any such expenses incurred during a twelve-month period by twelve, less the percentage in the CPI index for the twelve-month period. The quotient shall be allocated to the space rent for each space in the park based on the amount the space rent relates to total space rent for the park. Automatic adjustments to rent authorized by this paragraph E shall not be included in “base space rent” for the purpose of determining CPI increases pursuant to Section 5.44.060(B), but shall be considered as additional rent. Notice of the increase, or decrease, shall be in writing and shall be given as required by law no less than ninety days prior to any such increase or decrease being effective. The notice shall state the amount of the rent increase or decrease, the new space rent, the amount of the total increase or decrease in expenses and the nature of the expense. A copy of the notice shall be given to the city administrative officer. The city administrative officer shall have the authority to resolve questions regarding computation of the space rent increase or decrease based on this section. There shall only be one such increase or decrease in any twelve-month period. (Ord. 1279 § 1, 1995; Ord. 1268 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1226 § 2, 1992; Ord. 1173 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1167 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1146 § 2, 1989: Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.070 Application for rent adjustment—Fee—Contents—Notice of request—Hearing.
A. Except for automatic increases in base rent allowed under Section 5.44.060, an owner or tenant may file with the city clerk an application for a rent adjustment (“application”). The application shall state the amount of the adjustment for each space affected and the reasons for the adjustment.
    1. An application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee as may be established from time to time by the council.
    2. An application filed by an owner shall be accompanied by a statement that the tenant for each space affected has been served either personally or by mail with a notice describing the application and the change in rent or services.
    3. An application filed by a tenant shall be accompanied with a statement stating that the owner has been either personally or by mail served with the application and with a statement designating not more than three persons to act as representatives for the spaces affected and containing the names and addresses of tenants representing no less than fifty-one percent of the spaces affected by the application and supporting the application and established by a secret election.
    4. A statement shall accompany the application and shall notify the receiving party that he/she has thirty days to file an objection and if one is not filed within the time allowed, then the application will be automatically granted.
B. An objection to the application may be filed with the city clerk within thirty days after the notice of application has been served.
The objection shall identify the portions of the application objected to and shall state the grounds of the objection.
    1. A copy of an objection filed by an owner shall be mailed to each of the designated tenant representatives.
    2. A copy of an objection filed by a tenant shall be mailed to the owner. The tenant’s objection shall designate not more than three persons to act as representatives for the objecting tenants. The objection must be accompanied by a statement containing the names and addresses of tenants representing no less than fifty-one percent of the spaces affected by the owner’s application and verifying that they object to the application, established by secret ballot election.
C. If no objection is filed to an application within the time allowed, or if less than fifty-one percent of the tenants support an objection to an application, then the application will be automatically granted.
D. If an objection is filed within the time provided, then the owner and the tenant representatives shall meet and confer to negotiate in good faith an agreement regarding the application. Either party may request a mediator of their choice to assist in the negotiations, but this is not required. If an agreement is reached within sixty days, then the tenant representatives shall notify all tenants affected by the agreement. The tenants shall have ten days to approve or disapprove of the agreement. If tenants representing a majority of the spaces affected fail to disapprove of the agreement then the agreement shall be binding on the owner and all tenants affected. The city clerk shall be notified that an agreement has been reached. The statements made in negotiations and any agreements reached but not approved shall not be admissible in any subsequent hearings regarding the application.
E. If the owner and the tenant representatives fail to reach an agreement within the time provided or if a majority of the tenants disapprove of an agreement reached, then the applicant shall within ten days notify the city administrative officer that an agreement has not been reached. The city administrative officer shall obtain a list of no less than five qualified hearing officers. Owners and tenants may each delete one person from the list of qualified hearing officers seven days and one of the remaining persons shall be selected by the city administrative officer as the hearing officer. Appointment of the hearing officer shall be completed no later than twenty-one days after filing of the notice that an agreement has not been reached.
F. The hearing officer shall set a hearing on the application complying with the requirements of this section no less than ten days and no more than thirty days after his or her appointment. The hearing officer shall notify the owner and tenants, in writing, of the time, place and date set for the hearing. No hearing or any part thereof may be continued beyond thirty days after the initial hearing date, without the applicant’s consent. If the hearing officer approves an application as requested or as modified, the same shall take effect as noticed by the owner or as the hearing officer may otherwise direct. (Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.080 Application for rent adjustment—Conduct of hearing.
A. All review hearings conducted by the hearing officer shall be conducted in accordance with the Ralph M. Brown Act, at Section 54950 et seq. of the California Government Code and according to the rules of the American Arbitration Association.
B. All interested parties to a hearing may have assistance from an attorney or such other person as may be designated by the parties in presenting evidence or in setting forth by argument their position. All witnesses shall be sworn in and all testimony shall be under penalty of perjury.
C. In the event that either the owner or the tenant(s) should fail to appear at the hearing at the specified time and place, the hearing officer may hear and review such evidence as may be presented and make such decisions as if all parties had been present.
D. Owner and affected tenants may offer any testimony, documents, written declarations or other relevant evidence.
E. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply.
F. Minutes shall be taken at all review hearings. (Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.090 Application for rent adjustment—valuation—Relevant factors.
In evaluating the application the council may consider, along with all other factors it considers relevant, changes in costs to the owner attributable to increases or decreases in master land and/or facilities lease rent, utility rates, property taxes, insurance, advertising, variable mortgage interest rates, employee costs, normal repair and maintenance, and other considerations, including but not limited to, rehabilitation work, capital improvements, upgrading and addition of amenities or services, net operating income, and the level of rent necessary to permit a just and reasonable return on the owner’s property.
A. In applying the foregoing factors, the hearing officer shall utilize the maintenance of net operating income (MNOI) formula. Under the MNOI allowable gross rents are calculated as follows: all operating expenses for the twelve-month period ending December 31, 1981 are subtracted from all operating expenses for the twelve-month period immediately preceding the date of the application for which expense data is available. In the event operating expenses are not available for the period ending December 31, 1981, then expenses for a twelve-month period reasonably close to December 31, 1981 may be substituted. The difference shall be added to gross annual rent based on rental rates in effect on March 15, 1982. The sum shall be the allowable gross annual space rent. The allowable gross space rent shall be fairly apportioned between all spaces in the park. The space rent determined under the MNOI formula shall be adjusted as follows:
    1. There shall be an adjustment to allow for inflation calculated as follows: the net operating income (NOI) for the base period shall be calculated by subtracting the park’s operating expenses for the twelve-month period ending December 31, 1982, from the park’s annual gross space rent based on the space rent in effect on March 15, 1982. The CPI index for the month most recently available prior to filing the application shall be divided by the CPI index for March, 1982. The resulting quotient shall be multiplied by the base period NOI. This shall be the adjusted NOI. The operating expenses for the twelve-month period immediately preceding the date of the application for which information is available shall be added to the adjusted NOI. The sum shall be the inflation-adjusted gross space rent. The allowable space rent shall be the greater of the space rent calculated using the MNOI formula and the space rent adjusted for inflation.
    2. In calculating MNOI there shall be an adjustment to the gross space rent in effect on March 15, 1982, if the hearing officer determines that the gross space rent in effect on that date did not allow the owner to receive a just and reasonable return on his or her property.
    3. If the hearing officer concludes that the MNOI formula, and the adjustments thereto, does not provide a just and reasonable return to the owner, then the hearing officer may apply any reasonable formula, including a return on investment, a return on fair market value, or return on equity, to determine a space rent which will allow the owner to receive a fair and reasonable return on his or her property.
B. The hearing officer shall not consider income arising from spaces leased in the park pursuant to Section 5.44.030(E) of this chapter. Likewise, the hearing officer shall not consider a pro rata portion of the expenses of park operation attributable to the leased spaces. (Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.100 Application for rent adjustment—Hearing—Determination.
A. The hearing officer shall make a final decision no later than twenty days after the conclusion of the hearing. The hearing officer’s decision shall be based on the preponderance of the evidence submitted at the hearing. The decision shall be based on findings. All parties to the hearing shall be advised by mail of the hearing officer’s decision and findings.
B. Pursuant to his or her findings, the hearing officer may:
    1. Permit the requested adjustment to become effective, in whole or in part; or
    2. Deny the requested adjustment; or
    3. Permit or deny, in whole or in part, requested reductions of, or charges for, facilities or services.
C. Any decision of the hearing officer shall be final unless, within fifteen days after mailing of the decision and findings, the owner or any affected tenant appeals the decision.
D. The hearing officer’s charges shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.110 Application for rent adjustment—Hearing—Appeal.
A. Any appeal from a decision of the hearing officer shall be filed with the city clerk. The appellant shall also mail a copy of the appeal to the responding party. The appeal shall state the grounds on which it is based. An appeal filed by a tenant shall be accompanied by a statement continuing the names and addresses of the tenants supporting the appeal. The appeal must be supported by at least fifty-one percent of the tenants affected by the appeal.
B. Upon filing of a valid appeal, the city administrative officer shall obtain a list of no less than seven qualified hearing officers. The hearing officer who previously acted shall not qualify. Owners and tenant representatives may each delete one person from the list of qualified hearing officers within seven days, and three of the remaining persons shall be selected by the city administrative officer as the appellate panel. Appointment of the appellate panel shall be completed no later than twenty-one days after filing the appeal.
C. At the time set for consideration of the appeal, the appellate panel shall review and consider the record of the hearing officer’s hearing as well as the decision and finding of the hearing Officer. After review and consideration, the appellate panel may either (1) determine that a further hearing shall be held, or (2) ratify and adopt the decision and findings of the hearing officer. If a further hearing is conducted, the appellate panel may, upon conclusion of that hearing and in no event more than thirty days thereafter, modify or reverse the decision of the hearing officer, only if the appellate panel finds that there has been an abuse of discretion or that there is no substantial evidence to support the hearing officer’s decision. The appellate panel’s decision shall be final and no appeal may be taken to the council.
D. If the party filing the appeal is unsuccessful, then that party shall pay the appellate panel’s charges. If the responding party is unsuccessful, then both parties and the city shall share equally in payment of the appellate panel’s charges. (Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.120 Rent increases not made in conformity with provisions—Tenant’s right to refuse to pay.
A tenant may refuse to pay any increase in rent not made in conformity with this chapter. Such refusal to pay shall be a defense in any action brought to recover possession of a mobile home space or to collect the rent increase. (Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.130 Actions brought to recover possession of mobile home space—Retaliatory eviction grounds for denial.
Notwithstanding Section 5.44.120, in any action brought to recover possession of a mobile home space, the court may consider as grounds for denial any violation of any provision of this chapter. Further, the determination that the action was brought in retaliation for the exercise of any rights conferred by this chapter shall be grounds for denial. (Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.140 Owner to provide tenants with copy of this chapter.
Any tenant offered a lease or contract which if accepted and fully executed would be exempt from the provisions of this chapter (Section 5.44.030(E)) shall at the time of the offer also be provided with a copy of this chapter. (Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.141 Amendment.
The provisions of this chapter may be amended by a majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

5.44.142 Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is found to be invalid, then that shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 1117 (part), 1988)

Chapter 5.45 MOBILE HOME PARK CONVERSION

Sections:
5.45.010     Authority and short title.
5.45.020     Definitions.
5.45.030     Conversion impact report requirement.
5.45.040     Relocation specialist.
5.45.050     Pre-conversion questionnaire.
5.45.060     Conversion impact report content.
5.45.070     Public hearing regarding conversion impact report.
5.45.080     Decision regarding conversion impact report.
5.45.090     Application for exemption from relocation assistance obligations.
5.45.100     Certificate of acceptance.
5.45.110     Performance of mitigation measures.
5.45.120     Modification of conversion impact report.
5.45.130     Expiration of conversion impact report.
5.45.140     Nullification of impact report.
5.45.150     Right of first refusal.
5.45.160     Appeal.
5.45.170     Processing fees.
5.45.180     Building permits.
5.45.190     Exemption.

5.45.010 Authority and short title.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city’s police power and the authority of California Government Code Sections 65863.7, 65863.8 and 66427.4; and pursuant to the city’s adopted general plan. Housing Element Policy 3.5.2 discourages the removal of affordable housing unless it achieves general plan objectives and provides for replacement housing that is affordable or corrects unsafe or blighted conditions. In addition, Housing Element Policy 3.6.2 indicates the city will require a developer to assist displaced residents to find affordable housing when affordable housing is removed and Housing Element Policy 3.15.2 encourages the preservation of manufactured housing parks and authorizes city support of changes in tenure only if changes provide specified benefits to park residents. This chapter, which shall be known and may be cited as the “San Luis Obispo Mobile Home Park Conversion Ordinance,” implements general plan policies related to affordable housing and mobile home parks specifically. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following definitions shall apply:
A. “Absentee owner” means a person who owns a mobile home in a mobile home park and does not reside at such mobile home, but does not include a homeowner who purchased the home, prior to receiving any notification of the filing of a development application or request for approval of a closure or conversion, for the purpose of providing housing for an immediate family member who actually occupies the home as that family member’s primary residence. This definition also shall not include those individuals subletting their mobile homes pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.23.5.
B. “Affected mobile home owners and residents” means absentee owners, resident owners and resident tenants whose mobile homes will be displaced by the closure or conversion of a mobile home park.
C. “Applicant” means a mobile home park owner or authorized representative who proposes to perform a mobile home park conversion.
D. “Certificate of acceptance” means a written declaration expressing an applicant’s acceptance of the conditions imposed by the city in connection with approval of a conversion impact report.
E. “Commission” means the planning commission of the city.
F. “Comparable housing” means housing within a twenty-mile radius of the mobile home park to be converted that is equivalent (or better) in terms of amenities, condition, location, price and size (floor area and number of bedrooms) to the mobile home to which comparison is being made.
G. “Comparable mobile home park” means a mobile home park within a twenty-mile radius of the park to be converted that is equivalent (or better) in terms of amenities, condition, location and rental price to the mobile home park to which comparison is being made.
H. “Conversion impact report” means a report, meeting the requirements of this chapter, describing (1) the impacts of a mobile home park conversion on affected mobile home owners and residents; and (2) the measures that will be taken to mitigate adverse impacts of such conversion on affected mobile home owners and residents.
I. “Director” means the community development director of the city.
J. “Immediate family member” means the spouse, registered domestic partner, parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren or siblings, by blood, marriage, domestic partnership or adoption, of a mobile home owner, or any other person claimed as a dependent of the mobile home owner for federal income tax purposes.
K. “Mobile home” means a “mobilehome” as such term is defined in the Mobilehome Residency Law.
L. “Mobile home improvements” means carports, earthquake bracing, landscaping, new roofs, patios, porches and similar amenities and major repairs.
M. “Mobile home park” means a “mobilehome park” as such term is defined in the Mobilehome Residency Law.
N. “Mobile home park conversion” means (1) the conversion of a mobile home park or any part thereof to another use; (2) the closure of a mobile home park or any part thereof; and (3) the cessation of use of land as a mobile home park.
O. “Mobilehome Residency Law” means California Civil Code Section 798 et seq. as such statute exists at the time of enactment of this chapter or is subsequently amended.
P. “Resident owner” means a person who owns a mobile home in a mobile home park and resides at such mobile home as a principal residence or maintains such mobile home as the primary residence for an immediate family member who occupied the mobile home as a primary residence prior to receiving any notification of the filing of a development application or request for approval of a closure or conversion. This definition also shall include persons subletting their mobile homes pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.23.5.
Q. “Resident tenant” means a person who rents or leases a mobile home in a mobile home park and resides at such mobile home as the person’s primary residence. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.030 Conversion impact report requirement.
A. Whenever an applicant submits any development or permit application to the city the approval of which would result in a mobile home park conversion, as defined herein, the city shall notify the applicant of the requirements of this chapter.
B. Unless a conversion impact report has been approved by the city and a certificate of acceptance has been recorded, no mobile home park owner or authorized representative shall do any of the following:
    1. Perform a mobile home park conversion.
    2. Display a sign announcing that the mobile home park is closing, may be closing or has been closed.
    3. Display a sign announcing a new use for the mobile home park property.
    4. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to preclude any notification to residents as may be required by state law, nor shall this section preclude notification to residents that information is being requested in anticipation of the filing of a development application or request for approval of a closure or conversion. Notification to prospective residents regarding the existence or status of any application or approval process affecting the mobile home park shall not be considered a violation of this section. All notices required by this chapter shall be delivered by certified mail to the occupant and, where different, the registered owner of each unit within the mobile home park. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.040 Relocation specialist.
A. The director shall require an applicant to hire a relocation specialist to assist in: providing notification to mobile home owners and residents that a closure or conversion of the mobile home park is being requested through the city; developing the conversion impact report, including relocation proposals for affected mobile home owners and residents; assisting affected residents and owners to identify and secure alternate housing; and assisting residents and owners in the moving process.
B. The applicant shall choose the relocation specialist with the director’s approval. The director’s approval shall be contingent upon verification of professional qualifications demonstrating: familiarity with the region’s housing market; competency in assisting residents to evaluate, select and secure placement in replacement housing; ability to facilitate the moving of residents’ personal property, residential unit, and/or accessories, as appropriate; knowledge of qualifications for and availability of various housing types and programs; ability to assist residents in applying for available housing programs or assistance.
C. The applicant shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by the relocation specialist. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.050 Pre-conversion questionnaire.
A. Prior to filing a conversion impact report for city approval, the relocation specialist shall distribute a pre-conversion questionnaire to affected mobile home owners and residents. The affected mobile home owners and residents shall have no less than thirty days from the date of certified mailing to complete the pre-conversion questionnaire.
B. The director shall provide a standard pre-conversion questionnaire for use by the relocation specialist. At a minimum, the pre-conversion questionnaire shall include questions requesting the affected mobile home owners and residents to provide the following information:
    1. Whether the individual(s) occupying the unit in the mobile home park space owns, or is the immediate family member of the owner, or rents the mobile home unit and whether the individual owns other mobile home units within the park or any other mobile home park within the city.
    2. Length of occupancy in the mobile home unit in the mobile home park.
    3. For home owners, the purchase date and purchase price for each mobile home owned and, if non-owner occupied units are rented out, the amount of monthly rental payments received by the owner.
    4. The amount and terms of any outstanding mortgage obligation for the mobile home, including the name and mailing address of the lender.
    5. Manufacture date, size, and length of occupancy in the mobile home as located in the subject mobile home park.
    6. Any mobile home improvements that have been paid for by the mobile home owner or tenant and the costs of such improvements.
    7. Any circumstances, including but not limited to job location or disability, which restrict potential relocation areas.
    8. Any available, alternate housing opportunities known to the owner or resident that would be acceptable as a relocation option to the individual and approximate costs to accomplish a relocation to the alternate housing.
    9. Whether the individual or individuals residing in the unit qualify as a lower, very low or extremely low income household under applicable state law (California Health and Safety Code, Division 31, Part 1, Chapter 2).
    10. Any other information the director may deem necessary to facilitate the planning commission’s consideration of appropriate conditions to mitigate the adverse impacts of a park closure or conversion on residents and owners.
C. Prior to or concurrent with the distribution of the pre-conversion questionnaire, the applicant shall provide notice to affected owners and residents of the intention to seek city approval for a closure or conversion of the mobile home park. The notice shall, at a minimum, include an explanation, in general terms, of the nature and timeframes of the proposed closure or conversion, shall advise owners and residents that information will be sought from them to assist in determining appropriate relocation assistance, and shall include a copy of the tenants’ rights under the Mobilehome Residency Law (California Civil Code, Section 789 et seq.), or as those provisions may be amended. The notice shall also include the name, qualifications and contact information for the relocation specialist.
D. Completed pre-conversion questionnaires shall be submitted to the relocation specialist, shall be treated as confidential, and disclosure of information provided therein shall be limited to those individuals and uses necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter, including the applicant, as deemed appropriate by the relocation specialist.
E. Neither the completed pre-conversion questionnaire form nor any personal information provided in response thereto shall be considered public information and the city shall not publicly disclose any such information, except as necessary to facilitate the evaluation of the adequacy of the report herein or as may be required by law.
F. Any mobile home resident or owner may decline to provide any information requested, but the planning commission’s determination of the reasonableness of the level of relocation assistance proposed by the applicant will be based on information provided in response to the pre-conversion questionnaire, and the level of assistance deemed reasonable in an individual case may be limited, or the relocation assistance requirement may be eliminated, based on the owner’s or resident’s verified refusal to provide information necessary to make such a determination. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.060 Conversion impact report content.
A. Each conversion impact report submitted for city approval shall contain the following, or shall indicate that such information could not be obtained after documented reasonable efforts by the relocation specialist and/or the applicant:
    1. Legal description of the mobile home park.
    2. Description of any use proposed to replace the mobile home park.
    3. Any offers to sell or purchase the mobile home park, including offer dates and whether the proposed purchaser contemplated continuation of the mobile home park use, if known.
    4. Timetable for the proposed mobile home park conversion.
    5. Number of spaces in the mobile home park and the current rental rate for each space and, if the space is occupied by a park-owned rental unit, the combined rental rate for the space and unit.
    6. Name, mailing address, age and disability status of each resident owner and resident tenant having a mobile home in the mobile home park and whether the mobile home constitutes such person’s primary place of residence.
    7. Name and mailing address of each absentee owner having a mobile home in the mobile home park.
    8. Name and mailing address of each lender having an interest in a mobile home in the mobile home park.
    9. Manufacture date, size, length of occupancy and the appraised on-site fair market value of each mobile home as located in the subject mobile home park. “Fair market value” shall be determined assuming the continuation of the mobile home park in a safe, sanitary and well-maintained condition. The appraisal shall be performed by a professional appraiser selected by the director. The applicant shall pay all costs and expenses associated with the appraisal, including any appraisal fees. The applicant shall not be required to provide appraisal information for park-owned units.
    10. Estimates from two moving companies, chosen by the applicant with the director’s approval, as to the cost of moving mobile homes, relocatable mobile home improvements, and personal property. The estimates shall include tear-down and set-up costs to establish the home in the new location in substantially the same condition as prior to relocation. “Set-up costs” include the cost of connecting utilities at the new location and the cost of any upgrades required to comply with applicable laws or park rules. No estimate of mobile home relocation and associated set-up and tear-down costs shall be required for any park-owned units.
    11. Estimates from two temporary lodging facilities, chosen by the applicant with the director’s approval, as to the cost of providing temporary lodging for resident owners and resident tenants who are unable to complete relocation within one day. Such estimates shall include the anticipated duration of the stay in the temporary lodging facility.
    12. Itemization of available mobile home spaces within comparable mobile home parks within a twenty-mile radius within the county. Such itemization shall indicate the rental rate for each space and whether the owner of that mobile home park has agreed in writing to accept affected mobile home owners and residents that are displaced by the mobile home park conversion.
    13. Itemization of available comparable housing within a twenty-mile radius within the county. Such itemization shall indicate the purchase price for each equivalent (or better) mobile home or condominium, as well as the rental rate for each equivalent (or better) mobile home, condominium or apartment.
    14. Completed pre-conversion questionnaires.
    15. Proposed measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the mobile home park conversion on affected mobile home owners and residents.
    16. A copy of any agreement reached with any resident or owner relating to the purchase or relocation of the resident/owner or the provision of relocation assistance. The director may waive the requirement to include any or all of the information required by this section where an affected resident/owner and the applicant have reached a final, mutually acceptable agreement as to the relocation assistance to be provided.
B. The director may require an applicant to include information in the conversion impact report in addition to that specified in subsection A of this section.
C. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to preclude city approval of proposed impact mitigation measures that include the relocation of a resident or owner to a geographic area beyond the twenty-mile radius specified herein where the terms of such relocation are the product of a mutually acceptable agreement between the applicant and an individual owner or resident. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.070 Public hearing regarding conversion impact report.
A. No less than fifteen days prior to the first public hearing regarding the adequacy of the conversion impact report, the applicant shall conduct an informational meeting for the residents of the mobile home park. The meeting shall be conducted on the premises of the park, or other noticed location approved by the director, and the relocation specialist and a city representative shall be present. A copy of the conversion impact report shall be provided to each resident and owner prior to the meeting. The meeting shall address the proposed conversion or closure, the report contents and approval process, the project application process, if a replacement project is proposed, and proposed relocation assistance for displaced mobile home owners and residents. The applicant shall make the relocation specialist available for individual meetings with residents and owners to discuss concerns, relocation limitations, or needs unique to an individual resident or owner.
B. Upon the filing of a complete conversion impact report for city review, the director shall schedule a public hearing before the commission. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with subsection C of this section.
C. At least thirty days prior to the hearing date, the director shall perform the following actions:
    1. Mail a notice of the public hearing and a copy of the conversion impact report to affected mobile home owners and residents, to the owners of properties within a three-hundred-foot radius of the applicant’s property, and to each lender having an interest in a mobile home in the mobile home park. The notice shall contain a general explanation of the matters to be considered by the commission. The copy of the conversion impact report shall not include the completed pre-conversion questionnaires, which will be considered private information of each responding individual and not subject to public disclosure, but shall include the appraisal of the mobile home owned or resided in by that particular notice recipient.
    2. Inform the applicant in writing of the provisions of Civil Code Section 798.56 regarding the applicant’s duty to notify affected mobile home owners and residents of the proposed conversion. Such writing shall specify the manner in which the applicant shall verify that affected mobile home owners and residents have been notified of the proposed conversion.
    3. Notify the applicant that s/he shall be required to schedule an informational meeting in accordance with subsection A of this section.
D. The commission shall conduct a public hearing on the conversion impact report at the time and place set forth in the hearing notice. Such hearing shall not be held before the applicant has satisfactorily verified that affected mobile home owners and residents have been notified of the proposed conversion pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.56.
E. The applicant shall pay all costs associated with providing notice, including any publishing and postage expenses. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.080 Decision regarding conversion impact report.
A. After the conclusion of the public hearing, the commission shall adopt a resolution approving, conditionally approving or rejecting a proposed conversion impact report. The commission shall approve or conditionally approve a conversion impact report if it finds that the conversion impact report contains, or has been conditioned to contain, reasonable measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the mobile home park conversion on affected mobile home owners and residents. In considering the reasonableness of any measure to be required hereunder, the commission shall take into account whether a resident is a homeowner or a tenant in the mobile home unit, whether the mobile home is the resident’s primary residence, and the nature (i.e., monthly or longer term lease) and duration of the tenancy in the park.
B. Subject to subsection C of this section, the commission may impose conditions in connection with its approval of a conversion impact report. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, lump sum payments to affected mobile home owners and residents to mitigate the following expenses, as appropriate to each particular absentee owner, resident owner and resident tenant having a mobile home in the mobile home park, as specified below:
    1. The expense of relocating the mobile home to a comparable mobile home park. Assistance with these expenses shall be payable only to a resident or absentee owner of a mobile home in the mobile home park. The amount of such payment shall be based upon consideration of moving, tear-down and set-up costs. “Moving costs” include the cost of moving the mobile home and the cost of moving associated relocatable mobile home improvements, including accessory structures such as awnings, porches and carports or garages. “Set-up costs” include the cost of connecting utilities at the replacement mobile home park and the cost of any upgrades required to comply with applicable laws or park rules to establish the home in the new location in substantially the same condition as prior to relocation.
    2. The expense of forfeiting the mobile home. Assistance with these expenses shall be payable only to a resident owner of a mobile home in a mobile home park. The amount of such payment shall be based upon consideration of: (a) the on-site fair market value of the mobile home and associated mobile home improvements in its location within the existing mobile home park; (b) any outstanding mortgage obligation of the owner; (c) the cost of purchasing an equivalent mobile home in a comparable mobile home park together with the expense of assuming tenancy in the comparable park, as specified in subsection (B)(3) of this section; provided, that an owner shall not be entitled to payment for an amount based on more than one of the foregoing criteria. “Fair market value” shall be determined assuming the continuation of the mobile home park in a safe, sanitary and well-maintained condition.
    3. The expense of assuming tenancy in a comparable mobile home park. Assistance with these expenses shall be available to resident owners and absentee owners, who are relocating their homes, and resident tenants. The amount of such payment shall be based upon consideration of: (a) moving costs; (b) first month’s rent, last month’s rent and security deposit at the replacement mobile home park; (c) for low and extremely low income residents, the differential between rental rates at the mobile home park being converted and the replacement mobile home park during the first year of relocation.
    4. The expense of assuming tenancy in comparable housing. Assistance with these expenses shall be available to resident tenants. The amount of such payment shall be based upon consideration of: (a) moving costs; (b) first month’s rent, last month’s rent, and security deposit at the replacement housing; and (c) for lower, very low, and extremely low income residents, the differential between the rental rate at the mobile home park being converted and the replacement housing during the first year of relocation.
    5. The expense of purchasing comparable housing. Assistance with these expenses shall be payable only to a resident owner of a mobile home in a mobile home park as an alternative to the assistance available pursuant to subsection (B)(2) of this section. The amount of such payment shall be based upon consideration of: (a) moving costs; (b) down payment for the replacement housing; and (c) for lower, very low and extremely low income residents, the differential between the space rental rate at the mobile home park being converted and the mortgage payment for the replacement housing during the first year of relocation.
C. The conditions imposed in connection with approval of a conversion impact report shall not exceed the reasonable costs of relocation. Conditions shall only be imposed in order to ensure that the applicant adequately mitigates adverse impacts of the mobile home park conversion on affected mobile home owners and residents.
In imposing conditions, the city shall interpret and apply this chapter in a manner consistent with applicable law and shall not require cumulative forms of relocation assistance from the above options that result in costs to the applicant in excess of the reasonable costs of relocation in light of the circumstances of each affected resident or owner. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.090 Application for exemption from relocation assistance obligations.
A. Any applicant for change of use of a mobile home park may, simultaneous with such application, file an application for total or partial exemption from the obligation to provide relocation assistance.
B. If such application is filed, notice of such application, with the information contained therein, and distribution thereof to the owners and residents of the mobile home park, shall be provided with the application for change of use.
C. Any such application shall establish that it is made on either or both of the following bases:
    1. That provision for relocation assistance would eliminate substantially all reasonable use or economic value of the property. Such basis may only be established if it is demonstrated that the imposition of such obligations would eliminate the reasonable use or economic value of the property for alternate uses, and that continued use of the property as a mobile home park would eliminate substantially all reasonable use or economic value of the property for reasons not caused or contributed to by the park owner or applicant.
    2. That a court of competent jurisdiction has determined in connection with a proceeding in bankruptcy that the closure or cessation of use of said property as a mobile home park is necessary, and that such court has taken further action which would prohibit or preclude payment of relocation assistance benefits, in whole or in part.
D. Any such application made pursuant to subsection (C)(1) of this section shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
    1. Statements of profit and loss from the operations of the mobile home park for the most recent five-year period of the date of the application or request, certified by a certified public accountant. All such statements shall be maintained in confidence as permitted by the California Public Records Act.
    2. A statement to support the applicant’s assertion that continued use of the property as a mobile home park necessitates repairs or improvements or both, that are not the result of the park owner or applicant’s negligent failure to properly maintain the property, and that the costs thereof make continuation of the park economically infeasible. This statement must be made under penalty of perjury by a general contractor licensed as such pursuant to the laws of the state of California to certify that such contractor has thoroughly inspected the entire mobile home park; that such contractor has determined that certain repairs and improvements must be made to the park to maintain the park in decent, safe and sanitary condition, and that those certain repairs are not the result of the park owner or applicant’s negligent failure to properly maintain said property; the minimum period of time in which such improvements or repairs must be made; and itemized statement of such improvements and repairs; and the estimated cost thereof of repairs and improvements, if any, due to deferred maintenance separately identified. The applicant shall also submit a statement verified by a certified public accountant as to the necessary increase in rental rates of mobile home spaces within the park within the next five years necessary to pay for such repairs or improvements that are not the result of the park owner or applicant’s negligent failure to properly maintain said property. If the director requires an analysis of the information submitted by the general contractor, the director may procure services of another such licensed general contractor to provide such written analysis, and the cost thereof shall be billed to and payment therefor shall be required from the applicant.
    3. The estimated total cost of relocation assistance which would otherwise be required to be provided pursuant to this chapter, which shall be based upon documented surveys, included with the application, of the available mobile home spaces within twenty miles of the mobile home park, residents of the park who are willing to relocate and those who would elect to sell their mobile homes, and the value of the mobile homes in the park.
    4. An estimate of the value of the mobile home park by a professional appraiser, approved by the director, if the park were permitted to be developed for the change of use proposed in the application for redevelopment of the park, and as all other uses permitted by the zoning designation of the property, and an estimate of the value of such park, including current sale value of the mobile home park, by such appraiser if use of the property as a mobile home park is continued.
    5. The purchase price paid by the applicant to acquire the mobile home park.
    6. Such other information which the applicant believes to be pertinent, or which may be required by the director.
E. Any such application filed pursuant to subsection (C)(2) of this section shall be accompanied by adequate documentation as to the title, case number, and court in which the bankruptcy proceeding was held, and copies of all pertinent judgments, orders, and decrees of such court. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.100 Certificate of acceptance.
Upon city approval of a conversion impact report, the applicant shall record a certificate of acceptance on the title of the mobile home park property. City approval of a conversion impact report shall not be effective until proof of recordation of a certificate of acceptance has been delivered to the director. The director shall provide the certificate of acceptance form for use by the applicant. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.110 Performance of mitigation measures.
The applicant shall fully perform the mitigation measures set forth in, and the conditions imposed in connection with, the approved conversion impact report and such performance shall also be a condition of approval of any concurrent or subsequent development application proposing an alternate or replacement use of the mobile home park property. No affected mobile home owner or resident shall be required to vacate a mobile home space unless the applicant has performed all mitigation measures and conditions of approval applicable to such owner or resident and such performance has been verified by the director. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.120 Modification of conversion impact report.
A. The commission may, upon request of applicant and after holding a public hearing, modify the provisions of an approved conversion impact report. A modification may be approved where the commission finds that there has been a change in circumstances, or there is new information that could not have reasonably been known or considered at the time of the original hearing on approval of the conversion impact report.
B. The commission may impose additional conditions as deemed necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts resulting from a modification of an approved conversion impact report.
C. Upon city approval of modification of an approved conversion impact report with additional conditions, the applicant shall record a certificate of acceptance on the title of the mobile home park property. City approval of modification of an approved conversion impact report shall not be effective until proof of recordation of a certificate of acceptance has been delivered to the director. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.130 Expiration of conversion impact report.
A. An approved conversion impact report shall expire (1) the thirtieth day after adoption of the resolution of approval, unless proof of recordation of a certificate of acceptance is delivered to the director prior to such date; or (2) one year after delivery to the director of proof of recordation of a certification of acceptance, unless an extension is granted prior to such date pursuant to this section.
B. The commission may, upon request of the applicant and after holding a public hearing, extend the term of an approved conversion impact report. An extension may be granted where the commission finds that expiration of the conversion impact report would constitute an undue economic hardship to the applicant.
C. The commission may impose additional conditions as deemed necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts resulting from an extension. The commission may grant multiple extensions of an approved conversion impact report, not to extend beyond the date of expiration of any other city discretionary approval associated with the mobile home park conversion, but no single extension shall have a duration in excess of one year.
D. Upon city approval of an extension of an approved conversion impact report with additional conditions, the applicant shall record a certificate of acceptance on the title of the mobile home park property. City approval of an extension of an approved conversion impact report shall not be effective until proof of recordation of a certificate of acceptance has been delivered to the director. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.140 Nullification of impact report.
A. The commission may, upon request of the director and after holding a public hearing, order an approved conversion impact report null and void. No nullification shall be ordered unless the commission makes either of the following findings:
    1. Approval of the conversion impact report was obtained fraudulently.
    2. The applicant has failed to comply with the mitigation measures set forth in, or the conditions imposed in connection with, the approved conversion impact report.
B. If a conversion impact report is nullified, then the applicant shall not be entitled to perform the mobile home park conversion until a new conversion impact report is approved in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.150 Right of first refusal.
An applicant shall afford affected mobile home owners and residents a right of first refusal to purchase, lease or rent housing that is constructed for sale, lease or rental on the site of the mobile home park proposed to be converted. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.160 Appeal.
Any commission decision pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.170 Processing fees.
Each applicant seeking city approval, modification or extension of a conversion impact report shall pay a nonrefundable application deposit in an amount established by city council resolution. In addition, the applicant shall reimburse the city for all costs, including staff time and attorney’s fees, incurred in processing and reviewing the applicant’s conversion impact report. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.180 Building permits.
No building permit shall be issued for conversion of a mobile home park property until the applicant has filed with the director a written statement confirming full performance of the mitigation measures set forth in, and the conditions imposed in connection with, the approved conversion impact report. Such statement shall specify in itemized form the name of each affected mobile home owner and resident and the date and type of relocation assistance provided to such person. The statement shall be executed under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

5.45.190 Exemption.
This chapter shall not apply to any mobile home park conversion resulting from an adjudication of bankruptcy, wherein such action precludes the provision of relocation assistance. (Ord. 1533 § 1 (part), 2009)

Chapter 5.48 SALES ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS

Sections:
5.48.010     Purpose of provisions.
5.48.020     Permit—Required.
5.48.030     Permit—Issuance—Conditions and limitations.
5.48.040     Group permits—Conditions and limitations.
5.48.050     Permit—Hold harmless clause required.
5.48.060     Liability insurance.
5.48.070     Permit—Revocation—Appeal.

5.48.010 Purpose of provisions.
The council finds that the continued unrestricted use of the public sidewalks by merchants for the display of merchandise creates potential health and safety hazards. Council further finds the unrestricted display of merchandise on public sidewalks may have an adverse impact on the aesthetics of the city. It is the intent of the council to regulate sales on streets and sidewalks in order to insure the safe and unobstructed passage of all pedestrians and motorists using the public right-of-way. (Ord. 929 (part), 1982: prior code § 6800)

5.48.020 Permit—Required.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful in the city for any person to leave, or cause to be placed, any personal property upon any sidewalk, gutter, alley or street of the city, whether or not such property upon any sidewalk, gutter, alley or street of the city constitutes merchandise of any store, without first obtaining a city permit. The “personal property referred to in this section includes, but is not limited to, produce, merchandise, store boxes, store substances, or materials, signs or any other object or implement of any class, kind or character. This section shall not be construed to prohibit parking of automobiles where other wise allowed. (Ord. 929 (part), 1982: prior code § 6801)

5.48.030 Permit—Issuance—Conditions and limitations.
The community development director may issue use permits for sidewalk sales subject to the following conditions and limitations:
A. Applicants must be retail merchants possessing a valid city business license and having a fixed place of business within the city.
B. Each permit shall expressly provide that sidewalk sales shall be limited to Saturday during the hours of nine a.m. and five p.m.
C. Each permit shall expressly provide that any personal property or merchandise placed upon the sidewalk pursuant to the permit shall extend no further along the sidewalk than the exterior limits of the merchant’s place of business.
D. Each permit shall expressly state that no obstruction shall be placed upon the public sidewalk extending in excess of four feet into the sidewalk from the front of any structure, provided that in all cases a minimum sidewalk depth of five feet from the curbing shall be kept clear of any obstruction.
E. Each permit shall be in effect for a period of twelve months from the time of issuance.
F. Each permit shall specify all signage to be used in the conduct of the sidewalk sale; provided, that in no circumstance shall any sign be allowed in excess of eight and one-half inches by eleven inches in size. Signage shall be allowed only for the purpose of stating the price of items or articles for sale.
G. The community development director may approve a permit subject to additional conditions as he or she finds reasonable and appropriate. (Ord. 929 (part), 1982: prior code § 6802)

5.48.040 Group permits—Conditions and limitations.
The community development director may issue group permits for area wide promotional sidewalk sales subject to the following conditions and limitations:
A. All permits shall be issued to a bona fide merchant association comprised of retail merchants having fixed places of business within the city and desiring to sponsor a special program, event or sale.
B. No permit shall be in effect for more than three consecutive business days.
C. Each permit shall describe the geographic area entitled to the group permit and expressly provide day or days and hours that such sale shall be allowed.
D. The use permit shall expressly state that no obstruction shall be placed upon the public sidewalk extending in excess of four feet into the sidewalk from the front of any structure; provided, that in all cases a minimum sidewalk depth of five feet from the curbing shall be kept clear of any obstruction.
E. The community development director may approve a permit subject to additional conditions as he or she finds reasonable and appropriate.
F. Each permit shall specify all signage to be used in the conduct of the sidewalk sale; provided, that in no circumstances shall any sign be allowed in excess of eight and one-half inches by eleven inches in size. Signage shall be allowed only for the purpose of stating the price of items or articles for sale. (Ord. 929 (part), 1982: prior code § 6803)

5.48.050 Permit—Hold harmless clause required.
A. Each permit issued for sidewalk sales shall include an agreement wherein the recipient of the permit agrees to hold the city harmless from liability arising from the conduct of such outdoor sales.
B. The permit shall state that:
The recipient of this permit thereby agrees to hold the City harmless from, to defend the City against, and to indemnify the City from all claims, demands, and suits made against the City, its officers, or its employees, including attorney’s fees and court costs incurred by the City arising from any act or omission on the part of the recipient, its officers, employees, subcontractors, agents, guests, invitees or those entities participating in any sales activities sponsored by the recipient, in the prosecution of sales upon the sidewalks or any portion thereof. (Ord. 929 (part), 1982: prior code § 6804)

5.48.060 Liability insurance.
Each permit issued for sidewalk sales shall include an agreement wherein the recipient of the permit agrees to indemnify the city from any liability arising from the conduct of such outdoor sales, and shall name the city as an additional insured on an insurance policy, to the approval of the city attorney. (Ord. 929 (part), 1982: prior code § 6805)

5.48.070 Permit—Revocation—Appeal.
A. Any permit issued may be revoked by the community development director and the privileges granted thereunder terminated (1) in the event the community development director finds and determines, in his or her sole discretion, any permittee has failed to abide strictly with the conditions of the permit, or (2) in the event the community development director determines that continued exercise of the privileges granted under this chapter may be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Revocation by the community director of any permit is appealable to the council, upon written notice of appeal to be filed with the city clerk. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten calendar days of receipt of notice by the holder of the permit that the permit has been revoked. (Ord. 929 (part), 1982: prior code § 6806)

Chapter 5.50 SIDEWALK CAFES

Sections:
5.50.010     Intent.
5.50.015     Permits required.
5.50.020     Architectural review.
5.50.025     Application content.
5.50.030     Fees.
5.50.035     Review procedures.
5.50.040     Eligible sites.
5.50.045     Required operational standards.
5.50.050     Terms and expiration.
5.50.055     Grounds for denial of permit.
5.50.060     Revocation or suspension of permit.
5.50.065     Appeals.

5.50.010 Intent.
This chapter is intended to provide opportunities for properly licensed and permitted restaurants, coffee shops and bakeries to offer outdoor dining on public sidewalks, in a manner compatible with pedestrian traffic and surrounding uses, in commercial zones where such uses are allowed. (Ord. 1539 § 2 (part), 2010)

5.50.015 Permits required.
A. A sidewalk cafe permit allows outdoor dining service in the public right-of-way, including the placement of chairs, tables, awnings, and umbrellas. A removable barrier between the path of travel and the outdoor dining area shall be required. Applications for a revocable permit for sidewalk cafes shall be made to the community development department.
B. A table and chairs permit allows for the temporary placement of chairs and tables on the sidewalk in conjunction with a restaurant or other food/beverage service where seating for no more than six people are placed on the sidewalk. No barriers or other fixed items are allowed on the sidewalk. Alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed. All items must be removed at close of business. Applications for a revocable permit for a table and chairs permit shall be made to the community development department and shall be valid for one year from date of issuance.
C. An encroachment permit maybe required pursuant to Chapter 12.04. (Ord. 1539 § 2 (part), 2010)

5.50.020 Architectural review.
At the community development director’s discretion, architectural review may be required pursuant to Chapter 2.48. (Ord. 1539 § 2 (part), 2010)

5.50.025 Application content.
Applications shall be made jointly by the business operator requesting use of a sidewalk area for outdoor dining and the property owner(s) of the building in which the business is located. Such application shall be accompanied by:
A. Signed consent of business owner(s) and property owner(s);
B. Proof of liability insurance, meeting city standards, which names the city as additionally insured for the term of the permit to the approval of the city risk manager;
C. A liability release agreement wherein the recipient(s) of the permit agrees to hold the city harmless from liability arising from the operation of such sidewalk cafe;
D. A detailed site plan, drawn to scale, noting dimensions of the area proposed for outdoor dining; the proposed number and location of tables, chairs and other furnishings to be included in the dining area; the relationship of the outdoor dining area to the indoor dining area; and all sidewalk obstructions in the vicinity;
E. A detailed description of the type, color, and material of all proposed outdoor furniture, such as tables, chairs, barriers, planters, umbrellas, signs, and lighting;
F. An explanation of how any required additional parking will be provided;
G. A statement of proposed hours of operation; and any other information deemed necessary by the community development or public works directors. (Ord. 1539 § 2 (part), 2010)

5.50.030 Fees.
A. Sidewalk Cafe. In addition to application fees for administrative approval, the applicant(s) shall pay an annual sidewalk use fee. Encroachment permit fees shall be waived for the sidewalk cafe installation unless public improvements are proposed. If the sidewalk dining installation includes physical changes to an existing building, fees for architectural review may be required. If improvements are proposed to the existing sidewalk, including widening, sidewalk repaving, or any demolition or relocation of public property, an encroachment permit and associated public works inspection fees shall apply. Additional parking spaces or in-lieu fees for parking may be required. Fees shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council.
B. Tables and Chairs Permit. Permits are subject to application fees for administrative approval. Permits shall only be valid for one year and must be renewed annually subject to an additional administrative application. Annual sidewalk use fees shall not apply. Encroachment permit fees shall be waived unless public improvements, such as sidewalk widening or other public improvements are proposed. (Ord. 1539 § 2 (part), 2010)

5.50.035 Review procedures.
Public noticing and review procedures shall be the same as those required for an administrative approval. (Ord. 1539 § 2 (part), 2010)

5.50.040 Eligible sites.
Outdoor dining or the placement of tables and chairs must be within the frontage of an existing or proposed restaurant, coffee shop, or bakery approved for on-premises seating and incidental to the operation of that restaurant. (Ord. 1539 § 2 (part), 2010)

5.50.045 Required operational standards.
A. Alcoholic Beverage Restrictions. Establishments that serve alcohol must obtain any additional permits required by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board of the state of California.
B. Hours of operation shall not begin prior to seven a.m. nor extend later than ten p.m.
C. Parking shall be provided as required for restaurants in the zoning regulations. Expansion of dining areas within the public right-of-way frontage shall not normally trigger additional parking; however, the city reserves the right to require additional parking or in-lieu fees in instances where significant parking impacts to the public supply may occur. On-site bicycle parking may be required in lieu of vehicle parking spaces.
D. A path of travel for pedestrians shall be maintained free and clear of any existing obstacles (street furniture, utilities, etc.) to the satisfaction of the public works and community development directors. Such clear pathway shall link with pathways on each side of the property and shall generally allow a six-foot clear space. For new sidewalk construction, the pathway should generally be eight feet.
E. Movable barriers are required to delineate outdoor dining areas except under the approval of a tables and chairs permit where no alcoholic beverages are served.
F. Movable barriers shall be designed and attached to the sidewalk in a manner approved by the public works director and may be subject to additional criteria as prescribed by the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.
G. Where umbrellas or awnings are used, a vertical clearance of at least seven feet must be maintained. The placement, color, style, and types of outdoor furniture and barriers shall be consistent with and complement the design and appearance of the affected building to the satisfaction of the community development director.
H. Items used within the outdoor dining areas may not be left outdoors overnight or when not in use.
I. Outdoor dining facilities shall be confined to the area shown on an approved site plan exhibit and shall not interfere with building egress to the satisfaction of the chief building official and the fire marshal.
J. Outdoor dining areas shall be used for sit-down food and beverage service only. No stand-up or take-out service is permitted in the outdoor dining area.
K. The outdoor dining area must be maintained in a clean and safe condition at all times with appropriate provisions for trash disposal and recycling.
L. The operation must meet all required county health department standards, obtain any necessary permits and service to the areas shall be conducted in a safe manner at all times.
M. The permit issued shall not be transferable in any manner.
N. The outdoor dining operation shall in no way interfere with access to utilities.
O. Smoking shall be prohibited in the outdoor dining area.
P. Table and chairs permits are subject to the following additional criteria:
    1. No alcoholic beverages may be served or consumed.
    2. No more than three tables, with a maximum of two chairs per table, may be placed on the sidewalk. All items must be removed from the sidewalk at close of business.
    3. No barriers, fixed or movable, may be installed.
    4. Annual sidewalk fees shall not apply.
    5. Tables and chairs may be restricted for use by customers only. (Ord. 1539 § 2 (part), 2010)

5.50.050 Terms and expiration.
A. A sidewalk cafe permit will be for an unlimited term, unless a limited or probationary term is deemed appropriate by the community development director. The permit shall automatically expire upon expiration of the business tax certificate or upon failure to pay the required annual sidewalk use fee. Operators wishing to renew an expired permit shall submit a new application with appropriate fees. Permits may be transferred to new business owners subject to city approval of a new application reflecting new ownership.
B. A table and chairs permit is valid for one year and may be renewed on an annual basis subject to payment of fees for an administrative approval application. (Ord. 1539 § 2 (part), 2010)

5.50.055 Grounds for denial of permit.
The community development director shall deny the sidewalk cafe permit or table and chairs permit if the operation will not meet provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1539 § 2 (part), 2010)

5.50.060 Revocation or suspension of permit.
A. The city retains the right to revoke or suspend the permit upon twenty-four hours’ written notice to the sidewalk cafe operator for any cause, regardless of conformance with these provisions. Situations that may merit suspension or revocation include, but are not limited to:
    1. Emergencies, parades, necessary construction or maintenance, at the discretion of the public works director;
    2. Suspension, revocation, or cancellation of any necessary health permit(s);
    3. Incorrect or inadequate insurance coverage; or
    4. Failure to comply with conditions of permit approval.
B. Within twenty-four hours of receipt of written notice of revocation or suspension, regardless of any appeal of the action, the operation shall cease and the sidewalk cafe operator shall restore the sidewalk to the condition existing prior to the placement of outdoor dining facilities or to some other condition acceptable to the public works director.
C. The city retains the right to immediately revoke, suspend or modify the permit if:
    1. Under a state of emergency the sidewalk use may affect the health, safety or welfare of the general public as determined by the public works director, police chief or fire chief;
    2. Failure to comply with certain conditions of the permit for sidewalk use is determined to constitute a health, safety or welfare hazard to the general public as determined by the public works director, police chief or fire chief.
D. If pursuant to the above requirements, sidewalks are not restored to order in the time specified by the city, the city may remove any and all facilities installed within the right-of-way. Reimbursement of city costs for said removal shall be the responsibility of the sidewalk permit holder. (Ord. 1539 § 2 (part), 2010)

5.50.065 Appeals.
Decisions of the community development director to approve, deny, revoke or suspend a sidewalk cafe permit, or a table and chairs permit, may be appealed to the city council subject to the provisions of Chapter 1.20. (Ord. 1539 § 2 (part), 2010)

Chapter 5.52 ELECTRONIC GAME AMUSEMENT CENTERS

Sections:
5.52.010     Definitions.
5.52.020     License—Required—Grounds for denial—Fee—Renewal—Application—Investigation.
5.52.030     License issuance.
5.52.050     Inspection.
5.52.060     Establishment name.
5.52.070     License—Transfer prohibited.
5.52.080     License—Display required.
5.52.090     License—Revocation and suspension.
5.52.100     Existing centers—Applicability of provisions.
5.52.110     Interpretation of provisions.

5.52.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms having the meanings given them in this section:
A. “Electronic game” means a coin-operated machine or device offered to the public as a game or amusement, the object of which is to achieve a high or low score based on the skill of the player.
B. “Electronic game amusement center” means any premises having thereon available four or more electronic games.
C. “Person” means an individual firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture or combination of individuals. (Ord. 1128 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 946 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 4950)

5.52.020 License—Required—Grounds for denial—Fee—Renewal—Application—Investigation.
A. Required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry on the operation of an electronic game amusement center without the license obtained from the police department as required by this chapter. An electronic game amusement center license (hereinafter “license”) shall be issued to any person who has complied with the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this code, including application for and granting of a use permit through the community development department, unless grounds for denial of such license are found to exist. Grounds for denial include:
    1. Material misstatement in the application for license;
    2. The operation as proposed would not comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, all city laws;
    3. The operation as proposed would be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare;
    4. The applicant is lacking in the background and qualification to conduct an electronic game amusement center;
    5. The applicant has, within the previous three years, been convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter or of any similar law of another public agency which regulates operation of electronic game amusement centers.
B. Fees. Application for a license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by the council. The fee shall be in an amount sufficient fully to defray administrative costs incurred in the processing of an application, and shall not be in lieu of other fees or taxes, including business license taxes, required by this code.
C. Annual Renewal. A license shall be renewed with a change in ownership so that required background checks of applicants can be conducted. A nonrefundable renewal fee shall be established by the council with due consideration to the terms of subsection B of this section.
D. Application. 
    1. An initial application for license shall be made with the community development director and shall be accompanied by an application for use permit as required by Division I of Title 17. Notice and hearing requirements for an initial application shall be as required for the use permit application. Application for license renewal shall be made with the chief of police. If after investigation the chief of police finds no significant changes in operation or ownership, the chief of police shall refer the license renewal to the community development director. With referral of a license renewal to the director, the use permit shall be scheduled for a public hearing. Notice and hearing requirements shall be as required for the initial application. At the hearing, use permit conditions may be added, deleted or modified or the use permit and license may be revoked.
    2. Applications, both initial and renewal, shall be signed by the applicant(s), shall set out the place of business and shall furnish the following information:
        a. The previous address of each applicant, if any, for a period of three years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence of each;
        b. Written proof that each applicant is at least eighteen years of age;
        c. A statement that the applicant(s) shall allow the police department official to take the photographs and fingerprints of all applicant(s);
        d. Each applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth;
        e. Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant(s) for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application;
        f. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, together with the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation along with the amount of stock held. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant also shall apply. Any information required to be furnished by this section may be required of any individual named under the terms of this subsection;
        g. The names and residence address of all persons currently employed or proposed to be employed in the electronic game amusement center along with a description of the proposed or actual nature of the work performed or to be performed and recent passport-size photographs of each employee, suitable to the chief of police. The chief of police shall require each such employee to have fingerprints taken by a police department official for the purpose of identification. Any applicant or licensee shall notify the city in writing of the names and addresses of new employees and shall supply such photographs of any new employees within five days of employment. Within five days of employment new employees shall allow fingerprints to be taken for identification purposes;
        h. A statement that the electronic game center for which the license is sought is not intended to be, and will not be permitted to be used for any gambling purposes whatsoever;
        i. A complete description of the electronic games, and the manner in which they are to be placed and operated;
        j. A statement of the total number of such electronic games and devices currently on the premises, if any, and a description of each;
        k. A statement of the applicant’s interest in, or title to, the electronic games currently on the premises;
        l. Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the chief of police.
E. Investigation by the Chief of Police. The application shall be referred to the chief of police for the purpose of investigation and the chief of police shall have thirty days to investigate the application. At a minimum the chief of police shall determine whether any applicant has a criminal history, and based thereon and any other information which bears on the proposed operation, shall provide recommendation to the community development director. (Ord. 1128 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 946 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 4951)

5.52.030 License issuance.
The decision of the chief of police to grant or deny a license application is final, unless referred to or appealed to the council. Granting of a license shall be subject to any reasonable conditions imposed by the chief of police. In no case will a license be issued until required use permit approval has been granted in accordance with Sections 17.08.100 and 17.22.010 of this code. (Ord. 1128 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 946 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 4952)

5.52.050 Inspection.
Any and all investigating officials of the city shall have the right to enter electronic game amusement centers from time to time during regular business hours and on such periodic bases as may be required by the council as a condition of approval of the license, to make reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A warrant shall be obtained whenever required by law. (Ord. 1128 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 946 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 4954)

5.52.060 Establishment name.
No person licensed to operate an electronic game amusement center shall operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the license. (Ord. 1128 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 946 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 4955)

5.52.070 License—Transfer prohibited.
No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be assigned or transferred in any manner, nor shall any person other than those therein mentioned engaged in the enterprise for which the license is issued. As used in this section, “transfer” includes, but is not limited to, any modification of a business entity operating an enterprise, or otherwise required to be disclosed pursuant to Section 5.52.020, including transfer of more than five percent of the stock of any corporation. (Ord. 1128 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 946 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 4956)

5.52.080 License—Display required.
The owner or operator of an electronic game amusement center shall display the center license in an open and conspicuous place on the premises. (Ord. 1128 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 946 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 4957)

5.52.090 License—Revocation and suspension.
Any license granted under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police for violation or breach of any applicable code provision or condition of issuance. (Ord. 1128 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 946 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 4958)

5.52.100 Existing centers—Applicability of provisions.
These regulations shall not apply to any center lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Provided, however, that a significant change in operation or ownership of a center shall result in all provisions of this chapter applying to the center. “Significant change” shall include, but not be limited to, an increase in number of electronic games on premises. (Ord. 1128 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 946 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 4959)

5.52.110 Interpretation of provisions.
Nothing in this code shall be construed to authorize, legalize or permit gambling or gambling devices not permitted by state law. (Ord. 1128 § 1 (part), 1988: Ord. 946 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 4960)

Chapter 5.56 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE TECHNICIANS

Sections:
5.56.010     Purpose and intent.
5.56.020     Definitions.
5.56.030     Outcall massage prohibited.
5.56.040     Compliance of existing establishments and massage technicians with provisions required.
5.56.050     Exceptions.
5.56.060     Massage establishment—License—Required.
5.56.070     Massage establishment—License—Application—Contents.
5.56.080     Massage establishment—License—Application—Fee Relocation.
5.56.090     Massage establishment—License—Grounds for denial.
5.56.100     Massage technician—Permit—Required.
5.56.110     Massage technician—Permit—Application—Contents.
5.56.120     Massage technician—Permit—Application—Fee—Relocation.
5.56.130     Massage technician—Permit—Grounds for denial.
5.56.140     Massage establishment—Facilities and operations requirements.
5.56.150     Massage establishment—Record keeping requirements.
5.56.160     Massage establishment—Business name.
5.56.170     Massage establishment—Change of location application and fee.
5.56.180     Massage establishment—Sale or transfer of interest.
5.56.190     Display of permits and licenses required.
5.56.200     Investigation by officials—Authority.
5.56.210     Investigation by officials—Report.
5.56.220     Notice of violation—Issuance Contents.
5.56.230     Massage establishment—Revocation or suspension of license.
5.56.240     Massage technician—Revocation or suspension of permit.
5.56.250     Appeals—Hearing.

5.56.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly regulation of massage establishments and massage technicians, as defined in Section 5.56.020, in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare by providing certain minimum building, sanitation and health standards for massage establishments, and by providing certain minimum qualifications for the operators of massage establishments and for massage technicians. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4900)

5.56.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a different meaning, the words, terms and phrases hereinafter set forth shall have the meanings given in this section:
A. “License” means the business license to operate a massage establishment as required by this chapter.
B. “Massage” means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations.
C. “Massage establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture, or combination of individuals engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, massages, baths, or health treatment involving massage or baths as the principal functions. Massage establishment also means and includes any school or institution of learning, which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession or work of massage, including, but not limited to, a “recognized school of massage” as defined in subsection H of this section.
D. “Massage technician” means any person who administers massages, baths, or health treatments involving massages or baths as a principal function to another person for any consideration whatsoever or under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided, or some third person on his or her behalf, will pay money or give any other consideration of gratuity therefor.
E. “Outcall massage” means the engaging in or carrying on of massage for any consideration at a location other than a massage establishment, which location is designated by a person to whom a permit or license has been issued pursuant to this chapter, or by the customer or client, or by any other person.
F. “Permit” means the permit to engage in the activities of a massage technician as required by this chapter.
G. “Person” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture, or combination of individuals.
H. “Recognized school of massage” means any school or institution of learning which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession or work of massage, which school or institution of learning requires a residence course study of not fewer than two hundred hours, at least one hundred of which must be class hours completed within a consecutive four-month period and the remainder, if any, must be actual massage hours supervised by a certified massage instructor completed within a consecutive twelve-month period; provided, that the entire study program must be completed within an eighteen-month period before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of study or learning, and which school -has-been approved pursuant to California Education Code Section 94300 et seq., or if the school is not located in California, has complied with standards commensurate with those required in said Section 94300 et seq. Any school or institution of learning offering or allowing correspondence course credit not requiring actual attendance at class, of courses of a massage technician not approved by the California State Department of Education, shall not be deemed a “recognized school of massage.” (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4901)

5.56.030 Outcall massage prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, perform, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, performed, conducted or carried on, outcall massage or baths or health treatments involving massage or baths for any consideration or under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person for whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or gratuity therefor at any hotel, motel, or other residential structure or facility designed and operated primarily for transient occupancy unless such outcall massage service shall first be authorized in writing by a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, or osteopath duly licensed to practice in the state. It is unlawful to operate an outcall massage service by use of a telephone answering device. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4904)

5.56.040 Compliance of existing establishments and massage technicians with provisions required.
A. All massage establishments lawfully in operation on the effective date of this chapter shall within sixty days of said date apply to the chief of police for determination as to compliance with the provisions of this section. The application shall be in such form as prescribed by the chief of police.
B. Any massage establishment legally existing on the effective date of this chapter and which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall comply with said provisions within two years of the effective date of this chapter.
C. Any massage establishment lawfully in operation upon the effective date of this chapter which fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be issued a limited term license in lieu of its current license, containing a statement on its face reciting such noncompliance and the date by which compliance must be accomplished, and that said license shall not be renewed beyond said date.
D. Any massage technician lawfully performing massage on the effective date of this chapter and who is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall comply with said provisions within six months of the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4913)

5.56.050 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions:
A. Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state;
B. Nurses registered under the laws of the state;
C. Trainers of any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or bona fide athletic team;
D. Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the state. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part, 1984: prior code § 4905)

5.56.060 Massage establishment—License—Required.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the business of a massage establishment without the license required by this chapter. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4902)

5.56.070 Massage establishment—License—Application—Contents.
A. Any application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall be made with the chief of police. Within thirty working days following receipt of a completed application, the chief of police shall either issue the license or deny the application with a written statement of the reasons for the denial.
B. The application shall set forth the following information:
    1. The full name and present address of the applicant;
    2. Any and all names the applicant has previously used or been known by;
    3. The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for the period of three years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of the residence at each;
    4. Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;
    5. Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;
    6. Two recent color passport size photographs of the applicant taken within ninety days prior to the date of application;
    7. Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of application;
    8. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of corporation, together with the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate application shall apply;
    9. The business license history of the applicant, including whether such person previously operating in this or another city or state under license, has had such license suspended or revoked, the reason therefor and the business, activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;
    10. The exact nature of the massage, bath or health treatment to be administered;
    11. The proposed place of business;
    12. All criminal convictions;
    13. Whether the applicant is required to register under the provisions of Section 290 of the California Penal Code;
    14. Whether the applicant, including a corporation or partnership, or a former employer of the applicant while still employed, or a building in which the applicant was so employed or a business conducted, was ever subjected to an abatement proceeding under Sections 11225 – 11235 of the California Penal Code, or any similar provisions of law under a jurisdiction outside the state, and the date(s) thereof;
    15. The names, dates of birth, the residence addresses of all persons currently employed or intended to be employed in the massage establishment, regardless of the nature of their employment, along with a description of the proposed or actual nature of the work performed or to be performed, and recent color passport size photographs, acceptable to the chief of police, or designated representative processing the application, of each such employee. The chief of police may require any such employee to allow fingerprints to be taken for the purpose of identification. The applicant shall notify the city in writing of the names, addresses and nature of the work, of any new employees, within five days of such employment, and provide the photographs described in this subsection. Such new employees shall allow fingerprints to be taken for the purpose of identification upon request. “Employee” includes every owner, partner, manager, supervisor and worker, whether paid or not, who renders personal services of any nature in the operation of a massage establishment;
    16. Such other identification and information the police department may require in order to verify information in the application;
    17. Nothing herein shall be construed to deny the chief of police or the police department the right to take fingerprints and additional photographs of the applicant, nor shall anything contained herein be construed to deny the right of the chief or the department to confirm the height, weight or date of birth of the applicant. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4908)

5.56.080 Massage establishment—License—Application—Fee Relocation.
A. Any application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall be accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the council. The application fee shall be used to defray in whole or in part, the cost of the investigation and report by the chief of police, and is not made in lieu of any other fees or taxes required under this code. In addition, the applicant shall also pay all applicable fees to the county health officer according to the rate schedule of the county then in effect, and to the state all applicable fees necessary for the processing of applicant information.
B. A license to operate a massage establishment shall remain valid as long as the license holder maintains a continual business operation as evidenced by the possession of a valid business tax certificate. Each license holder shall be required to submit a copy of their valid business tax certificate by mail to the Police Department by September 30 of each fiscal year. Failure to renew the business tax certificate by September 30 shall cause the massage establishment license to become invalid and the license holder must complete a new massage license application accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the council. If a licensed establishment relocates or opens an additional business location, an application for such purpose shall be required and accompanied by an administrative fee as set by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1317 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4907)

5.56.090 Massage establishment—License—Grounds for denial.
Any person engaged in, conducting, or carrying on the operation of a massage establishment, in or upon any premises within the city, shall first obtain a license from the city. A massage establishment license shall be issued to any person who has complied with the requirements of Sections 5.56.070 and 5.56.080, and all other applicable provisions of this code unless grounds for denial of such license are found to exist. The grounds or denial are as follows:
A. The applicant made a material misstatement in the application for license;
B. The applicant has, within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of:
    1. Any offense which relates directly to the operation of a massage establishment, whether as a massage establishment owner or operator, or as a massage technician; or
    2. Any felony the commission of which occurred on the premises of a massage establishment; or
    3. An offense which involved conduct which required registration under California Penal Code Section 290; or
    4. Any violation of Section 2661, Sections 311 – 311.7, 313.1, 314, 316, 316, 318 or 647(a), 647(b), 647(d), or 647(h) of the California Penal Code or of any offense involving theft of property or violence, or conspiracy or attempt to commit any such offense; or
    5. Any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code; or
    6. Any offense in a jurisdiction outside the state which is the equivalent of any of the aforesaid offenses;
C. The applicant, any officers, director or any holder of more than five percent of the stock of any corporate applicant, or any partner, including, limited partners, of any partnership applicant, has, within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 – 11235 of the California Penal Code, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state; or
D. That the operation of a massage establishment, as proposed by the applicant if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, all city ordinances and regulations;
E. That the operation of the proposed massage establishment is likely to be injurious to the health, safety, welfare and interest of the people of the city;
F. That the applicant is lacking in the background and qualifications to conduct a bona fide massage establishment; or
G. That the applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or of any similar ordinance, law, rule or regulation of another public agency which regulates the operation of massage establishments. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4906)

5.56.100 Massage technician—Permit—Required.
It is unlawful for any person to act as a massage technician unless such person has a valid permit issued by the chief of police as required by this chapter. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4903)

5.56.110 Massage technician—Permit—Application—Contents.
Any application for permit to act as massage technician shall be made with the chief of police. Within thirty working days following receipt of a completed application the chief of police shall either issue the permit or mail a written statement of his or her reasons for denial thereof. The chief of police may request the applicant to furnish fingerprints, when needed for the purpose of establishing identification. The applicant shall furnish the following information:
A. Name, residence address and telephone number;
B. Social security number and drivers license number, if any;
C. Applicant’s weight, height, color of hair and eyes, and date of birth;
D. Two prints of a passport size photograph of applicant taken within thirty days prior to the date of application;
E. Certificate from a medical doctor stating that the applicant has, within thirty days immediately prior to the filing of the application, been examined and found to be free from any contagious or communicable disease;
F. Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;
G. Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of application;
H. The name and address of the establishment where the applicant is to be employed, if any, and the name of the owner or the operator of same. Any applicant granted a permit pursuant to this section must report any change of massage establishment employment within five days of said change;
I. The name and address of the recognized school of massage attended, and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school of massage showing that such applicant or permittee has completed at least two hundred class hours or one hundred class hours and one hundred actual massage hours supervised by persons authorized or certified to provide instruction and/or supervision of massage;
J. All criminal convictions;
K. Whether the applicant is required to register under the provisions of Section 290 of the California Penal Code;
L. Whether the applicant, including any officer, director or any shareholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporate applicant or any partner, including limited partners, or any partnership applicant, corporation or partnership, or a former employer of the applicant while so employed, or a building in which the applicant was so employed or a business conducted, was ever subject to an abatement proceeding under Sections 11225 – 11235 of the California Penal Code or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4911)

5.56.120 Massage technician—Permit—Application—Fee—Relocation.
A. Any application for a massage technician permit shall be accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the council. The application fee shall be used to defray, in whole or in part, the city, county, and/or state costs of investigation and report. Any person who applied for a massage establishment license and who desires to act as a massage technician within the establishment shall not be required to pay the fee required by this section, but shall be required to provide the information required by Section 5.56.110.
B. A massage technician permit shall remain valid as long as the permit holder maintains continual employment as evidenced by the possession of a valid business tax certificate. Each permit holder shall be required to submit a copy of their valid business tax certificate by mail to the Police Department by September 30 of each fiscal year. Failure to renew the business tax certificate by September 30 shall cause the massage technician permit to become invalid and the technician must complete a new massage technician permit application accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the council. If a licensed technician relocates to a business location requiring a facility inspection, an application for address change shall be required and accompanied by an administrative fee as set by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1317 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4910)

5.56.130 Massage technician—Permit—Grounds for denial.
Any person acting or desiring to act as a massage technician within the city shall first obtain a valid permit issued by the chief of police. A massage technician permit shall be issued to any person who has complied with the requirements of Section 5.56.110 and 5.56.120 and all other applicable provisions of this code, unless grounds for denial of such permit are found to exist. The grounds for denial are as follows:
A. The applicant made a material misstatement in the application for a license;
B. The applicant has, within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of:
    1. Any offense which relates directly to the operation of a massage establishment, whether as a massage establishment owner or operator or as a massage technician; or
    2. Any felony the commission of which occurred on the premises of a massage establishment: or
    3. An offense which involved conduct which required registration under California Penal Code Section 290; or
    4. Any violation of Section 2661, Sections 311 – 311.7, 313.1, 314, 315, 316, 318 or 647(a), 647(b), 647(d) or 647(h) of the California Penal Code or of any offense involving theft of property or violence, or conspiracy or attempt to commit any such offense; or
    5. Any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code; or
    6. Any offense in a jurisdiction outside the state which is the equivalent of any of the aforesaid offenses;
C. The applicant, or any persons employed by the applicant has, within ten years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 – 11235 of the California Penal Code, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state: or
D. That the applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or of any similar ordinance, law, rule or regulation of another public agency which regulates the operation of massage establishments:
E. That the applicant has not provided proof of graduation from a recognized school of massage. The chief of police is authorized to determine whether minor variations from this requirement, with respect to a particular applicant, are insignificant and find that the applicant has substantially complied with the basic education requirement so as to satisfy this provision. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4909)

5.56.140 Massage establishment—Facilities and operations requirements.
All massage establishments shall comply with the following facilities and operation requirements:
A. Massage establishments shall comply with all code requirements;
B. Closed cabinets or other cupboard space shall be provided for the storage of clean linen. Approved receptacles shall be provided for the storage of all soiled linen and paper towels;
C. The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have a washable, mold-resistant surface;
D. All lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with running water, disinfectant, soap and single service towels;
E. Security deposit facilities capable of being locked by the patron or a security bag that may be carried by the patron shall be available for the protection of the valuables of the patrons;
F. Every portion of a massage establishment including appliances, apparatus and personnel, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition;
G. All massage establishments shall be equipped with clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens of sufficient quantity. Towels, sheets and linens shall not be used by more than one person Reuse of such linen is prohibited unless the same has first been laundered Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets: provided, that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded in a sanitary receptacle;
H. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steamrooms and other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam and vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use;
    1. Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment shall be provided for any instruments used in performing acts of massage and said instruments shall be disinfected and sterilized after each use;
J. Pads used on massage tables shall be covered with durable, washable plastic or other acceptable waterproof material;
K. To protect patrons from potential health and sanitary hazards, all employees, and massage technicians shall be clean and shall wear clean outer garments when performing services on the premises, No massage technician shall, in the course of administering any massage, bath or health treatment, expose his or her genitals or private parts, No massage technician shall, in the course of administering any massage, bath or health treatment, make physical contact with the genitals or private parts of any other person;
L. A listing of each service offered, the price thereof, and the minimum length of time such service shall be performed shall be made available on request, No services shall be performed and no sum shall be charged for any services other than those listed, Arrangements shall be made for all services prior to the performance of any service. No massage technician shall solicit or offer to perform for any patron any additional service after such technician has commenced the performance of any service for such patron;
M. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or furnished on the premises of any massage establishment:
O. No massage establishment shall be open for business between the hours of ten-thirty p.m. of one day and seven a.m. of the following day;
P. Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, and in addition, at least one artificial light of not less than forty watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure when massage is performed on patrons:
Q. Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code;
R. No massage establishment shall be allowed in any district where residential use is the principal permitted use unless having first qualified for and obtained a home occupation permit;
S. Proof of compliance with all applicable provisions of this code shall be provided. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4912)

5.56.150 Massage establishment—Record keeping requirements.
Every person operating a massage establishment within the city shall keep a record of the date and hour of each treatment, the name and address of the patron, the address of the place where the service was rendered, and the name of the technician administering such treatment, The records shall be open to inspection by officials charged with the enforcement of these provisions for the purposes of law enforcement and for no other purpose. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such inspection shall be confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any city officer or employee shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter, in addition to any other penalties provided by law. Identical records shall be kept of all outcall massage treatments which may be rendered as set forth in Section 5.56.030 and in addition, shall describe the address where the treatment was rendered and retain a copy of any applicable prescription or other written authorization. The records required by this section shall be maintained for a period of two years. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4924)

5.56.160 Massage establishment—Business name.
No person licensed to operate a massage establishment shall operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the license. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4914)

5.56.170 Massage establishment—Change of location application and fee.
Upon a change of location of a massage establishment, an application to the chief of police shall be made, and such application shall be granted, provided all applicable provisions of this code are complied with and a change of location fee as set by resolution of the council to defray, in whole or in part, the cost of investigation and report, has been paid to the city. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4915)

5.56.180 Massage establishment—Sale or transfer of interest.
The sale or transfer of any interest in a massage establishment which interest would be reported as required in this chapter upon application for a massage establishment license, shall be reported to the chief of police within ten days of such sale or transfer. The chief of police shall investigate any person receiving any interest in a massage establishment as a result of such sale or transfer and if such person satisfies the requirements relating to massage establishment license applicants the existing license shall be endorsed to include such person. A fee established by resolution of the council shall be paid to the city for the investigation by the chief of police necessitated by each such sale or transfer. Any such establishment which intends to in any way transfer ownership or alter or change the nature of any such massage establishment on or after the effective date of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of this chapter prior to such transfer, alteration or change. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4916)

5.56.190 Display of permits and licenses required.
The owner or operator of a massage establishment shall display the massage establishment license and the permit of each and every massage technician employed in the establishment in an open and conspicuous place on the premises. Passport size photographs of the licensee and permittees shall be affixed to the respective license and permits on display pursuant to this section. Home addresses of massage technicians shall not be displayed. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4917)

5.56.200 Investigation by officials—Authority.
Any and all investigating officials of the city shall have the right to enter massage establishments from time to time during regular business hours to make reasonable inspections, to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or health regulations, or other provisions of this chapter. A warrant shall be obtained whenever required by law. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4918)

5.56.210 Investigation by officials—Report.
Whenever any investigating official of the city makes an inspection of a massage establishment he or she shall record his or her findings on an inspection report and shall give notice of his or her findings by furnishing a copy of the inspection report to the licensee or permittee. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4919)

5.56.220 Notice of violation—Issuance Contents.
Whenever any investigating official of the city makes an inspection of a massage establishment and finds that any provision of this chapter has been violated, he or she shall give notice of such violation by means of an inspection report or other written notice. In any such notification, the investigating official shall:
A. Set forth the specific violation or violations found;
B. Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation or violations. If the investigating official determines that the violation or violations are minor in nature, the investigating official may issue a warning to the licensee or permittee, that any further violation of this chapter may result in the filing of a complaint for revocation or suspension of the license or permit;
C. State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may result in the city revoking or suspending the license or permit. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4920)

5.56.230 Massage establishment—Revocation or suspension of license.
Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police where it is found that:
A. The licensee has violated any provision of this chapter: or
B. The licensee has failed to comply with one or more of the facility and operations requirements of Section 5.56.140; or
C. The licensee has engaged in fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in conducting the massage establishment: or
D. The licensee has failed to correct a violation after notice to do so pursuant to Section 5.56.220; or
E. The licensee has continued to operate the massage establishment after the license has been suspended: or
F. The licensee has allowed a person to work as a massage technician who:
    1. Does not have a valid permit: or
    2. Has engaged in conduct or has been convicted of any offense described in subsections B and C of Section 5.56.090 where the licensee has active or constructive knowledge of such conduct or conviction: or
G. Licensee is a person who is engaged in conduct or has been convicted of an offense described in subsections B and C of Section 5.56.090. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4921)

5.56.240 Massage technician—Revocation or suspension of permit.
Any massage technician permit may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police where it is found that:
A. The permittee has violated any provision of this chapter: or
B. The permittee is a person who has engaged in conduct described in subsections B or C of Section 5.56.090; or
C. The permittee has engaged in conduct which would constitute an offense which relates directly to the permittee’s employment or performance as a massage technician or has engaged in conduct which would constitute a felony, the commission of which occurred on the premises of a massage establishment; or has been convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of any such offense or felony; or
D. The permittee has continued to function as a massage technician after the permit has been suspended: or
E. The permittee has failed to correct a violation found pursuant to Section 5.56.220. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4922)

5.56.250 Appeals—Hearing.
In the event a permit or license application has been denied, the applicant may appeal to the council pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.20 of this code. Any licensee or permittee whose license or permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal to the council pursuant to the procedure set forth in Chapter 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 1002 § 1 (part), 1984: prior code § 4923)

Chapter 5.60 POSTING

Sections:
5.60.010     Advertising by posting—Permit required.

5.60.010 Advertising by posting—Permit required.
A. Every person carrying on the business of advertising by posting, sticking, tacking, affixing or painting bills or signs to or upon posts, fences, buildings, or other structures, except billboards or advertising sign boards, shall pay a permit fee. The fee shall be in an amount sufficient to defray administrative cost incurred, and shall not be in lieu of other fees or taxes, including business taxes, required by this code.
B. Before a permit is issued under this section, the applicant must first obtain approval from the council. (Ord. 1202 § 19, 1991)

Chapter 5.64 PUBLIC DANCES

Sections:
5.64.010     Permit required.

5.64.010 Permit required.
Every person who shall conduct a public dance at which an admission fee is charged shall pay a permit fee set by the council, payable in advance. This fee shall be in an amount sufficient to fully defray administrative cost incurred, and shall not be in lieu of other fees or taxes, including business taxes, required by this code. Before a permit is granted under this section the applicant must obtain a permit from the chief of police and must during such dance provide two or more uniformed members of a city-licensed private patrol service as defined in this code, the number of such persons to be determined at the full discretion of the chief of police. (Ord. 1202 § 20, 1991)

Chapter 5.68 CARDROOMS

Sections:
5.68.010     Cardrooms prohibited.

5.68.010 Cardrooms prohibited.
A. No person shall conduct, maintain, manage, operate, carry on or cause to be conducted, maintained, managed, operated or carried on, any cardroom or other business where tables or other items of furniture are used directly or indirectly for playing cards or card games and for the use of which a fee, commission or compensation is directly or indirectly charged to, or accepted or received from, players or participants in any such playing of cards or card games.
B. A “cardroom” means any space, room or enclosure furnished or equipped with a table or tables, or other items of furniture, used or intended to be used as a card table for the playing of cards, and the use of which is available to the public or any portion of the public provided that “cardroom” shall not include a room in which the sole card game played is bridge. (Ord. 1202 § 21, 1991)

Chapter 5.72 PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO HOLDERS OF STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES

Sections:
5.72.010     Fee for support of local cable usage.
5.72.020     Franchise fee.
5.72.030     Authority to examine records.
5.72.040     Customer service penalties under state video franchises.
5.72.050     City response to state video franchise applications.
5.72.060     Public, educational or governmental (PEG) channel capacity.
5.72.070     Interconnection.
5.72.080     Emergency alert system and emergency overrides.

5.72.010 Fee for support of local cable usage.
A. A fee paid to the city is hereby established for the support of public, educational, and governmental access facilities and activities within the city. Unless a higher percentage is authorized by applicable state or federal law, this fee shall be one percent of a state video holder’s gross revenues, as defined in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. This fee shall be remitted quarterly to the city treasurer and must be received not later than forty-five days after the end of the preceding quarter. The fee payment shall be accompanied by a summary that explains the basis for the calculation of the support fee for local cable usage.
B. The city’s interpretation of Section 5870(n) of the Public Utilities Code is that the one percent fee to support PEG channel facilities authorized by that code section does not expire upon the expiration of any particular state franchise holder but shall expire and may be reauthorized upon the expiration of the legislative authorization of the state franchise. However, to the extent any court or reviewing authority finds otherwise, the city hereby reauthorizes the fee set forth in this section on state-franchised video service providers operating within the city, to support public, educational, and governmental access channel facilities, which fee shall remain unchanged and in full effect as to all state-franchised video service providers operating within the city. The city hereby reauthorizes the fee on any additional state franchised video service providers that are or will be operating in the city of San Luis Obispo to support public, educational, and governmental access channel facilities, upon the expiration of that state franchise, which fee shall remain unchanged and in full effect. Notwithstanding Public Utilities Code Section 5870(n), upon the expiration of any state video franchise, without any further action of the city council, this section shall be deemed to have been automatically reauthorized, unless the state franchise holder has given the city manager and the city council written notice ninety days prior to the expiration of its state franchise that the state franchise holder believes the section will expire concurrently with the expiration of its state franchise pursuant to the terms of Public Utilities Code Section 5870(n). (Ord. 1645 § 1, 2018: Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.72.020 Franchise fee.
A state video franchise holder operating in the city shall pay to the city a franchise fee that is equal to five percent of the gross revenues of that state video franchise holder. The term “gross revenues” shall be defined as set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5860. This fee shall be remitted quarterly to the city treasurer and must be received not later than forty-five days after the end of the preceding calendar quarter. The fee payment shall be accompanied by a summary that explains the basis for the calculation of the franchise fee. Unless construed otherwise by applicable law, the phrase “summary that explains the basis for the calculations,” as used herein and in Section 5.72.010, means the identification of the sources of revenue upon which the fee is based. (Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.72.030 Authority to examine records.
Not more than once annually, the appropriate city department may examine the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with all applicable statutes and regulations related to the computation and payment of franchise fees. (Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.72.040 Customer service penalties under state video franchises.
A. The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.
B. The city manager or his or her designee shall monitor a state video franchise holder’s compliance with state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city will provide to the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty-day time period will be subject to the following monetary penalties to be imposed by the city in accordance with state law:
    1. For the first occurrence of a violation, a monetary penalty of five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation.
    2. For a second violation of the same nature within twelve months, a monetary penalty of one thousand dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each violation.
    3. For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve months, a monetary penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each violation.
C. A state video franchise holder may appeal a monetary penalty assessed by the city. Such appeal must be filed no later than sixty days after the date of mailing of notification of the penalty or the right to appeal shall be deemed waived. After relevant evidence and testimony is received, and staff reports are submitted, the city council will vote to either uphold or vacate the monetary penalty. The city council’s decision on the imposition of a monetary penalty shall be final. (Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.72.050 City response to state video franchise applications.
A. Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the city must concurrently provide to the city complete copies of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commission. One complete copy must be provided to the city manager.
B. The city will provide any appropriate comments to the California Public Utilities Commission regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. (Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.72.060 Public, educational or governmental (PEG) channel capacity.
A. A state video franchise holder that uses the public rights-of-way shall designate sufficient capacity on its network to enable the carriage of at least four PEG access channels.
B. PEG access channels shall be for the exclusive use of the city or its designees to provide public, educational, or governmental programming.
C. Advertising, underwriting, or sponsorship recognition may be carried on the PEG access channels for the purpose of funding PEG-related activities.
D. The PEG access channels shall be carried on the basic service tier and shall be of similar quality and functionality to that offered by commercial channels on the lowest cost tier of service unless the signal is provided to the video service provider at a lower quality or with less functionality, as provided in California Public Utilities Code Section 5870(g)(3).
E. To the extent feasible, the PEG access channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier, and the channel numbers for the PEG access channels shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by federal law.
F. After the initial designation of PEG access channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the prior written consent of the city, unless the change is required by federal law.
G. Each PEG access channel shall be capable of carrying a National Television System Committee television signal, as provided in Public Utilities Code Section 5870b. (Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.72.070 Interconnection.
Where technically feasible, a state video franchise holder and an incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG access channel programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable, microwave link, satellite, or other reasonable method of connection. State video franchise holders and incumbent cable operators shall provide interconnection of the PEG access channels on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a state video franchise holder and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow the state video franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent’s network at a technically feasible point on the holder’s network as identified by the holder. If no technically feasible point for interconnection is available, the state video franchise holder shall make an interconnection available to the channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state video franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the parties. (Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 2010)

5.72.080 Emergency alert system and emergency overrides.
A state video franchise holder must comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the holder’s network. (Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 2010)

Chapter 5.76 PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS
(Repealed by Ord. 1413)

Chapter 5.80 PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES

Sections:
5.80.010     Permit required.
5.80.020     Definitions.
5.80.030     Exemptions.
5.80.040     Application for permit.
5.80.050     General criteria for issuance or denial of permit.
5.80.060     Nondiscrimination.
5.80.070     Notice of issuance or denial of permit.
5.80.080     Interference with parade or assembly.
5.80.090     Prohibitions.
5.80.100     Content of permit.
5.80.110     City’s costs to be paid by person or organization responsible for parade or assembly.
5.80.120     Violation.
5.80.130     Prompt judicial review.

5.80.010 Permit required.
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the activity of a parade or assembly without a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1414 § 1 (part), 2002)

5.80.020 Definitions.
A. “Parade” shall mean any march, demonstration, procession, motorcade, or promenade consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, having a common purpose, design, destination, or goal, upon any public place, which parade, march, demonstration, procession, motorcade, or promenade does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or control.
B. “Assembly” shall mean any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally, gathering, or group of one hundred fifty or more persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, having a common purpose, design, or goal, upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public place, which assembly substantially inhibits the usual flow of pedestrian or vehicular travel or which occupies any public area, other than a parade, as defined in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1414 § 1 (part), 2002)

5.80.030 Exemptions.
The permit application provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Funeral processions.
B. Spontaneous parades or assemblies occasioned by news or affairs coming into public knowledge within three days of such parade or assembly; provided, that the organizers thereof give written notice to the city at least twenty-four hours prior to such parade or assembly. Such written notice shall contain all of the following information:
    1. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons seeking to conduct the parade or assembly. This person or these persons shall be considered a permittee for the purposes of this chapter;
    2. The name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, if any, and of the organizer or responsible head of such organization by whom or on whose behalf the parade or assembly is proposed to be conducted;
    3. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will chair the parade or assembly and who will be responsible for its conduct;
    4. The location and date of the proposed parade or assembly, including the assembly area, disbanding area, and the route to be traveled;
    5. An estimate of the approximate number of persons who will be participating in the parade or assembly and an estimate of the approximate number of persons who will be observing the parade or assembly;
    6. The time at which the parade or assembly will start and conclude;
    7. The type of security or other arrangements that will be provided to assure that participants are properly directed.
C. The city administrative officer or the city administrative officer’s designee may deny permission to conduct the parade or assembly within eighteen hours of the submission of the notice pursuant to subsection B of this section if the city administrative officer or the city administrative officer’s designee makes a finding requiring denial pursuant to Section 5.80.050(B). If the city administrative officer makes a finding requiring denial pursuant to that subsection, the city administrative officer shall immediately provide notice of the denial, including the reason for the denial, by telephone to the permittee and shall also provide written notice of the denial including the reason for the denial. If the permittee provides a fax number for the purpose of receiving notices, the city administrative officer shall provide written notice of the denial by fax immediately upon making the denial decision. (Ord. 1414 § 1 (part), 2002)

5.80.040 Application for permit.
A. A person seeking issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the city administrative officer or the city administrative officer’s designee, on forms supplied by the city.
B. The application shall be filed with the city administrative officer or the city administrative officer’s designee in accordance with the following time limitations:
    1. Not less than six days prior to the date of the parade or assembly if the parade or assembly is proposed to take place in whole or in part on, in or along the roadway portion (other than within crosswalks) of the following streets in the city of San Luis Obispo: Higuera Street, Marsh Street, Monterey Street, Broad Street;
    2. Not less than four days prior to the date of the parade or assembly if the parade or assembly is proposed to take place in whole or in part on, in or along the roadway portion (other than within crosswalks) of any other street in a commercial zone within the city of San Luis Obispo;
    3. Not less than three days prior to the date of the parade or assembly if the parade or assembly is proposed to take place in a residential zone, or outside of the roadway in a commercial zone, but within the sidewalk or any other portion of the public right-of-way;
    4. Not less than two days prior to the date of the parade or assembly if the parade or assembly is proposed to take place in whole or in part on, in or along any park or other publicly owned traditional public forum in the city of San Luis Obispo not governed by subsections (B)(1) through (3) of this section.
C. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
    1. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons seeking to conduct the parade or assembly;
    2. The name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, if any, and of the organizer or responsible head of such organization by whom or on whose behalf the parade or assembly is proposed to be conducted;
    3. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will chair the parade or assembly and who will be responsible for its conduct;
    4. The location and date of the proposed parade or assembly, including the assembly area, disbanding area, and the route to be traveled;
    5. An estimate of the approximate number of persons who will be participating in the parade or assembly and an estimate of the approximate number of persons who will be observing the parade or assembly;
    6. The hours when the parade or assembly will start and conclude;
    7. The type of security or other arrangements that will be provided to assure that participants are properly directed;
    8. The minimum and maximum speeds that the parade is to travel, if applicable, and the maximum number of platoons or units, if any, in the parade or assembly and the maximum and minimum interval of space to be maintained between the units of such parade or assembly;
    9. The maximum length of such parade or assembly in miles or fractions thereof;
    10. The number and type of vehicles in the parade or assembly, if any;
    11. A statement to be signed by the person seeking the permit that the permittee will hold harmless and indemnify the city of San Luis Obispo, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents from any damages which may arise as a result of the conduct of the parade or assembly for which the permit is sought. Each permit shall expressly provide that the permittee agrees to defend, protect, indemnify and hold the city, its officers, employees, agents, and volunteers free and harmless from and against any and all claims, damages, expenses, loss or liability of any kind or nature whatsoever arising out of, or resulting from, the alleged acts or omissions of permittee, its officers, agents, or employees in connection with the permitted event or activity; and the permit shall expressly provide that the permittee shall, at permittee’s own cost, risk and expense, defend any and all claims and all legal actions that may be commenced or filed against the city, its officers, agents, employees, or volunteers, and that the permittee shall pay any settlement entered into and shall satisfy any judgment that may be rendered against the city, its officers, agents, employees, or volunteers as a result of the alleged acts or omissions of permittee or permittee’s officers, agents, or employees in connection with the uses, events, or activities under the permit;
    12. If the assembly or the parade set-up or dispersal is to be conducted on private property, the applicant must submit with the application proof of the property owner’s permission for the property to be used for that purpose.
D. Within twenty-four hours after the submission of the application, the city administrative officer or the city administrative officer’s designee must notify the applicant, in writing, whether the application is complete. If no such notice is given within twenty-four hours after submission, the application will be deemed to be complete. (Ord. 1414 § 1 (part), 2002)

5.80.050 General criteria for issuance or denial of permit.
A. The following criteria shall apply to issuance or denial of a parade or assembly permit.
B. The permit shall be issued by the city administrative officer or the city administrator’s designee unless there is a finding that:
    1. The information contained in the application is false or intentionally misleading; or
    2. The parade or assembly is proposed for a time and location for which another parade or assembly permit has been previously issued; or
    3. The proposed route or location of the parade or assembly traverses a street or other public right-of-way that was scheduled for maintenance, construction or repair prior to the application for that parade or assembly permit and the conduct of the parade or assembly would interfere with such maintenance, construction or repair or the maintenance, construction or repair would represent a threat to the health or safety of the participants in the parade or assembly; or
    4. The proposed area for the assembly or for the set-up or dispersal of a parade could not physically accommodate the number of participants expected to participate in the parade or assembly, as reflected in the application completed and submitted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter; or
    5. The parade would result in a violation of any federal, state or local law or regulation.
Upon making any finding set forth in this subsection, the city administrative officer or the city administrative officer’s designee shall deny the permit application.
C. As a condition of the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the city administrative officer or the city administrative officer’s designee may require that the parade or assembly be limited to a portion of the width of the street or right-of-way upon which the applicant seeks to conduct the parade or assembly; provided, that such limitation does not limit or interfere with the conduct of the parade or assembly or cause the parade or assembly to violate any other provision of this chapter or any other federal, state or local law or regulation. (Ord. 1414 § 1 (part), 2002)

5.80.060 Nondiscrimination.
The official designated by the city to act on permit applications shall uniformly consider each application upon its merits and shall not discriminate in granting or denying applications, and shall not deny any permit based upon political or religious grounds or reasons. (Ord. 1414 § 1 (part), 2002)

5.80.070 Notice of issuance or denial of permit.
A. The city administrative officer or the city administrator’s designee shall approve or deny the permit application and shall provide notice to the applicant of the action taken by telephone and by written notice or facsimile, if the applicant provides a fax number, within the following time limitations:
    1. If the permit is sought under the provisions of Section 5.80.040(B)(1) or (2), within two days after submission of the application.
    2. If the permit is sought under the provisions of Section 5.80.040(B)(3) and (4), within twenty-four hours after submission of the application.
B. If the permit is denied, the notice of denial shall set forth the reasons for denial. (Ord. 1414 § 1 (part), 2002)

5.80.080 Interference with parade or assembly.
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any parade or assembly conducted under permit from the city, in violation of any of the terms of said permit, nor knowingly join or participate in any permitted parade or assembly without the consent of the permittee, nor in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct. (Ord. 1414 § 1 (part), 2002)

5.80.090 Prohibitions.
The following prohibitions shall apply to all demonstrations, rallies, picket lines, parades and assemblies:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any sign, poster, plaque, or notice, unless such sign, poster, plaque, or notice is constructed solely of a cloth, paper, or cardboard material no greater than one-quarter inch in thickness.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or cause to be ridden or driven any animal or any animal-drawn vehicle upon any public street, unless specifically authorized by a permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry, possess or wear any gas mask or similar device designed to filter all air breathed and that would protect the respiratory tract and face against irritating, noxious or poisonous gases.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to abide by the instructions of a traffic control officer given for the purpose of accommodating traffic, including emergency vehicles, through and across a parade route, demonstration, rally, picket line or assembly.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit a disabled person from carrying a cane, walker, or similar device necessary for providing mobility so that the person may participate in a demonstration, rally, picket line, parade or assembly. (Ord. 1414 § 1 (part), 2002)

5.80.100 Content of permit.
In each permit, a copy of which shall be maintained and kept upon the person in charge of the parade or assembly at the parade or assembly site at all times during the parade or assembly, including during assembly and dispersal, the city administrative officer or the city administrative officer’s designee shall set forth the following information as that information is set forth in the approved application:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person to whom the permit is issued;
B. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the sponsoring organization, if any;
C. The name, address and telephone number of the chairperson of the parade or assembly;
D. The date for which the parade or assembly is scheduled;
E. The assembly area for the parade or assembly;
F. The starting and ending time for the parade or assembly;
G. The minimum and maximum speeds at which the parade is to progress, if applicable;
H. The route which the parade or assembly will take;
I. The maximum number of platoons or units, if any, in the parade or assembly and the maximum and minimum interval of space to be maintained between the units of such parade or assembly;
J. The maximum length of such parade or assembly in miles or fractions thereof;
K. The disbanding area for the parade or assembly and the disbanding time;
L. The number and type of vehicles in the parade or assembly, if any;
M. Whether participants in the parade or assembly shall be wearing masks;
N. The type of security or other arrangements that will be provided to assure participants are properly directed.
The parade or assembly permit shall also set forth any condition imposed pursuant to Section 5.80.050(C). Additionally, the permittee shall advise all participants in the parade or assembly of the terms and conditions of the permit prior to the commencement of the parade or assembly. (Ord. 1414 § 1 (part), 2002)

5.80.110 City’s costs to be paid by person or organization responsible for parade or assembly.
A permittee under the provisions of this chapter shall reimburse the city for all traffic control costs incurred in connection with diverting traffic due to the closure of streets. These costs shall be established by the city council by resolution. No fee shall be charged based upon the need for security or increased police protection due to the nature of the parade or assembly. (Ord. 1414 § 1 (part), 2002)

5.80.120 Violation.
Any violation of this chapter or the terms or conditions of a parade or assembly permit by the permittee or any participant in a parade or assembly is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1414 § 1 (part), 2002)

5.80.130 Prompt judicial review.
Any applicant or permittee pursuant to this chapter may seek judicial review of any decision made pursuant to this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.20.060 of this code. (Ord. 1414 § 1 (part), 2002)

Chapter 5.84 FILMING REGULATIONS

Sections:
5.84.010     Title.
5.84.020     Definitions.
5.84.030     Permits and exemptions.
5.84.040     Rules and regulations.
5.84.050     Applications and permit issuance.
5.84.060     Liability provisions.
5.84.070     Appeals.
5.84.080     Permit revocation.
5.84.090     Violation.

5.84.010 Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the film ordinance of the city of San Luis Obispo. (Ord. 1448 § 1 (part), 2004)

5.84.020 Definitions.
A. “Applicant” shall mean the person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust or manager, lessee, agent servant, officer or employee, or any of them except where the context clearly requires a different meaning, applying for a permit to film within the city limits of San Luis Obispo.
B. “City administrative officer (CAO)” shall mean the chief administrative officer of the city of San Luis Obispo or designated representative
C. “City services charges” shall mean the actual costs which city departments incur in connection with commercial activities for which a permit is required under these regulations, not limited to administration or coordination of services, support personnel, equipment, materials and supplies, related fringe benefits, loss of revenue, etc.
D. “Commercial” shall mean any activity intended to generate financial gain, in whole or in part, for the applicants or to advertise products, goods or services
E. “Destination marketing organizations” shall mean filming or videotaping or still photography produced or coordinated by an organization that qualifies under Section 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code as a mutual benefit organization for the purpose of tourism and travel promotion.
F. “Motion picture, television, still photography” shall mean all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, and commercial advertisements or other media displaying images for commercial purposes.
G. “Nonprofit films” shall mean any commercial, motion picture, television, videotape, or still photography produced by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes or photos.
H. “News media” shall mean any news organization that photographs, films or videotapes for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or reporting for print media by reporters, photographers or cameramen.
I. “Private video” shall mean any filming or videotaping taken solely for personal use.
J. “Public right-of-way” shall mean any public access that is open to vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic.
K. “Special event coordinator” shall mean a member of city’s staff who serves as the point of contact for all filming activities within the city of San Luis Obispo.
L. “Studio” shall mean a fixed place of business where filming activities (motion or still photography) are regularly conducted upon the premises. (Ord. 1448 § 1 (part), 2004)

5.84.030 Permits and exemptions.
No person shall use any city street, alley, sidewalk, park, right-of-way or other public property owned or controlled by the city for the purpose of taking commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, and commercial still photography without first applying for and receiving a permit from the city administrative officer or designee.
Exemptions:
A. News Media. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect reporters, photographers or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot print media, publishing or broadcasting of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest.
B. Private Video. The filming or videotaping of motion pictures solely for personal use.
C. Studio Filming. Filming activities (motion or still photography) conducted at a studio. (Ord. 1448 § 1 (part), 2004)

5.84.040 Rules and regulations.
The city council will establish by resolution conditions for the issuance of such permits and rules and regulations for activities conducted pursuant to such permits. The city administrative officer is authorized to make minor administrative changes in such rules and regulations as long as they are intended to carry-out the purpose of this chapter and will not have any significant policy impacts. (Ord. 1448 § 1 (part), 2004)

5.84.050 Applications and permit issuance.
A. Issuing Authority. The issuing authority shall be the city administrative officer or designee.
B. Applications. The following information shall be included in the application:
    1. The name of the owner, the address and telephone number of the location(s) at which the activity is to be conducted;
    2. The specific location at such address or place;
    3. The inclusive hours and dates such activity will transpire;
    4. A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed filming activity;
    5. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of such filming activity;
    6. The exact number of personnel to be involved;
    7. Use of any animals or pyrotechnics; and
    8. The exact amount/type of vehicles/equipment to be involved.
    9. Use of public right-of-way.
C. Application Fee. An application fee, payable to the city of San Luis Obispo, is due with the completed application. A reduced fee will be made available for those organizations qualifying as nonprofit or destination marketing as defined in Section 5.84.020(E) and (F).
D. Reimbursement for Personnel. The production company shall reimburse the city for any personnel provided to the company (i.e., police, public works, fire, traffic, parks and recreation) for the purpose of assisting the production at the city’s current billable labor rate.
E. Other Fees. Other city fees to be charged to the applicant as deemed appropriate and as set by council resolution.
F. Denial of Permit. The city administrative officer may deny a permit if the applicant fails to provide adequate information on the application or if the timing of a filming request prevents the city from providing the necessary resources needed to facilitate the activity. (Ord. 1448 § 1 (part), 2004)

5.84.060 Liability provisions.
A. Liability Insurance. Before a permit is issued, a certificate of insurance will be required in an amount to be determined by the risk manager (minimum of one million dollars) naming the city of San Luis Obispo as an “additional insured” and a policy endorsement for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and property damage. The city officers, agents, and employees shall be named as “additional insured.” The endorsement shall not be subject to cancellation or modification without thirty days written notice to the city. A copy of the certificate and endorsement will remain on file.
B. Worker’s Compensation Insurance. An applicant shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for worker’s compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit.
C. Hold Harmless Agreement. An applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the city prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter.
D. Faithful Performance Bond. To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, an applicant may be required to post a refundable faithful performance bond (amount to be determined) at the time the application is submitted. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site by the city, the bond may be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 1448 § 1 (part), 2004)

5.84.070 Appeals.
The applicant shall have the right to appeal a denial within one working day to the city administrative officer. Should the CAO uphold the denial, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council in accordance with appeals procedure in Section 1.20.020 of the city’s municipal code. (Ord. 1448 § 1 (part), 2004)

5.84.080 Permit revocation.
The city may revoke a filming permit at any time if:
A. An emergency arises making it impossible to assign sufficient or appropriate personnel to the filming activity to protect public safety.
B. Information is obtained after the filming permit is issued from which it may be reasonably concluded that the permit should have been denied.
C. The applicant fails to meet the conditions required by the filming permit.
If the city revokes a filming permit, the applicant shall be informed in writing of the grounds for revocation. The applicant may appeal the decision to the city council within ten days unless the cause of the revocation is an emergency and there is insufficient time available to present or schedule an appeal. In such a case, the applicant shall schedule a personal meeting with the CAO, or in his/her absence, the Assistant CAO, to discuss the circumstances. (Ord. 1448 § 1 (part), 2004)

5.84.090 Violation.
If an applicant violates any provisions of this ordinance or a permit issued pursuant thereto, the city may revoke the permit. A violation of this chapter or the terms and conditions of a film permit issued pursuant to this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1448 § 1 (part), 2004)

Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:
6.04         Definitions
6.08         Public Pound
6.12         Impoundment Procedures
6.16         Dog Registration and Licensing
6.20         Animal Control Regulations
6.24         Dog Kennels, Pet Shops, Catteries and Aviaries
6.28         Domestic Animals and Poultry

Chapter 6.04 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
6.04.010     Generally.
6.04.020     Aviary.
6.04.030     Cattery.
6.04.040     Dog kennel.
6.04.050     Pet shop.
6.04.060     Stray dogs.

6.04.010 Generally.
The words and phrases defined herein shall have the meanings set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 4003)

6.04.020 Aviary.
“Aviary” means any lot, building, pen, structure, enclosure or premises where a total of six or more birds are kept. (Prior code § 4003.4)

6.04.030 Cattery.
“Cattery” means any lot, building, structure, enclosures or premises where six or more cats are kept. (Prior code § 4003.3)

6.04.040 Dog kennel.
“Dog kennel” means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises whereon or wherein four or more dogs, four months of age or older, are kept or maintained for any purpose whatsoever, provided, however, that if other animals or birds or fowl are bought, sold or bartered, the classification to apply shall be that of a pet shop; and provided further, that this definition of dog kennel shall not be construed as applying to a duly licensed veterinary hospital nor to the San Luis Obispo County Humane Society. (Prior code § 4003.1)

6.04.050 Pet shop.
“Pet shop” means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises whereon or wherein is carried on a business of buying and selling or bartering birds, animals or fowl; but this definition shall not be construed as applying to the buying or selling of livestock, nor to the business or activities of a duly licensed veterinary hospital, nor to the business or activities of the San Luis Obispo County Humane Society. (Prior code § 4003.2)

6.04.060 Stray dogs.
It is unlawful for any person owning, having interest in, harboring or having charge, care, control, custody or possession of any dog, licensed or unlicensed, to allow, cause or permit such dog to be in or on any public road, highway, street, alley, square, park, school ground or other public place, or in or upon any lot, premises, or property of another. Any dog found running at large in violation of the provisions of any law of the state or of the city shall be deemed a “stray dog,” and for all purposes shall be immediately seized and impounded. (Prior code § 4110)

Chapter 6.08 PUBLIC POUND

Sections:
6.08.010     Established—Location.
6.08.020     Poundmaster—Office created—Appointment—Duties—Compensation.
6.08.030     Poundmaster and deputies—Powers.
6.08.040     Poundmaster and deputies—Badges required.
6.08.050     Poundmaster—Recordkeeping.
6.08.060     Poundmaster—Reports.

6.08.010 Established—Location.
A public pound is hereby provided and the same, and any branches thereof, shall be located and established at such place in the city as shall be fixed from time to time by the council. Such public pound, or any authorized branches thereof, shall provide suitable buildings and enclosures to adequately keep and safely hold all such dogs, animals, poultry or household pets subject to be impounded by the provisions of the ordinance codified herein. (Prior code § 4000)

6.08.020 Poundmaster—Office created—Appointment—Duties—Compensation.
The office of city poundmaster is created. He or she shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the council. It shall be the duty of the poundmaster and his or her duly authorized deputies and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter and all applicable statutes of the state and shall thereupon have charge of the public pound hereby provided and established. The poundmaster shall serve for such period of time and shall receive such compensation as shall be established by the city council. (Prior code § 4000.1)

6.08.030 Poundmaster and deputies—Powers.
The poundmaster and any duly authorized deputies appointed by him or her shall, as provided in the state of California Civil Code, Section 607F, have the power of arrest in connection with the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, and shall have the authority to issue citations as provided in Sections 1.16.010 through 1.16.060. (Prior code § 4000.2)

6.08.040 Poundmaster and deputies—Badges required.
The poundmaster and his or her duly authorized and appointed deputies while engaged in the execution of their duties, shall each wear in plain view a badge having, in the case of the poundmaster the word “poundmaster” and, in the case of the deputy poundmaster, the words “deputy poundmaster” engraved thereon. Any person who has not been appointed as provided in Sections 6.08.020 and 6.08.030, or whose appointment has been revoked and he or she has been notified thereof, who shall represent himself to be or shall attempt to act as the poundmaster or as a deputy poundmaster shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 4000.3)

6.08.050 Poundmaster—Recordkeeping.
The poundmaster shall keep a record of the number, description and disposition of all dogs, animals, poultry and household pets impounded, showing in detail in the case of each, the date of receipt, the date and manner of disposal, the name of the person reclaiming, redeeming or receiving such dogs, animals, poultry and household pets, the reason for destruction and such additional records as the city council may from time to time feel necessary. (Prior code § 4000.4)

6.08.060 Poundmaster—Reports.
The poundmaster shall make a monthly report to the city council, or as often as may be required by the city, of the actions, transactions and operations of the public pound. (Prior code § 4000.5)

Chapter 6.12 IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES

Sections:
6.12.010     Poundmaster enforcement authority.
6.12.020     Poundmaster—Seizure and impoundment of stray dogs.
6.12.030     Dogs running at large.
6.12.040     Delivery of dogs to poundmaster by private persons.
6.12.050     Impoundment—Notice.
6.12.060     Impoundment—Redemption.
6.12.070     Redemption fees.
6.12.080     Sale, gift or destruction of dogs.
6.12.090     Injured and diseased dogs.
6.12.100     Impoundment—Care of dogs—Fees.
6.12.110     Vicious and dangerous dogs.
6.12.120     Impoundment—Biting dogs.
6.12.130     Stray or abandoned cats—Impoundment and disposition.
6.12.140     Resisting or hindering poundmaster in duties unlawful.

6.12.010 Poundmaster enforcement authority.
It shall be the duty of the poundmaster to patrol the incorporated area of the city from time to time and without notice to the public for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Prior code § 4111.1)

6.12.020 Poundmaster—Seizure and impoundment of stray dogs.
It shall be the duty of the poundmaster to seize and impound, subject to the provisions of this chapter, all stray or unlicensed dogs found within the city, and for that purpose the poundmaster may go upon private property, with or without consent of the owner of such property, to enforce this chapter, or to collect and impound dogs. (Prior code § 4111.2)

6.12.030 Dogs running at large.
Any dog found trespassing on any private property in the city may be taken up by any person at interest and delivered to the poundmaster or detained on the property until picked up by the poundmaster. (Prior code § 4111.3)

6.12.040 Delivery of dogs to poundmaster by private persons.
Every person taking up any dog under the provisions of this chapter and every person finding any lost, strayed or stolen dog shall, within twenty-four hours thereafter, give notice thereof to the poundmaster and every such person in whose custody such dog may, in the meantime be placed, shall surrender such animal to the poundmaster without fee or charge and the poundmaster shall thereupon hold and dispose of such dog in the same manner as though such dog had been found running at large and impounded by him or her. (Prior code § 4111.4)

6.12.050 Impoundment—Notice.
Within twenty-four hours after impounding any dog properly registered under the provisions of the ordinance codified herein, the poundmaster shall notify the registered owner of the dog by telephone, mail or orally that such dog is impounded and that it can be redeemed within three days from the date of such impounding and unless redeemed the dog will be disposed of in any manner as provided by this chapter. (Prior code § 4112.0)

6.12.060 Impoundment—Redemption.
The poundmaster shall securely keep any dog impounded for a period of three days unless the same is sooner reclaimed or redeemed by the owner or person having control thereof. The owner or person entitled to the custody of the dog so impounded may, at any time before the sale or other disposition thereof, during the office hours of the pound, reclaim or redeem the same by exhibiting to the poundmaster the license certificate or license tag showing that the license for such dog for the then current year has been paid and by paying the poundmaster any charges provided for in accordance with the adopted schedule which has been approved by the city council. (Prior code § 4112.1)

6.12.070 Redemption fees.
The owner or person entitled to the custody of a dog impounded shall pay the following fees to the poundmaster before such dog is released:
A. Registration or license fee for the current year unless fee has been previously paid and adequate evidence of paid fee is exhibited;
B. Impound fee of fifteen dollars for the first occasion of any dog impounded within a calendar year;
C. Impound fee of fifty dollars for the second occasion the same dog is impounded within a calendar year;
D. Impound fee of one hundred dollars for each subsequent occasion the same dog is impounded within a calendar year. (Ord. 945 § 1, 1983: prior code § 4112.2)

6.12.080 Sale, gift or destruction of dogs.
At any time after the expiration of the period of three days, the poundmaster may, without further notice, and without advertising in any manner, sell, give away or dispose of in a humane way any dog not reclaimed or redeemed as aforesaid. Provided, however, the poundmaster may not sell, give away or transfer title to any dog or any other animal to any institution engaged in the diagnosis or treatment of human or animal disease, or in research for the advancement of veterinary, dental, medical, or biological sciences, or in the testing or diagnosis, improvement or standardization of laboratory specimens, biologic products, pharmaceuticals or drugs. (Prior code § 4112.3)

6.12.090 Injured and diseased dogs.
Every dog taken into custody by the poundmaster which by reason of injury, disease or other good cause as determined by a licensed veterinarian as dangerous or inhumane to keep impounded, shall be forthwith destroyed by the poundmaster in a humane manner unless the owner or person entitled to the custody of the dog can be notified by the poundmaster within a reasonable time to arrange and provide for medical care. The poundmaster shall release such dog to its owner or person having control thereof upon payment of the redemption fees and other charges as provided in this chapter. However, if the licensed veterinarian determines that such dog is diseased and by reason of such disease is dangerous to persons or to other animals, or to the general health and welfare of the city, the poundmaster shall destroy the dog. (Prior code § 4112.4)

6.12.100 Impoundment—Care of dogs—Fees.
The poundmaster shall provide all dogs in his or her custody with proper food and water, and shall give them all necessary care and attention. The poundmaster may establish fees which shall be approved by the council to reflect the costs incurred for the care of such dogs and may charge these fees at the time an impounded dog is redeemed by its owner or person having custody or may charge these fees at such time an unclaimed dog is sold. (Prior code § 4112.5)

6.12.110 Vicious and dangerous dogs.
If any dog within the city is determined by the county health officer to be vicious or dangerous to the safety of any person or persons, or if any such dog is known to have bitten any person or persons on at least three separate occasions as evidenced by affidavits furnished to the county health officer, the health officer shall notify the owner or person having control of such dog to keep the dog in such manner as the health officer shall direct. If it is determined by the county health officer that such dog cannot be properly controlled by the owner or person having custody and no further arrangements can be made to ensure public safety, then the county health officer shall direct the city poundmaster to destroy such dog. (Prior code § 4113.0)

6.12.120 Impoundment—Biting dogs.
Upon written notice by the county health officer, the owner or person having the control of any dog which has, within the preceding ten days, bitten any person or animal shall, upon demand, and in the discretion of the county health officer, follow one of the following procedures, he or she shall either
A. Confine such dog to his or her own premises; or
B. Surrender such dog to the poundmaster who shall impound and keep such dog at the public pound in a separate kennel for a period of not less than ten days; or
C. Surrender such dog to a licensed veterinarian as designated by the county health officer; or
D. Surrender the dog to the poundmaster for quarantine at any other location or facility designated and approved by the county health officer. If the dog is quarantined on the premises of the owner, the poundmaster may post a quarantine sign on such premises, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove the sign during the term of such quarantine without the consent of the county health officer. Any quarantine provided in this section shall be for a term of not less than ten days unless otherwise specified by the county health officer. During the period it shall be the duty of the county health officer, upon being notified by the poundmaster that such dog has been impounded, to determine whether or not such dog is suffering from any disease. If a duly licensed veterinarian designated by the county health officer shall determine that such dog is diseased and by reason of such disease is dangerous to persons or to other animals, he or she shall so notify the poundmaster in writing, to destroy such dog. A copy of the notice may also be served upon the owner or person having control of such dog. If the veterinarian determines that such dog is not so diseased, and if the license required for such dog shall have been duly paid for the then current year, the poundmaster shall notify by mail the person to whom the license for such dog was issued and at the address from which the dog was surrendered to the poundmaster and shall, upon demand, release such dog to the owner or person lawfully entitled thereto, upon payment of any charges provided therefor, in accordance with the schedule approved by the city council, including expenses of quarantine and veterinary care; provided, however, that if no person lawfully entitled to such dog shall within three days after the date of giving the last mentioned notice, appear at the public pound and request the release of such dog, and pay the charges, such dog may be sold or destroyed by the poundmaster in the same manner as hereinbefore provided. (Prior code § 4113.1)

6.12.130 Stray or abandoned cats—Impoundment and disposition.
It shall be the duty of the poundmaster to receive and impound all cats desired to be abandoned by their owners, or receive and impound all stray cats believed to have been abandoned by their owners. The poundmaster shall provide proper care and attention, food and water, for all cats received and impounded and shall keep such cats for a period of three days unless the same are sooner reclaimed or redeemed by the owner or person having control thereof. Such redemption may be made by paying the poundmaster any charges imposed thereon as per adopted schedule approved by the city council. At any time after the expiration of the period of three days, the poundmaster may, without notice and without advertising in any manner, sell, give away, or dispose of such cats. Provided, however, the poundmaster may not sell, give away or transfer title to any cats for any purposes as set forth in Section 6.12.080. (Prior code § 4119.0)

6.12.140 Resisting or hindering poundmaster in duties unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to resist, hinder, molest or obstruct the poundmaster or any of his or her deputies or employees in the exercise of their duties as poundmaster. (Prior code § 4005)

Chapter 6.16 DOG REGISTRATION AND LICENSING

Sections:
6.16.010     License—Required.
6.16.020     Vaccination—Required.
6.16.030     No licensing without vaccination—Exception.
6.16.040     Vaccination—Performance—Tag and certificate issuance.
6.16.050     Recordkeeping.
6.16.060     Tags—Issuance Wearing required.
6.16.070     Annual licensing required.
6.16.080     License—Fees.
6.16.090     Tags—Duplicates.
6.16.100     License—Exceptions.
6.16.110     License—Fee exemptions.
6.16.120     Violations deemed misdemeanor.
6.16.130     Tags—Counterfeiting unlawful.

6.16.010 License—Required.
Except as provided in Section 6.16.100, it is unlawful to own, keep or control any dog unless and except if a license has been procured therefor as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 4115.0)

6.16.020 Vaccination—Required.
It is unlawful for any person owning, harboring or having the care, custody or possession of any dog to keep or maintain such dog in any place in the corporate limits, unless such dog has been vaccinated as provided in this chapter. This section shall have no application to dogs under the age of four months, who are fastened securely by a rope, chain or leash, or confined within the private property of the owner or person having control of the dog. (Prior code § 4115.1)

6.16.030 No licensing without vaccination—Exception.
The county department of animal regulation shall not license any dog until it has been vaccinated with canine rabies vaccine by injection or other method approved by the health officer during the time prescribed by state law, or the rules and regulations of the State Department of Public Health, unless the owner or person in possession of the same submits a certificate from a licensed veterinarian issued within the preceding sixty days, stating that, in his or her opinion, the rabies vaccination would be likely to seriously injure the dog. Any dog so excepted from rabies vaccination shall be restricted to the enclosed yard of the owner or person in possession of the same except when held upon a rope, chain or leash. Any violation thereof by the owner or person in possession of such dog is unlawful. (Prior code § 4115.2)

6.16.040 Vaccination—Performance—Tag and certificate issuance.
A. The vaccination shall be performed by a duly qualified and licensed veterinarian. The veterinarian vaccinating the dog shall issue to the owner or person in possession of the dog a rabies vaccination tag and a certificate of vaccination, which certificate shall include:
    1. The type of vaccine used;
    2. The date of vaccination;
    3. Description of dog, including age, breed and color;
    4. Serial number of rabies vaccination tag issued to dog;
    5. Name and address of owner of dog;
    6. Statement that the dog is male, neutered male, female or spayed female.
B. A copy of this certificate shall be sent to the county department of animal regulation. (Prior code § 4115.3)

6.16.050 Recordkeeping.
The county department of animal regulation shall maintain a record in which it shall, upon the application of any person owning or having the custody of any dog in the city, and the payment to it of the license fee prescribed in this chapter, register the dog by entering in the record its name (if any), its sex and general description, whether it has been spayed or neutered, the name of its owner or custodian, the number of the tag issued therefor the date of expiration of the rabies vaccine, the date of issuance and the amount received for the license fee. (Prior code § 4115.4)

6.16.060 Tags—Issuance Wearing required.
Upon exhibition of the proper evidence of vaccination and payment of the license fee, there shall be delivered to the person making such payment a metal tag with the number and year stamped or cut thereon, and the words “DOG TAG-County of San Luis Obispo,” stamped thereon, which dog tag shall be securely fastened to a collar or harness which must be worn at all times by the dog for which the tag was issued. If the dog is exempted from vaccination, the dog tag shall have a distinguishing mark as evidence of such fact. This tag, while attached to a dog’s collar or harness, shall be prima facie evidence that the dog for which the tag was issued has been licensed during the calendar year for which the tag was issued, and has been vaccinated. (Prior code § 4115.5)

6.16.070 Annual licensing required.
On January 1st of each year, all prior licensing made under the provisions of this chapter shall be cancelled and all tags theretofore issued shall become null and void and of no effect and all dogs kept or permitted to remain in the city must be again licensed. The new license fee shall become due and payable on January 1st of each year. (Prior code § 4115.6)

6.16.080 License—Fees.
The following fees shall be charged:
A. For licensing each altered dog, male or female, the county department of animal regulation shall collect and receive a fee of five dollars, and for licensing each unaltered dog, male or female, it shall collect and receive a fee of ten dollars, unless the owner or custodian of the dog chooses to place a deposit for the spaying or neutering of the dog, with the county department of animal regulation. This deposit shall be forfeited to the county department of animal regulation if the operation is not performed by the expiration date of the license issued.
B. The license fee shall be paid by March 8th of each year. After this date a late penalty shall take effect and the late license fee shall be twice the prepenalty fee.
C. Puppies must be licensed upon reaching the age of four months. A spay-neuter deposit may be placed with the county department of animal regulation, at which time the lesser fee of five dollars shall be charged.
D. Any dog brought within the city after March 15th of each year shall be registered within thirty days or these penalties shall accrue from date of entry into the city: provided, that any dog which has a valid license from any other county or city within the state shall be so registered upon a fee of one-half the established fee. (Prior code § 4115.7)

6.16.090 Tags—Duplicates.
If the tag issued for any duly registered dog is lost or accidentally destroyed during the year it is issued, the owner or custodian of such dog, upon making proof to the satisfaction of the county department of animal regulation of its loss or destruction, shall, upon payment of a fee of two dollars receive for such dog another tag; whereupon the county department of animal regulation shall enter the number of the tag so issued on the register and cancel the tag previously issued for such dog. (Prior code § 4115.8)

6.16.100 License—Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter requiring the licensing of dogs shall not apply to:
A. Dogs under the age of four months if fastened securely by a rope, chain or leash or confined within the private property of the owner or person having control of the dog;
B. Dogs owned by or in custody or under the control of persons who are nonresidents of the city travelling through the city or temporarily sojourning therein for a period not exceeding thirty days;
C. Dogs duly licensed with the current license of an incorporated city within the county or the county;
D. Dogs brought into the city exclusively for the purpose of entering the same in any dog show or exhibition, and which are actually entered in and kept at such show or exhibition;
E. Dogs under the treatment in the custody or control of animal hospitals;
F. Dogs on sale in duly licensed pet shops, nor dogs owned, kept or controlled by any person, firm or corporation having a permit to keep and maintain a dog kennel; provided, that such dogs are kept enclosed within such pet shop or dog kennel;
G. Dogs under the ownership, custody and control of the owner of a dog kennel duly licensed under the provisions of the ordinance codified herein, or his or her duly authorized employee or agent when such dogs are removed from such kennel in the bona fide operation thereof for the purpose of exercise or training; provided, that any such dog bear an identification tag attached to its collar, which tag shall set forth the name of the licensed kennel. A dog bearing such identification tag shall be treated in all respects as any other dog in the event of its escape and subsequent impoundment. (Prior code § 4116.0)

6.16.110 License—Fee exemptions.
A. All seeing-eye dogs and all dogs which have served with the Armed Forces of the United States of America during any period of actual hostilities must be licensed and vaccinated under the provisions of this chapter, but their owners shall be exempt from the license fee imposed by this chapter providing adequate evidence can be furnished at such time the license is issued.
B. Dogs used by any governmental agency for the purpose of law enforcement must be licensed and vaccinated under the provisions of this chapter, but their owners shall be exempt from the license fee imposed by this chapter providing adequate evidence can be furnished at such time the license is issued.
C. All dogs being raised and trained specifically for the purpose to perform as a seeing-eye dog must be licensed and vaccinated under the provisions of this chapter, but their owners shall be exempt from the license fee imposed by this chapter providing adequate evidence can be furnished at such time the license is issued. (Prior code § 4116.1)

6.16.120 Violations deemed misdemeanor.
Any person owning or having the care, custody or control of any dog in the city, who wilfully refuses, fails or neglects to furnish to the county department of animal regulation, the health officer, or any of their duly qualified and authorized deputies or employees, the information necessary to properly license the dog; or who shall resist, hinder or prevent the county department of animal regulation, health officer, or any of their duly authorized deputies or employees in the exercise of their duties or who fails, neglects or refuses to pay the license fee at the time and in the manner herein provided, or who violates any of the provisions of this chapter declared to be unlawful, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 4117.0)

6.16.130 Tags—Counterfeiting unlawful.
No person shall imitate or counterfeit such registration tags or rabies vaccination tags. It is unlawful for any person to remove any tag from any dog not owned by him or her or not lawfully in his or her possession or under his or her control or to place on any dog any such license tag not issued as provided for in this chapter for that particular dog for the then current year or to make or to have in his or her possession or to place on a dog any counterfeit or imitation of any license tag or vaccination tag provided for. (Prior code § 4118.0)

Chapter 6.20 ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS

Sections:
6.20.010     Keeping noisy animals—Prohibited.
6.20.020     Keeping of noisy animals—Complaints—Abatement.
6.20.030     Disposition of dead animals—Owner’s responsibility.
6.20.040     Disposition of dead animals—By poundmaster upon request.
6.20.050     Leash law.
6.20.060     Animals showing rabies symptoms—Responsibility of person having custody.
6.20.070     Menacing and aggressive animals—Animal owner and property owner responsibility.

6.20.010 Keeping noisy animals—Prohibited.
No person shall keep, maintain or permit on any lot or parcel of land any dogs, animals, poultry or household pets, which by any sound or cry shall disturb the peace and comfort of any neighborhood, or interfere with any person in the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life or property. (Prior code § 4001)

6.20.020 Keeping of noisy animals—Complaints—Abatement.
Whenever it shall be affirmed in writing by three or more persons having separate residences or regularly employed in the neighborhood that any dog, animal, poultry or household pet is a habitual nuisance by reason of howling, barking or other noise, or is in any other manner causing undue annoyance, the poundmaster, if he or she finds such nuisance to exist, shall serve notice upon the owner or custodian that such nuisance shall be abated or the animal shall be impounded. If such nuisance and annoyance cannot be successfully abated and the poundmaster determines it necessary to impound such dog, animal, poultry or household pet, he or she shall not permit the reclaiming or redemption of such to the owner or custodian unless adequate arrangements have been made by the owner or custodian to ensure abatement of the annoyance or nuisance. (Prior code § 4001.1)

6.20.030 Disposition of dead animals—Owner’s responsibility.
It is unlawful for any owner or person who, having had the possession or control of any animal, dog, poultry and household pet while alive to place the body of such animal, dog, poultry and household pet, after its death, or cause to permit it to be placed or to knowingly allow or permit the same to remain, in or upon any public road, highway, street, alley, square, park, school ground or other public place, or in or upon any lot, premises or property of another. (Prior code § 4002.2)

6.20.040 Disposition of dead animals—By poundmaster upon request.
It shall be the duty of the poundmaster upon the request of any owner of any dead animal, dog, poultry or household pet which was kept or maintained in the city immediately prior to its death, or upon the request of any person or persons discovering a dead animal, dog, poultry or household pet upon his or her premises or upon any public road, highway, street, alley, square, park, school ground or other public place, or in or upon any lot or premises, to bury or dispose of the same in such manner as maybe prescribed by the health officer. The poundmaster may charge and collect such fees as have been approved by the city council for the transportation and disposal of such animal, dog, poultry or household pet from the owner or person having had the possession or control of such if same can be ascertained. (Prior code § 4002.1)

6.20.050 Leash law.
A. It is unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any dog owned, harbored or controlled by him or her to be on any public street, alley, lane, park or place of whatever nature open to and used by the public in the incorporated area of the city unless such dog is securely leashed and the leash is held continuously in the hand of a responsible person capable of controlling such dog, or unless the dog is securely confined in a vehicle, or unless the dog is at “heel” beside a competent person and obedient to that person’s command.
B. Dogs used on farms and ranches for the primary purpose of herding livestock are not required to be leashed or at “heel” beside their owner or person controlling the use of the dogs while on a public street, alley, lane or place of whatever nature open to and used by the public in the incorporated area of the city while herding such livestock and as long as the dogs are obedient to the commands of the person controlling their use for this purpose.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no person shall allow any dog, whether on a leash or not, to be on any public street, alley, lane, sidewalk or other place open to and used by the public and for which an encroachment, sidewalk or street closure, or similar permit has been issued and the person(s) holding said permit have given reasonable notice that the presence of any dogs would interfere with the purposes for which the permit was issued. This prohibition shall not apply to guide or seeing-eye dogs. (Ord. 1121 § 1, 1988; prior code § 4111.0)

6.20.060 Animals showing rabies symptoms—Responsibility of person having custody.
A. Whenever the owner or person having the custody or possession of an animal shall observe or learn that such animal shows symptoms of rabies, or acts in a manner which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that it may have rabies, such owner or person having the custody or possession of such animal shall immediately notify the county health officer. The county health officer shall make or cause an inspection or examination of such animal to be made by a licensed veterinarian until the existence of or nonexistence of rabies in such animal is established by such veterinarian. Such animal shall be kept isolated in a pound, veterinary hospital, or other adequate facility in a manner approved by the county health officer and shall not be killed or released for at least ten days after the onset of symptoms suggestive of rabies, after which time such animal may be released by the county health officer.
B. The county health officer or his or her duly authorized representative is authorized and empowered to enter upon private property where any dog or other animal is kept, or believed by him or her to be kept, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such dog or other animal is afflicted or infected with rabies or other contagious disease. (Prior code § 4114.0)

6.20.070 Menacing and aggressive animals—Animal owner and property owner responsibility.
A. It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, or maintain any aggressive or menacing animal which threatens, harasses, or intimidates a person who is peaceably and lawfully upon public or private property, unless it is contained in an enclosure of a construction adequate to keep it securely confined and prevent its escape.
B. It is unlawful for any person to permit any animal owned, harbored, or controlled by him or her to attack and cause severe bodily injury or death to another domestic or captive animal while off the property of its owner or keeper.
C. Upon notification of a violation of subsection A of this section, the animal owner(s) must immediately confine the animal to an enclosure or location which mitigates the aggressive and menacing behavior.
D. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
    1. “Aggressive animal” means any animal whose observable behavior causes a person observing that behavior reasonably to believe that the animal may attack a person or another animal without provocation.
    2. “Menacing animal” means any animal which, through its behavior, causes a person observing or subject to that behavior to be in reasonable fear for his or her safety, or the safety of animals kept by him or her. Police or military service canines being utilized in an official capacity are excluded from this definition.
    3. “Severe bodily injury” means any physical injury which results in deep lacerations with separation of subcutaneous tissues, muscle tears or lacerations, fractures or joint dislocations, or permanent impairment of locomotion or special senses.
E. Penalties for violation:
    1. Three hundred fifty dollars for the first violation.
    2. Seven hundred dollars for the second violation of subsection A or B of this section within one year.
    3. One thousand dollars for each additional violation of subsection A or B of this section within one year.
    4. For the purposes of this section, a first violation of subsection A of this section will be deemed to have occurred if the menacing or aggressive animal is not confined as required by subsection C of this section within twenty-four hours of notification; a separate violation of subsection A of this section shall be deemed to exist for each twenty-four-hour period following notification in which an animal’s menacing or aggressive behavior continues unmitigated.
    5. Where criminal enforcement of this section is pursued, any violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor, notwithstanding Section 1.12.060.
F. Liability of Property Owners. Owners of properties upon which a tenant keeps, harbors, or maintains any aggressive or menacing animal may, along with the animal owner(s), be jointly and severally liable for penalties related to violations of subsection A of this section, provided that they have received at least fourteen days’ prior written notice of the existence of such violation and the violation has not been abated. No penalty shall be imposed upon the property owner if the property owner can demonstrate, within fourteen days following notification that a violation has occurred, that the property owner has initiated action to abate the illegal activity on the property. (Ord. 1581 § 1, 2012)

Chapter 6.24 DOG KENNELS, PET SHOPS, CATTERIES AND AVIARIES

Sections:
6.24.010     Permit—Required.
6.24.020     Permit—Revocation.

6.24.010 Permit—Required.
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to erect, establish or maintain any dog kennel, pet shop, cattery or aviary as defined in Chapter 6.04 without first obtaining a permit from the license collector.
B. The granting of such permit shall be in the discretion of the hearth officer who shell take into consideration the type of construction to be employed as it relates to sanitation and manner in which the animals, birds, or fowl are to be housed, as well as the character of the person, firm, corporation or association making application and such zoning regulations as may now be in effect or adopted from time to time. Upon approval of the health officer, the license collector, upon the payment of the annual established license fee for the privilege of maintaining such dog kennels, pet shops, catteries or aviaries shall issue to the applicant a license in such form as he or she may prescribe. Such annual license shall be for the calendar year or any part thereof during which the dog kennel, pet shop, cattery or aviary shall be maintained, and shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of July of each year, and shall expire on the thirtieth day of June of such year, provided the above mentioned permit has not been revoked. Every person, firm or corporation maintaining a dog kennel, pet shop, cattery or aviary shall post a notice in a conspicuous place where it may be seen outside the locked premises, a notice listing names, addresses and telephone numbers of persons who may be contacted in the event of an emergency. (Prior code § 4004.0)

6.24.020 Permit—Revocation.
The permit for the maintenance and operation of a dog kennel, pet shop, cattery or aviary may be revoked at any time for cause when, in the opinion of the health officer, such dog kennel, pet shop, cattery or aviary is not being properly maintained or operated. (Prior code § 4004.1)

Chapter 6.28 DOMESTIC ANIMALS AND POULTRY

Sections:
6.28.010     Definitions.
6.28.020     Animals and poultry running at large—Prohibited—Exceptions.
6.28.030     Animals and poultry running at large—Impoundment—Redemption.
6.28.040     Disposition of impounded animals and poultry.
6.28.050     Unsanitary conditions prohibited.
6.28.060     Keeping of animals—Limitations and regulations.
6.28.070     Bees prohibited—Exception.
6.28.080     Breeding prohibited in city.

6.28.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
A. “Animals” means and includes horses, ponies, mules, jacks, jennies, cows, bulls, calves, heifers, sheep, goats, swine, rabbits and all other domestic or domesticated animals other than household pets.
B. “Household pets” means and includes cats, dogs, canaries, parrots and other kindred animals and birds usually and ordinarily kept as household pets.
C. “Poultry” means and includes pigeons, ducks, geese, turkeys, chickens and all other domestic or domesticated fowl other than household pets. (Prior code § 4120)

6.28.020 Animals and poultry running at large—Prohibited—Exceptions.
No person shall allow or permit animals or poultry, other then household pets, to run at large upon any public street or place, or to trespass upon the property of another. This provision shall not be construed as permitting the running at large of any household pets who are restricted by the provisions of any other ordinances of this city or by any law applicable thereto. (Prior code § 4120.1)

6.28.030 Animals and poultry running at large—Impoundment—Redemption.
All animals and poultry if found running at large upon any public road, highway, street, alley, square, park, school ground or other public place, or in or upon any lot, premises or property of another shall be impounded by the poundmaster and provided with proper care and attention, food and water. The poundmaster shall keep all animals and poultry for a period of three days unless the same is sooner reclaimed or redeemed by the owner or person having control thereof. Such redemption by the owner or person having control thereof, shall be made by signing an affidavit, under penalty of perjury, declaring ownership or by exhibiting proof of ownership to the satisfaction of the poundmaster and by paying to the poundmaster any charges imposed thereon in accordance with a schedule to be approved by the council. Upon such redemption being made, the poundmaster shall release such animals and poultry; provided, however, that in all cases any charges provided for keeping such animals and poultry must be paid. (Prior code § 4120.3)

6.28.040 Disposition of impounded animals and poultry.
At any time after the expiration of the period of three days, the poundmaster may, without further notice, and without advertising in any manner, sell, give away, or dispose of in a humane manner, any animals or poultry not reclaimed or redeemed as set out in Section 6.28.030. Provided, however, the poundmaster may not sell, give away, or transfer title to any animals or poultry for any of the purposes as set forth in Section 6.12.080. (Prior code § 4120.4)

6.28.050 Unsanitary conditions prohibited.
No person shall keep upon any premises, any animals, poultry or household pets in a foul, offensive, obnoxious, filthy or unsanitary condition. (Prior code § 4120.2)

6.28.060 Keeping of animals—Limitations and regulations.
A. Poultry and Rabbits. 
    1. No person shall keep upon any premises in the city any poultry or rabbits:
        a. Within fifty feet of any dwelling; or
        b. If more than five in all of any such rabbits or poultry are kept, within seventy-five feet of any dwelling.
    2. No person shall keep upon any premises in the city more than twenty-five such rabbits or poultry, except by special permit of the council first had and obtained, or keep any rooster of crowing age within one hundred feet of any dwelling. This provision limiting the maximum number of rabbits or poultry shall not be retroactive or effective as to rabbit or poultry ranches or processing plants actually in operation on the effective date of the ordinance codified herein.
    3. The owners or persons in charge of such rabbits or poultry kept in the city shall provide suitable houses or cotes with board or cement floors in each and every house and cote, and the houses, cotes or pens shall at all times be kept clean.
B. Swine, Hogs and Pigs. No person shall keep upon any premises in the city any swine, hog or pig, whatsoever.
C. Other Animals. 
    1. No person shall keep upon any premises in the city any other animals as defined in Section 6.28.010:
        a. On any lot containing less than twenty thousand square feet; or
        b. In any corral, barn or other enclosure which would permit the animals within seventy-five feet of any dwelling;
        c. If staked within one hundred feet of any dwelling.
    2. No person shall tie, stake or pasture, or permit the tying, staking or pasturing, of any animal upon any private property in the city without consent of the owner or occupant of such property in such a way as to permit any such animal to trespass upon any street or public place or upon any such private property. No person shall permit any such animal to be or remain during the nighttime secured by a stake or secured in any manner other than by enclosing such animal in a pen, corral or barn sufficient and adequate to restrain such animal. All such animals shall be provided with adequate food, water and shelter or protection from the weather.
    3. All fences or enclosures used for the purposes set forth in this subsection must be of such material and maintained in such manner as humane for the safety and protection of such animals.
The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to apply to any public educational institution. (Prior code § 4120.5)

6.28.070 Bees prohibited—Exception.
No person, firm or corporation shall keep bees within the corporate limits; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to apply to keeping of bees for the purpose of study and observation in a hive or box, which is situated and kept within a school building. (Prior code § 4120.6)

6.28.080 Breeding prohibited in city.
No owner of, and every person in possession or in charge of, any animal shall breed or permit the breeding of such animal within the city. (Prior code § 4120.7)

Title 7 (RESERVED)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:
8.04         Solid Waste Disposal
8.05         Construction and Demolition Debris Recycling Program
8.06         Expanded Polystyrene
8.07         Plastic Bottled Beverages and Water Bottle Filling Stations
8.08         Hazardous Weeds and Debris
8.09         Single-Use Straws
8.12         Abatement of Dangerous Obstructions in Streambeds
8.14         Tobacco Retailer Licenses
8.16         Smoking Prohibited and Secondhand Smoke Control
8.17         Cigarette Vending Machines
8.18         Regulation of the Sale and Distribution of Tobacco Products
8.20         Food Handling
8.22         Offensive Odors
8.24         Nuisance Abatement
8.28         Hazardous Chemicals Transport
8.32         Liability for Costs of Response to Hazardous Waste or Substance Spills, Releases and Other Incidents

Chapter 8.04 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL

Sections:
8.04.010     Definitions.
8.04.020     Accumulation—Type and placement of containers.
8.04.030     Transportation.
8.04.040     Collection required at least once a week.
8.04.050     Health officer and city engineer to direct removal.
8.04.060     Disposal site.
8.04.070     Use of disposal service mandatory—Collection of charges.
8.04.080     Collection rates.
8.04.090     Condition of collection trucks.
8.04.100     Refuse—Burning or burying.
8.04.110     Emergency removal.
8.04.120     Disposal by producer.
8.04.130     Certain hauling prohibited.
8.04.140     Health regulations—Establishment.
8.04.150     Franchise for collection—Authorization.
8.04.160     Placement of receptacles for pickup—Disputes settlement.
8.04.170     Dumping on private or public premises prohibited.
8.04.180     Owners responsibility to maintain premises free of debris and waste matter.
8.04.190     Placing of handbills or advertising matter in or upon vehicles.
8.04.200     Storage of certain vehicles prohibited.
8.04.210     Clearing of waste matter, debris and vehicles from private property.
8.04.220     Enforcement.
8.04.230     Violation—Penalty.

8.04.010 Definitions.
Words used in this chapter are defined as provided in this section:
A. “City disposal site” means and refers to that certain tract of land which the franchisee shall furnish and use as a place of depositing garbage, rubbish and rubble.
B. “Creek” means a natural stream of water normally smaller than and often tributary to a river. May be seasonal in that it is dry during certain times of the year.
C. “Drainageway” means a route or course along which water moves or may move to drain a region. These are generally manmade as compared to “creeks”.
D. “Franchisee” means and includes a person whom the city has granted the privilege of collecting and disposing of refuse, garbage, rubbish and other solid waste produced within the limits of the city under the terms set out in this chapter, and under the provisions of the Charter of the city, as amended.
E. “Garbage” means and includes kitchen and table refuse, offal, swill and also every accumulation of animal and vegetable refuse, and other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay or dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits or vegetables. It shall also include crockery, bottles, tin vessels, fireplace ashes and all or any refuse, save and excepting as defined in this section as rubbish or rubble.
F. “Incinerator” means and includes fireproof receptacles approved by the city engineer or fire chief, and used for disposing of combustible rubbish on private premises.
G. “Lake” means a considerable inland body of standing water, an expanded part of a river, a reservoir formed by a dam, or a lake basin intermittently or formerly covered by water.
H. “Refuse” means and includes garbage, rubbish or both.
I. “Refuse collector” means and includes the same as the term franchisee, as is defined in subsection D of this section.
J. “Rubbish” means and includes all combustible and noncombustible waste matter, excepting garbage ordinarily accumulating in and about residences, flats, buildings, apartment houses, lodginghouses, hotels, restaurants, eating houses, stores, shops, offices and other public buildings. Among other things, it shall include tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants and weeds, but shall not include rubble.
K. “Rubble” means and includes all debris from the construction, demolition or alteration of buildings, earth, rocks or incinerator ashes, brick, mortar, concrete and similar solid material.
L. “Solid waste” means and includes all waste substances including garbage as well as combustible and noncombustible wastes. (Ord. 1040 (part), 1985: prior code § 5200)

8.04.020 Accumulation—Type and placement of containers.
No person shall deposit, keep, accumulate or permit any rubbish, rubble, garbage or other solid waste to be deposited, kept or accumulated upon any lot or parcel of land, or on any public or private place, creek, lake or drainageway, street, lane, alley or drive, unless the same shall be kept, deposited or allowed to accumulate as provided in this chapter.
A. Garbage. No person shall keep, accumulate or permit to be kept or accumulated any garbage upon any lot or parcel of land, or on any public or private place, street, lane, alley or drive, unless the same shall be in metal or plastic receptacles provided with handles. Each receptacle shall have a capacity of not less than five gallons and not more than thirty-five gallons. The maximum weight of a receptacle and its contents at collection time shall not exceed seventy-five pounds. Each receptacle shall be provided with close-fitting metal or plastic lids or covers which shall be kept closed at all times except when necessarily opened to permit garbage to be taken therefrom or deposited therein. Each receptacle shall be kept in a clean, neat, sanitary condition at all times. The outside of each receptacle, including its cover, shall be kept clean from accumulating grease or decomposing material. Garbage shall not be kept in any creek, lake or drainageway whether it is in a receptacle or not.
B. Rubbish. No person shall keep or accumulate any rubbish or other solid waste unless the same is kept in a suitable box or boxes, barrels or other suitable receptacles to be kept on each of the premises, sufficient to hold the rubbish which would ordinarily accumulate on such premises. Rubbish shall not be kept in any creek, lake or drainageway whether it is in a receptacle or not.
C. Location of Garbage and Rubbish Containers. Each garbage vessel, tank or receptacle, and each rubbish container provided by the owner, manager or person in possession, charge or control of any restaurant, hospital, hotel, boardinghouse, cafe, cafeteria, and other like eating places, apartment houses, and of butcher shops and green vegetable stores and every person occupying a dwelling within the city, shall be kept or placed entirely above ground level at a location which is convenient for access by collection personnel during the time for collection, as follows:
    1. Where there is an alley, other than a blind alley, in the rear of the premises, such vessel, tank, receptacle or rubbish container shall be placed on the premises within five feet of the rear property line.
    2. Where there is no alley, such vessel, tank, receptacle or rubbish container shall be placed on the premises within twenty feet of the rear of the restaurant, cafe, cafeteria, hospital, hotel, boardinghouse, and other like eating places, apartment houses, or dwelling from which garbage or rubbish is accumulated. It may not be placed in any creek, lake or drainageway.
D. Containers which do not comply with the requirements as stipulated in this chapter or which deteriorate to the point where they do not comply will be tagged by the franchisee and, if not replaced by the next regular collection day, will be considered as rubbish and will be removed by the franchisee in the same manner as any other rubbish.
E. No person shall place, store or otherwise keep any garbage or rubbish container in a receptacle or pit in an exterior location which is not entirely above ground level.
F. Refuse and garbage containers shall not be placed adjacent to the street for pickup more than twenty-four hours before pickup time, and such containers shall be removed within the twelve-hour period following pickup, except in the Business Improvement Area (as defined in Chapter 12.36). In the Business Improvement Area, refuse and garbage containers shall not be placed adjacent to the street for pickup before 5:00 p.m. or the close of business on the day preceding pickup, whichever is later. Such containers shall be removed before 10:00 a.m. following pickup.
G. No person shall place any solid waste into a solid waste container without permission of the owner or tenant of the property on which the container sits. (Ord. 1192 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1176 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1040 (part), 1985; prior code § 5200.1)

8.04.030 Transportation.
A. Solid Waste and Rubbish Transportation. No solid waste or rubbish shall be removed and carried on and along the streets and alleys of the city except that the same be carried, conveyed or hauled in conveyances so constructed as to be absolutely dustproof, and so arranged as not to permit dust or other matter to shift through or fall upon the streets and alleys. The contents of such conveyances must be further protected so as to prevent the same from being blown upon the streets, alleys and adjacent lands.
B. Wet Garbage Transportation. No wet garbage shall be removed and carried on or along any street or alley of the city except the same be transported in watertight containers with proper covers, so that the garbage shall not be offensive and every such container shall be kept clean and the garbage shall be so loaded that none of it shall fall, drip or spill to or on the ground, sidewalk or pavement. (Prior code § 5200.2)

8.04.040 Collection required at least once a week.
All garbage or refuse of any kind, shall be removed by the city, its agent, employees, or permittees or representatives, at least once every seven days, unless otherwise directed by the city health office or the city engineer. (Prior code § 5200.3)

8.04.050 Health officer and city engineer to direct removal.
It shall be the duty of any franchisee engaged in or conducting the business of collecting garbage or rubbish to remove rubbish or garbage to which the attention of the franchisee may be directed by the health officer or city engineer, and where garbage or rubbish is accumulated and thence removed, any and all the cost of the removal of garbage or rubbish shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 5200.4)

8.04.060 Disposal site.
A. The franchisee shall contract with the operator of a disposal site situated without the city limits for disposal of solid waste collected within the city. All solid waste collected within the city and not separated for recycling shall be delivered to the disposal site and disposed of according to the regulations of the disposal site.
B. The council is authorized to adopt by resolution all necessary rules and regulations for the efficient and sanitary maintenance of the city disposal site, and to change or amend the same. (Ord. 1176 § 2, 1990: prior code § 5200.5)

8.04.070 Use of disposal service mandatory—Collection of charges.
A. The city has determined that periodic collection and disposal of solid waste from all developed properties in the city benefits all occupants of developed properties in the city.
B. The city will provide solid waste collection and disposal service through its franchisee; and all developed properties in the city must use the city’s solid waste collection and disposal service, except that there may be joint or multiple use of solid waste containers, subject to conditions established by the city.
C. The franchisee shall collect all fees for solid waste collection and disposal.
D. The owner of developed property shall be responsible and liable for paying the solid waste collection and disposal fees for that property, although the franchisee will bill a tenant if requested by the owner.
E. Once each year, prior to a date established by the city, the franchisee may take the following actions to collect delinquent solid waste collection and disposal accounts:
    1. Present to the city a list of property owners (with corresponding parcel numbers) within the city whose accounts are more than one hundred twenty days past due;
    2. Send a certified letter requesting payment to each property owner with a delinquent account;
    3. At least thirty days after receiving delivery certification for payment requests, present to the city a list of property owners (with corresponding parcel numbers) whose accounts are still past due.
F. After the franchisee has completed all of the actions listed in paragraph E, the city council will adopt a resolution authorizing the San Luis Obispo county assessor to assess the amounts due on delinquent accounts as liens against the properties. The franchisee shall bear the full cost of any fees charged by the San Luis Obispo county assessor to lien affected properties. (Ord. 1176 § 3, 1990: prior code § 5200.6)

8.04.080 Collection rates.
Collection rates for solid waste disposal shall be set by a resolution of the council. (Prior code § 5200.6A)

8.04.090 Condition of collection trucks.
Every truck used in the collection and removal of garbage or rubbish shall be kept well painted, clean inside and out, and in a prominent place on each truck display the following sign with appropriate number:REFUSE SERVICE
San Luis Obispo, California
No. ____________
(Prior code § 5200.7)

8.04.100 Refuse—Burning or burying.
A. No waste matter, combustible material or refuse shall be burned in the open air within the city, except barbecue fires.
B. No waste matter which shall, in burning, cause or create a dense or offensive smoke, shall be burned upon any premises within the corporate limits of the city, whether in an incinerator or not, except as noted in subsection A of this section.
C. No garbage, wet garbage, refuse or rubbish shall be disposed of by burying the same underground, except that rubbish and refuse may be made use of for the filling of low areas within the city when it is properly leveled and covered with dirt and upon written permission of the health officer or city engineer. (Prior code § 5200.8)

8.04.110 Emergency removal.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the removal and hauling by an unlicensed person of materials considered by the health officer or city engineer to constitute a health menace of such nature as necessary to be ordered by either of the officers to be promptly removed. (Prior code § 5200.9)

8.04.120 Disposal by producer.
A. Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed to prohibit any producer of refuse, garbage or rubbish from personally hauling in producer’s vehicle, through the streets of the city and disposing of same at the city disposal site; provided, that such hauling and disposal shall at all times be subject to the approval of the health officer.
B. The person in charge of any vehicle used to haul refuse, garbage or rubbish under the permission granted by the provisions of this chapter shall, on request from the custodian of or person in charge at the city disposal site, exhibit satisfactory evidence showing that such refuse, garbage or rubbish accumulated in, and was hauled from, the city, and that the producer thereof is a resident of the city.
C. The permission granted by the provisions of this chapter shall not include the right to haul and dispose of dead animals, the refuse from the construction, demolition or alteration of buildings, old automobile bodies or frames, nor any refuse or rubbish originating in a commercial establishment where the quantity exceeds one cubic yard.
D. The city is authorized, by resolution duly adopted by the council, to provide that any person who shall haul his or her own garbage, refuse or rubbish and dispose of the same at the city disposal site shall pay to the franchisee holding a franchise from the city, a fee for such privilege. The rate of such fee shall be established by such resolution and may be changed from time to time by the council by resolution duly adopted by the council. (Prior code § 5200.10)

8.04.130 Certain hauling prohibited.
No person, other than the franchisee, shall collect, remove or haul solid wastes, including, but not limited to, refuse or rubbish, over the streets of the city; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to producer-hauling as provided in Section 8.04.120, nor to persons who have a permit from the health officer or city engineer for emergency removal of the same. (Prior code § 5200.11)

8.04.140 Health regulations—Establishment.
The city engineer in conjunction with the health officer have power to establish rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter governing the collection and disposal of refuse, garbage, wet garbage or rubbish; provided, that such rules and regulations shall have as their purpose the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the health and sanitary laws and ordinances in effect in the city. (Prior code § 5200.12)

8.04.150 Franchise for collection—Authorization.
For the collection and disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish a franchise may be granted by the city in accordance with and subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the City Charter. (Prior code § 5200.14)

8.04.160 Placement of receptacles for pickup—Disputes settlement.
In all cases of disputes or complaints arising from or concerning the place where the garbage, wet garbage, and rubbish receptacles shall be placed while awaiting the removal of their contents, or concerning the cost of such removal, the same shall be determined by the city council or the health officer, and such decision shall be final. (Prior code § 5200.15)

8.04.170 Dumping on private or public premises prohibited.
No person shall dump, deposit, keep or accumulate any brick, mortar or debris incident to the construction of buildings or any other waste material which, if thrown or deposited, tends to create a hazard to public health, safety and welfare on any public or private place, creek, lake, drainageway, street, lane, alley or drive, except the same be kept, deposited or allowed to accumulate temporarily, during the period of factual construction on premises under construction or alteration, and in a manner approved by the building inspector. Failure of a building permittee to clean up unapproved accumulations within three working days after the building inspector serves written notice upon the permittee or his or her agent so to do shall result in summary suspension of the building permit until such time as the condition is corrected to the satisfaction of the building inspector. The suspension authorized in this section shall be in addition to the misdemeanor penalties provided for elsewhere in this code. (Ord. 1040 (part), 1985: prior code § 5200.16)

8.04.180 Owners responsibility to maintain premises free of debris and waste matter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall, at all times, maintain the premises free of rubbish, garbage, refuse, mortar, debris or any other waste material, except pursuant to a permit approved by the city engineer for fill and compaction work, and provided that this section and Section 8.04.170 shall not prohibit the storage of such waste materials in private receptacles for collection. (Prior code § 5200.17)

8.04.190 Placing of handbills or advertising matter in or upon vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any handbills or advertising matter in or upon any vehicle. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without charge, to the receiver thereof, such handbills or advertising matter to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. (Prior code § 5200.18)

8.04.200 Storage of certain vehicles prohibited.
Storage or parking of unlicensed vehicles or vehicles not in operating condition, for any period in excess of thirty days, is prohibited. The owner or person in control of any private property shall keep the premises free of any such parked or stored vehicles, except where permitted under the city zoning ordinance and pursuant to a valid city business license. (Prior code § 5200.19)

8.04.210 Clearing of waste matter, debris and vehicles from private property.
A. Notice to Remove. The city engineer is authorized and empowered to notify the owner, his or her agent, or person in control of any private premises within the city, to dispose of waste matter prohibited by Sections 8.04.170 through 8.04.190. Such notice shall be given by posting the private premises and by certified mail addressed to the owner, his or her agent, or such other person at his or her last known address, or by personal service on the owner, agent, person in control or occupant of the property.
B. Content of Notice. The notice shall describe the work to be done and shall state that if the work is not commenced within five days after receipt of notice and diligently prosecuted to completion without interruption, the city engineer shall dispose of the litter and the cost thereof shall be a lien on the property. The notice shall be substantially in the following form:NOTICE TO REMOVE WASTE MATTER
The owner of the property described as follows:_________________________________________________________________________________ commonly known as is hereby ordered to properly dispose of the waste matter located on the property, to wit, within five days from the date thereof. If the disposal of the waste matter herein indicated is not commenced and diligently prosecuted to completion within the time fixed herein, the city engineer of the City of San Luis Obispo shall cause such disposal to be done, and the cost thereof, including any incidental expenses will be made a lien upon said property, pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. 250 of the City of San Luis Obispo. 
Estimated Cost of Disposal $____________
Date__________
City Engineer of the City
of San Luis Obispo
C. City Engineer to Keep Record. The city engineer shall cause to be kept in his or her office a permanent record containing: (1) a description of each pared of property for which notice to dispose of waste matter has been given; (2) the name of the owner, if known; (3) the date on which such notice was mailed and posted; (4) the charges incurred by the city in disposing of waste matter, and all incidental expenses in connection therewith; and (5) a brief summary of the work performed. Each such entry shall be made as soon as practicable after completion of such act.
D. Action Upon Noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of the waste matter within five days after notice has been given as provided in this section, or within ten days after the date of mailing such notice in the event the post office department is unable to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner or agent, the city engineer is authorized and empowered to pay for the disposal of such waste matter out of the city funds or to order its disposal by city forces. The city engineer and his or her authorized representatives, including any contractor with whom he or she contracts hereunder, and assistants, employees or agents of such contractor, are authorized to enter upon the property for the purpose of disposing of the waste matter described in the notice. Before the city engineer arrives, any property owner may dispose of the waste matter at his or her own expense.
E. Charge to Owner. When the city has effected the removal of such waste matter, or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of six percent per year from the date of the completion of the work, shall be charged to the owner of such property and the owner, or his or her agent, shall be billed therefor by mail, if not paid prior thereto. The bill shall apprise the owner that failure to pay the bill will result in a lien.
F. Recorded Statement Constitutes a Lien. Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within thirty days after date of the billing by the city engineer, he or she shall cause to be recorded with the city clerk a sworn or certified statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the location of the property on which the waste disposal work was done. The recordation of such sworn or certified statement shall constitute a lien on the property, and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made. The costs and expenses shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of ten percent in the event same is not paid in full on or before the date the amount due becomes a lien. Sworn or certified statements recorded in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest and costs, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. The city clerk shall record the lien. The remedy provided in this section shall not constitute an election of remedies by the city. (Prior code § 5200.20)

8.04.220 Enforcement.
A. The city engineer, the health department and the police department are specifically required to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and shall have the right to enter any and all premises for the purpose of determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being conformed with, and no person shall deny or obstruct such entry.
B. No person shall in any manner interfere with the collection or disposal of garbage, refuse or rubbish by any person authorized by franchise to collect and dispose of the same. (Prior code § 5200.13)

8.04.230 Violation—Penalty.
Every person as defined in this chapter who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor as set forth in Section 1.12.020. (Prior code § 5200.21)

Chapter 8.05 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS RECYCLING PROGRAM

Sections:
8.05.010     Definitions.
8.05.020     Threshold for covered projects.
8.05.030     Submission of recycling plan.
8.05.040     Review of recycling plan.
8.05.050     Compliance with recycling plan.
8.05.060     Infeasible exemption.
8.05.070     Appeals.
8.05.080     Civil penalties.

8.05.010 Definitions.
A. “Applicant” means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, or renovation project within the city, unless otherwise specifically exempted by law.
B. “Compliance official” means the utilities conservation coordinator or his/her designee.
C. “Construction” means the building of any structure or any portion thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure.
D. “Construction and demolition debris” means used or discarded materials removed from premises during construction or renovation of a structure resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on any pavement, house, commercial building, or other structure.
E. “Conversion rate” means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table approved by the city pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in a recycling plan.
F. “Covered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 8.05.020(A).
G. “Deconstruction” means the systematic removal of usable items from a structure.
H. “Demolition” means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.
I. “Divert” means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill.
J. “Diversion requirement” means the diversion of at least fifty percent by weight of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an infeasible exemption pursuant to Section 8.05.060, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the recycling plan compliance official for the project.
K. “Noncovered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 8.05.020(C).
L. “Project” means any activity which requires an application for a building or demolition permit or any similar permit from the city.
M. “Renovation” means any change, addition, or modification in an existing structure.
N. “Reuse” means further or repeated use of construction or demolition debris.
O. “Salvage” means the controlled removal of construction or demolition debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse or storage for later recycling or reuse.
P. “Recycling plan” means a completed recycling plan form, approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered or noncovered project. (Ord. 1381 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.05.020 Threshold for covered projects.
A. Covered Projects. All construction and renovation projects within the city, the valuation of which are, or are projected to be, greater than or equal to fifty thousand dollars (“covered projects”), shall comply with this chapter. The cost of the project shall be the valuation ascribed to the project by the building official. In addition, all demolition projects having a total square footage of more than one thousand square feet shall be a covered project. Failure to comply with any of the terms of this chapter shall subject the project applicant to the full range of enforcement mechanisms set forth in Sections 8.05.050(C)(3) and 8.05.060.
B. City-Sponsored Projects. All city-sponsored construction and renovation projects within the city, the costs of which are, or are projected to be, greater than or equal to fifty thousand dollars (“covered projects”) shall comply with this chapter. The cost of the project shall be the valuation attributed to the permit issued by the building official. In addition, all demolition projects having a total square footage of more than one thousand square feet shall be a covered project. These city-sponsored covered projects shall submit a recycling plan to the compliance official prior to beginning any construction or demolition activities and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter with the exception of Section 8.05.050(C)(3).
C. Noncovered Projects. Applicants for construction, demolition, and renovation projects within the city whose permit valuations are less than fifty thousand dollars (“non-covered projects”) shall be encouraged to divert at least fifty percent of all project-related construction and demolition debris.
D. Compliance as a Condition of Approval. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of approval on any building or demolition permit issued for a covered project.
E. Control of Waste. Regardless of the project size and requirement for a formal recycling plan, all projects shall implement control of waste to prevent the release of pollutants to the storm drain system in accordance with the city’s storm water quality ordinance, set forth in Chapter 12.08. (Ord. 1543 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1381 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.05.030 Submission of recycling plan.
A. Recycling Plan Forms. Applicants for building or demolition permits involving any covered project shall complete and submit a recycling plan on a recycling plan form approved by the city for this purpose as part of the application packet for the building or demolition permit. The completed recycling plan shall indicate all of the following:
    1. The estimated volume or weight of project construction and demolition debris, by materials type, to be generated;
    2. The maximum volume or weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse or recycling;
    3. The vendor or facility that the applicant proposes to use to collect or receive that material; and
    4. The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition debris that will be landfilled.
B. Calculating Volume and Weight of Debris. In estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in the recycling plan, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose.
C. Deconstruction. In preparing the recycling plan, applicants for building or demolition permits involving the removal of all or part of an existing structure shall deconstruct, to the maximum extent feasible, and shall make the materials generated thereby available for salvage. (Ord. 1381 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.05.040 Review of recycling plan.
A. Approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no building or demolition permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the recycling plan compliance official has approved the recycling plan. Approval shall not be required, however, where an emergency demolition is required to protect the public health, welfare or safety as determined by the chief building official. The recycling plan compliance official shall only approve a recycling plan if he or she first determines that all of the following conditions have been met:
    1. The recycling plan provides all of the information set forth in Section 8.05.030(A); and
    2. The recycling plan indicates that at least fifty percent by weight of all construction and demolition debris generated by the project will be diverted.
If the recycling plan compliance official determines that these conditions have been met, he or she shall mark the recycling plan “Approved,” return a copy of the recycling plan to the applicant, and notify the building department that the recycling plan has been approved.
B. Nonapproval. If the recycling plan compliance official determines that the recycling plan is incomplete or fails to indicate that at least fifty percent by weight of all construction and demolition debris generated by the project will be reused or recycled, he or she shall either:
    1. Return the recycling plan to the applicant marked “Denied,” including a statement of reasons, and so notify the building department; or
    2. Return the recycling plan to the applicant marked “Further Explanation Required.” (Ord. 1381 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.05.050 Compliance with recycling plan.
A. Documentation. Prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy for the project, the applicant shall submit to the recycling plan compliance official documentation that the diversion requirement for the project has been met. The diversion requirement shall be that the applicant has diverted at least fifty percent of the total construction and demolition debris generated by the project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an infeasible exemption pursuant to Section 8.05.060, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the recycling plan compliance official for the project. This documentation shall include all of the following:
    1. Receipts from the vendor or facility which collected or received each material showing the actual weight or volume of that material;
    2. A copy of the previously approved recycling plan for the project adding the actual volume or weight of each material diverted and landfilled;
    3. Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this chapter.
B. Weighing of Wastes. Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all construction and demolition debris diverted or landfilled are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all construction and demolition debris shall be weighed by measurement on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For construction and demolition debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose.
C. Determination of Compliance. The recycling plan compliance official shall review the information submitted under Section 8.05.050(A) and determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement, as follows:
    1. Full Compliance. If the recycling plan compliance official determines that the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirements applicable to the project, he or she shall approve the recycling plan and inform the building division that a certificate of occupancy can be issued.
    2. Substantial Compliance. If the recycling plan compliance official determines that the diversion requirement has not been achieved, he or she shall determine on a case-by-case basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort and is in substantial compliance with this chapter. In making this determination, the recycling plan compliance official shall consider the availability of markets for the construction and demolition debris landfilled, the size of the project, and the documented efforts of the applicant to divert construction and demolition debris. If the recycling plan compliance official determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter and is in substantial compliance, he or she shall approve the recycling plan and inform the building division that a certificate of occupancy can be issued.
    3. Noncompliance. If the recycling plan compliance official determines that the applicant is not in substantial compliance with this chapter, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by Section 8.05.050(A), then the applicant shall pay a civil penalty as prescribed in Section 8.05.080.
D. Falsification of Records. If the applicant deliberately provides false or misleading data to the city in violation of this chapter, the applicant may be subject to penalties in addition to those specified in Section 8.05.080. In any civil enforcement action, administrative or judicial, the city shall be entitled to recover its attorneys’ fees and costs from an applicant who is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.
E. Final Approval. All conditions of this chapter shall be met prior to final approval by the building division. (Ord. 1381 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.05.060 Infeasible exemption.
A. Application. If an applicant for a covered project experiences unique circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time that he or she submits the recycling plan required under Section 8.05.030(A). The applicant shall indicate on the recycling plan the maximum rate of diversion he or she believes is feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that he or she believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement.
B. Meeting with Recycling Plan Compliance Official. The recycling plan compliance official shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. The recycling plan compliance official may request that staff from the San Luis Obispo County Integrated Waste Management Authority or designee attend this meeting or may require the applicant to request a separate meeting with San Luis Obispo County Integrated Waste Management Authority staff. Based on the information supplied by the applicant and, if applicable, San Luis Obispo County Integrated Waste Management Authority staff or designee, the recycling plan compliance official shall determine whether it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement.
C. Granting of Exemption. If the recycling plan compliance official determines that it is infeasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement due to unique circumstances, he or she shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this rate on the recycling plan submitted by the applicant. The recycling plan compliance official shall return a copy of the recycling plan to the applicant marked “Approved for Infeasible Exemption” and shall notify the building division that the recycling plan has been approved.
D. Denial of Exemption. If the recycling plan compliance official determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, he or she shall so inform the applicant in writing. The applicant shall have thirty days to resubmit a recycling plan form in full compliance with Section 8.05.030(A). If the applicant fails to resubmit the recycling plan, or if the resubmitted recycling plan does not comply with Section 8.05.030(A), the recycling plan compliance official shall deny the recycling plan in accordance with Section 8.05.040(B). (Ord. 1381 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.05.070 Appeals.
A. Contents of Appeals. An appeal of the recycling plan compliance official decision may be made to the utilities director in writing not longer than ten days after the compliance official’s decision. The decision of the utilities director shall be final. The appellant must specifically state in the notice of appeal:
    1. The name and address of the appellant and appellant’s interest in the decision;
    2. The nature of the decision appealed from and/or the conditions appealed from;
    3. A clear, complete, but brief statement of the reasons why, in the opinion of the appellant, the decision or the conditions imposed were unjustified or inappropriate; and
    4. The specific facts of the matter in sufficient detail to notify the city. The appeal shall not be stated in generalities.
B. Acceptance of Appeal. An appeal shall not be accepted by the utilities director unless it is complete. (Ord. 1381 § 1 (part), 2001)

8.05.080 Civil penalties.
A. Civil Penalty. If the recycling plan compliance official or, upon appeal, the utilities director determines that an applicant is in noncompliance as described in Section 8.05.050(C)(3), the applicant shall pay a civil penalty in the amount calculated as two percent of the total project valuation. Until the civil penalty is paid, a certificate of occupancy may be withheld by the building division.
B. Enforcement. The city attorney is authorized to bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover such civil penalties for the city of San Luis Obispo. (Ord. 1381 § 1 (part), 2001)

Chapter 8.06 EXPANDED POLYSTYRENE

Sections:
8.06.010     Definitions.
8.06.020     Expanded polystyrene disposable food containers prohibited.
8.06.030     Required biodegradable, compostable, or recyclable disposable food containers.
8.06.040     Prohibited sales.
8.06.050     Exemptions.
8.06.060     Violations.

8.06.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
A. “Affordable” means that a biodegradable, compostable or recyclable product may cost up to fifteen percent more than the purchase cost of comparable EPS alternatives.
B. “ASTM standard” means meeting the standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) international standard D6400 or D6868 for biodegradable and compostable plastics, as those standards may be amended.
C. “Biodegradable” means compostable (separately defined) or the ability of organic matter to break down from a complex to a more simple form through the action of bacteria or to undergo this process.
D. “City facility” means any building, structure or vehicle owned and operated by the city of San Luis Obispo, its agents, agencies, and departments.
E. “City contractor” means any person or entity that enters into an agreement with the city to furnish products or services to or for the city.
F. “Compostable” means all the materials in the product or package will break down, or otherwise become part of usable compost (e.g., soil-conditioning material, mulch). Compostable disposable food containers must meet ASTM standards for compostable materials.
G. “Disposable food container” is interchangeable with “to go” packaging and “food packaging material” and means all containers that are used to hold prepared food or drinks. Disposable food containers include clamshells, bowls, plates, trays, cartons, and cups that are intended for single use, including, without limitation, food containers for takeout foods and/or leftovers from partially consumed meals prepared by food providers. This does not include single-use disposable items such as straws, cup lids, or utensils, nor does it include single-use disposable packaging for unprepared foods.
H. “Events promoter” means an applicant for any event permit issued by the city or any city employee(s) responsible for any city-organized event.
I. “Expanded polystyrene” or EPS means blown expanded and extruded polystyrene or other plastic foams which are processed by any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of monomer spheres (expanded bead plastic), injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blown molding (extruded foam plastic). Expanded polystyrene and other plastic foam is generally used to make cups, bowls, plates, trays, clamshell containers, meat trays, ice chests, shipping boxes and packing peanuts.
J. “Expanded polystyrene products” means any item such as coolers, ice chests, cups, bowls, plates, clamshell containers, shipping boxes, or any other merchandise made from expanded polystyrene that is not wholly encapsulated or encased by a more durable material.
K. “Food provider” means any establishment located within the city that is a retailer of prepared food or beverages for public consumption including, but not limited to, any store, supermarket, delicatessen, restaurant, shop, caterer or mobile food vendor.
L. “Person” means an individual, business, event promoter, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit, including a government corporation, partnership, or association.
M. “Prepared food” means food or beverages, which are served, packaged, cooked, chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen, squeezed or otherwise prepared within the city. Prepared food does not include raw, butchered meats, fish and/or poultry sold from a butcher case or similar food establishment.
N. “Recyclable” means any material that is specified in the franchise agreement with the city’s solid waste removal provider including, but not limited to, aluminum, tin and bi-metal cans, clear and colored glass containers, high density polyethylene (HDPE), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), clear or rigid polystyrene, corrugated cardboard and mixed paper.
O. “Vendor” means any store or business which sells or offers goods or merchandise, located or operating within the city of San Luis Obispo, including those referenced in the definition of “food provider.” (Ord. 1617 § 3 (part), 2015)

8.06.020 Expanded polystyrene disposable food containers prohibited.
A. Food providers within the city of San Luis Obispo may not provide prepared food in or provide separately any disposable food container made from expanded polystyrene, except as exempted in Section 8.06.050.
B. Disposable food containers made from expanded polystyrene are prohibited from use in all city facilities.
C. City contractors in the performance of city contracts and events promoters may not provide prepared food in disposable food containers made from expanded polystyrene. (Ord. 1617 § 3 (part), 2015)

8.06.030 Required biodegradable, compostable, or recyclable disposable food containers.
A. All food providers within the city utilizing disposable food containers shall use biodegradable, compostable or recyclable products.
B. All city facilities utilizing disposable food containers shall use biodegradable, compostable or recyclable products.
C. City contractors and events promoters utilizing disposable food containers shall use biodegradable, compostable, or recyclable products while performing under a city contract or permit. (Ord. 1617 § 3 (part), 2015)

8.06.040 Prohibited sales.
No vendor or events promoter in the city may sell or otherwise provide any expanded polystyrene product which is not wholly encapsulated or encased within a more durable material, except as exempted in Section 8.06.050. This specifically includes, but is not limited to, cups, plates, bowls, trays, clamshells and other products intended primarily for food service use, as well as coolers, containers, ice chests, shipping boxes, packing peanuts, or other packaging materials. (Ord. 1617 § 3 (part), 2015)

8.06.050 Exemptions.
A. The city manager or designee may exempt a food provider from the requirements set forth in Section 8.06.020(A) for a single, one-year period upon the food provider showing, in writing, that this chapter would create an undue hardship or practical difficulty as evidenced by no alternatives being available or such alternatives are not affordable. The city manager or designee shall put the decision to grant or deny a one-year exemption in writing, and the decision shall be final.
B. Exemptions to allow for the sale or provision of expanded polystyrene products may be granted by the city manager or designee, if the vendor can demonstrate in writing a public health and safety requirement or medical necessity to use the product. The city manager or designee shall put the decision to grant or deny the exemption in writing and the decision shall be final.
C. An exemption application shall include all information necessary for the city manager or designee to make a decision, including but not limited to documentation showing factual support for the claimed exemption. The city manager or designee may require the applicant to provide additional information.
D. The city manager or designee may approve the exemption application in whole or in part, with or without conditions.
E. Foods prepared or packaged outside the city and sold inside the city are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
F. Raw meat, fish and other raw food trays are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
G. Products made from expanded polystyrene which are wholly encapsulated or encased by a more durable material are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Examples include surfboards, life preservers, and craft supplies which are wholly encapsulated or encased by a more durable material, and coolers encased in hard plastic.
H. Construction products made from expanded polystyrene are exempted from this chapter if the products are used in compliance with Title 15, Buildings and Construction, and Chapter 12.08, Urban Storm Water Quality Management and Discharge Control, and used in a manner preventing the expanded polystyrene from being released into the environment.
I. In a situation deemed by the city manager to be an emergency for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, city facilities, food providers, city contractors and vendors doing business with the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
J. Expanded polystyrene packaging products which have been received from sources outside the city may be reused to be kept out of the waste stream. (Ord. 1617 § 3 (part), 2015)

8.06.060 Violations.
A. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person is subject to administrative fines as provided in Chapter 1.24, which may be appealed pursuant to the procedures in that chapter.
B. For the first violation, the city manager or designee may allow the violating food provider, in lieu of payment of the administrative fine, to submit receipts demonstrating the purchase after the citation date of biodegradable, compostable, or recyclable products in an amount equal to the amount of the citation.
C. Food providers or vendors who violate this chapter in connection with city permitted special events shall be assessed fines as follows:
    1. A fine not to exceed two hundred dollars for an event of one to two hundred persons.
    2. A fine not to exceed four hundred dollars for an event of two hundred one to four hundred persons.
    3. A fine not to exceed six hundred dollars for an event of four hundred one to six hundred persons.
    4. A fine not to exceed one thousand dollars for an event of six hundred or more persons.
D. In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city attorney, including but not limited to administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. (Ord. 1617 § 3 (part), 2015)

Chapter 8.07 PLASTIC BOTTLED BEVERAGES AND WATER BOTTLE FILLING STATIONS

Sections:
8.07.010     Definitions.
8.07.020     Sale/distribution of single-use plastic bottled beverages (under twenty-one ounces) on city property restricted.
8.07.030     New leases, permits, and agreements.
8.07.040     Restricting use of city funds.
8.07.050     Increasing availability of public drinking water.
8.07.060     Exceptions.
8.07.070     Implementation and enforcement.

8.07.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
A. “Bottled beverage” means drinking water, sparkling water, enhanced water, soda, sport drinks, juice, or other similar product in a rigid plastic bottle having a capacity of twenty-one fluid ounces or less, and intended primarily as a single-service container.
B. “City property” means real property, including buildings thereon, owned or leased by the city of San Luis Obispo (“city”), and in the city’s possession or in the possession of any entity under contract with the city. This includes but is not limited to city offices and facilities, plazas, parks, and public right-of-way (sidewalks and streets).
C. “City street” means the public right-of-way (e.g., streets, sidewalks, public alleys).
D. “Event” means any activity which requires a permit pursuant to Chapter 5.80 or Section 12.20.050(C) with three hundred or more persons in attendance or any event which requires a permit pursuant to Chapter 5.80 or Section 12.20.050(C) which is located at Mission Plaza or the Jack House.
E. “Participant athletic event” means an event in which a group of people collectively walk, jog, run, bicycle or otherwise participate in a sport or similar activity on city property.
F. “Rigid plastic bottle” means any formed or molded container made of predominantly plastic resin, having a relatively inflexible fixed shape or form, and intended primarily as a single-service container. (Ord. 1641 § 3 (part), 2017)

8.07.020 Sale/distribution of single-use plastic bottled beverages (under twenty-one ounces) on city property restricted.
A. On or after March 1, 2018, no person may sell or distribute bottled beverages at an event held indoors or outdoors on city property.
B. In the event that containers greater than twenty-one ounces in size are utilized, single-use containers (e.g., single-use plastic cups) may not be used in the serving of beverages. The use of reusable containers is required. (Ord. 1641 § 3 (part), 2017)

8.07.030 New leases, permits, and agreements.
On or after March 1, 2018, the city shall not issue any new leases, contracts, permits, bid proposals, solicitations, or other form of agreement allowing use of city property for purposes that would include the sale/distribution of bottled beverages. This provision shall apply to any such permit renewed, extended, or materially amended as of March 1, 2017. (Ord. 1641 § 3 (part), 2017)

8.07.040 Restricting use of city funds.
A. City funds shall not be used to purchase bottled beverages except as exempted or allowed under this chapter. The city’s purchasing policies shall be amended for consistency with this chapter.
B. It shall be city policy not to have drinking water systems in city offices/facilities that use bottled beverages of any size where sufficient alternatives exist and are feasible. City offices/facilities shall conform drinking water systems to this policy where reasonable. (Ord. 1641 § 3 (part), 2017)

8.07.050 Increasing availability of public drinking water.
A. It shall be city policy to increase the availability of drinking water for public consumption in public areas by ensuring access to drinking fountains, potable water hook-ups, and with particular emphasis on providing water bottle filling stations. City departments will take all reasonable and appropriate steps to promote and facilitate achievement of the intent and requirements of this chapter.
B. It shall be city policy that capital improvement projects in a park, plaza, playground, or other public space shall install devices that provide appropriate availability of drinking water for public consumption such as water bottle filling stations, drinking fountains, and/or potable water hook-ups for public use, if the department finds the installation is proximate and feasible with the scale and scope of the project.
C. It shall be city goal to encourage the inclusion of water bottle filling stations for public use in privately owned developments. (Ord. 1641 § 3 (part), 2017)

8.07.060 Exceptions.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply where the city manager or department finds that relying on bottled beverages (e.g., bottled water) is necessary in a given situation to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and no reasonable alternative will serve the same purpose.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to emergencies.
C. The city manager or designee responsible for permitting an event or issuing a lease on city property may waive the requirements of this chapter in full or in part if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager or designee that strict compliance would not be feasible, would create undue hardship or practical infeasibility, or that other reasonable circumstances warrant waiving the requirements of this chapter.
D. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply where there are hydration requirements for employees working outside (i.e., fieldwork) and no reasonable alternative to plastic beverage bottles will serve the same purpose.
E. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sale/distribution of bottled beverages to participants of a participant athletic event.
F. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an event where the applicant submitted a complete application for review, or received approval, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
G. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair a lease, contract, permit, bid proposal, solicitation, or other form of agreement to which the city is a party on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1641 § 3 (part), 2017)

8.07.070 Implementation and enforcement.
A. Prior to March 1, 2018, the city and departments issuing permits and/or other agreements shall take appropriate steps to update application checklists and other materials as well as educate and inform the public about the requirements of this chapter.
B. In addition to any other remedy available, any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person is subject to the following administrative fines pursuant to the procedures of Chapter 1.24:
    1. A fine not to exceed two hundred dollars for an event of one to two hundred persons;
    2. A fine not to exceed four hundred dollars for an event of two hundred one to four hundred persons;
    3. A fine not to exceed six hundred dollars for an event of four hundred one to six hundred persons; and
    4. A fine not to exceed one thousand dollars for an event of six hundred or more persons. (Ord. 1641 § 3 (part), 2017)

Chapter 8.08 HAZARDOUS WEEDS AND DEBRIS

Sections:
8.08.010     Definitions.
8.08.020     Nuisance declared—Permitting accumulation of weeds and debris unlawful—Permission required to burn weeds or debris.
8.08.030     Notice to abate—Generally.
8.08.040     Notice to abate—Mailing and posting.
8.08.050     Abatement by city—Authority.
8.08.060     Report and assessment list—Contents and filing.
8.08.070     Report and assessment list—Notice of filing.
8.08.080     Rubbish detrimental to health prohibited.
8.08.090     Rat harbors prohibited.
8.08.100     Violation Sections 8.08.080 and 8.08.090—Penalty.

8.08.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively as cited to them in this section:
A. “Weeds” means any of the following:
    1. Weeds which, when mature, bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature;
    2. Any brush or weeds which attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved property;
    3. Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous;
    4. Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions are such as to constitute a menace to the public health; and
    5. Dry grass, stubble, brush, litter, or other flammable material, which endangers the public safety by creating a fire hazard.
B. “Debris” means waste matter, litter, trash, refuse, rubbish, dirt, dry grass, dead trees, tin cans, paper, waste material of every kind, or other unsanitary substance, object or condition which is, or when dry may become, a fire hazard, or which is or may become a menace to health, safety or welfare, or which is offensive to the senses.
C. “Street” means and includes public streets, alleys, parkways, driveways, sidewalks, and areas between sidewalks and curbs. (Prior code § 5220.1)

8.08.020 Nuisance declared—Permitting accumulation of weeds and debris unlawful—Permission required to burn weeds or debris.
The council declares that all weeds growing upon private property or streets in the city and all debris on private property or streets in the city are public nuisances. Also, it is unlawful for any property owner in the city to cause or permit any debris to be or remain on any real property in the city or on portions of streets adjoining such real property to the centerline of such streets. It shall be the duty of every such person to remove or destroy such weeds and/or debris. Destruction by burning within the city shall be unlawful unless the written permission of the chief of the fire department is first obtained. (Prior code § 5220.2)

8.08.030 Notice to abate—Generally.
Whenever the fire chief or his or her authorized representative finds weeds, rubbish or similar material upon any property, lands or lots in the city, which, in his or her opinion, may become a fire hazard, endanger or injure neighboring property, or be detrimental to the health or welfare of the residents in the vicinity of such property, lands or lots, he or she shall cause to be given to the owner of the property a notice to remove such weeds, rubbish or other material which may constitute a fire hazard or public nuisance in the manner provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 5220)

8.08.040 Notice to abate—Mailing and posting.
A. In the event the person or persons owning, occupying, renting, managing or controlling any real property in the city shall fail to remove therefrom, and from the portions of streets adjoining such property, all weeds and debris in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the city fire chief to notify such person or persons to remove the same. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be deposited in the United States Post Office at San Luis Obispo, California, with postage thereon prepaid and addressed to such owner at his or her last known place of address as shown on the assessment roll of the city or of the county, and if no such address is there shown or is known, then to General Delivery, San Luis Obispo, California.
B. If such property is occupied and the mailing address thereof is different from that of the owner as shown on the assessment roll, then an additional copy shall be similarly mailed to the occupant of such property at the mailing address thereof. Also, such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the property, land or lot upon which such weeds, rubbish or similar material are found. Such notice shall contain a description of such property, which description may be the number of the lot and block and the name of the map, tract or subdivision in which such real property lies, or may be the street and number thereof, or may be any other description by which the property may be reasonably and readily identified. One or more lots or blocks of land may be described in one and the same statement or notice. (Prior code § 5220.3)

8.08.050 Abatement by city—Authority.
In the event the person or persons owning, occupying, renting, managing or controlling real property in the city shall fail to remove or destroy weeds and debris in accordance with the notice given pursuant to the provisions of Section 8.08.040 within ten calendar days after the mailing of such notice, it shall be the duty of the fire chief and his or her deputies, assistants, employees, contracting agents, or other representatives, including, without limitation, members of the public works department of the city, to destroy or remove such weeds and debris, and they, and each of them, are expressly authorized to enter upon private property for such purpose, and it is unlawful for any person to interfere, hinder or refuse to allow them to enter upon private property for such purpose and to destroy or remove weeds and debris in accordance with the provisions of this part. Any person owning, occupying, renting, managing, leasing or controlling real property in the city shall have the right to destroy or remove weeds and debris, or have the same destroyed or removed at his or her own expense, at any time prior to the arrival of the fire chief or his or her authorized representative for such purpose. (Prior code § 5220.4)

8.08.060 Report and assessment list—Contents and filing.
The fire chief shall keep an account of the costs to the city to destroy or remove weeds and debris, as provided in Section 8.08.050, for each separate lot or parcel of land and the portions of streets adjoining the same and shall embody such account in a report and assessment list to the council, which report shall be filed with the city clerk and a copy thereof with the director of finance. Such report shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description sufficient reasonably to identify same, together with the expense proposed to be assessed against it, which shall include a seventy-five percent administrative charge and such penalty fees as may be adopted by resolution from time to time by the council. (Ord. 955 (part), 1983: prior code § 5220.5)

8.08.070 Report and assessment list—Notice of filing.
The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and assessment list on or near the door of the Council Chamber of the City Hall, together with the notice of the filing thereof and of the time and place when and where it will be submitted to the council for hearing and confirmation. The posting shall be for at least five calendar days prior to the submission of the report to the council. The fire chief shall mail to the persons, and in the manner prescribed in Section 8.08.040, a notice substantially in the following form:ASSESSMENT FOR DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL OF FIRE HAZARD AND NOTICE OF HEARING THEREON
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8.08 of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code, the Fire Chief has destroyed or removed weeds and debris from the real property owned, occupied, rented, managed, or controlled by you and from the portions of streets, alleys, and sidewalks adjoining the same, which real property is described as follows:
(Here insert description of real property sufficient for reasonable and ready identification.)
The cost of said destruction or removal proposed to be assessed against said property including a 75% administrative charge and a $_____ penalty fee, is $_____. (Ord. 854. § 1980 Series).
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on the _____ day of __________, 19___ at the hour of ______m., in the Council Chambers of City Hall at 990 Palm Street, San Luis Obispo, California, the report of the Fire Chief on the cost of destruction or removal of weeds and/or debris and the assessment list thereon will be presented to the City Council for consideration, correction, and confirmation and that at said time and place, any and all persons interested in or having any objections to said report or list or proposed assessments, or to any matter or thing contained herein, may appear and be heard. The failure to make any objection to said report and list shall be deemed a waiver of the same.
Upon confirmation of said assessment by the City Council, the amount thereon will be payable. In the evens the same is not paid on or before the 15th day of August following the aforesaid hearing, said assessment will be added to the tax bill for said property and thereafter shall become a lien on said property.
Date:_______________
__________________________
San Luis Obispo City Fire
Chief By Fire Marshal
(Ord. 955 (part), 1983: prior code § 5220.6)

8.08.080 Rubbish detrimental to health prohibited.
No person shall have or permit upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or her, any nuisance detrimental to health or any accumulation of rubbish, filth, garbage, decaying animal or vegetable matter or any animal or human excrement. (Prior code § 5220.7)

8.08.090 Rat harbors prohibited.
All accumulation of boxes, boards or other material liable to harbor rats or other rodents shall be neatly piled on racks at least eighteen inches above the ground, except that lumber in commercial lumberyards shall be kept at least six inches above the ground. (Prior code § 5220.8)

8.08.100 Violation Sections 8.08.080 and 8.08.090—Penalty.
If after being notified by any police or health Officer any person shall fail, neglect or refuse to abolish, abate or remove, within one day, any of the matters of things mentioned in Section 8.08.080 or Section 8.08.090 then the city may abolish, abate or remove the same and the person whose duty it was to do so, in addition to incurring penalties provided in this chapter shall become indebted to the city for the costs and charges so expended. (Ord. 979 § 1, 1983: prior code § 5220.9)

Chapter 8.09 SINGLE-USE STRAWS

Sections:
8.09.010     Definitions.
8.09.020     Beverage straws upon request.
8.09.030     Exceptions.
8.09.040     Implementation and enforcement.

8.09.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
A. “Dine-in customer” means a customer that consumes a food or beverage order on the same premises it was ordered.
B. “Single-use” means a product that is designed to be only used one time in its same form by the customer, food vendor or entity.
C. “Take-out food orders” means prepared meals or other food or beverage items that a customer purchases at an establishment and are intended for consumption elsewhere.
D. “Vendor” means any business providing food or beverages within the city of San Luis Obispo. (Ord. 1640 § 3 (part), 2017)

8.09.020 Beverage straws upon request.
On or after March 1, 2018, any vendor shall ask each dine-in customer if the customer wants a single-use beverage straw before providing a single-use beverage straw to the customer. (Ord. 1640 § 3 (part), 2017)

8.09.030 Exceptions.
Take-out food orders are exempt from this chapter. (Ord. 1640 § 3 (part), 2017)

8.09.040 Implementation and enforcement.
In addition to any other remedy authorized by this code, any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person or restaurant is subject to administrative fines as provided in Chapter 1.24. (Ord. 1640 § 3 (part), 2017)

Chapter 8.12 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREAMBEDS

Sections:
8.12.010     Title Purpose.
8.12.020     Definitions.
8.12.030     Enforcement authority.
8.12.040     Dry season—Inspection for dangerous obstructions—Abatement procedures.
8.12.050     Rainy season—Inspection for dangerous obstructions—Emergency abatement procedures.
8.12.060     Rainy season—Removal of dangerous obstruction at public expense pursuant to owner’s prior authorization.
8.12.070     Removing or defacing notices unlawful—Obstructing abatement unlawful.
8.12.080     Obstructions of drainage channels—Abatement.
8.12.090     Abatement charges made lien.
8.12.100     Drainage improvements—Approval required.

8.12.010 Title Purpose.
This chapter shall be cited as “Regulations for the Abatement of Dangerous Obstructions in Streambeds.” It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a speedy, just, equitable and practicable method, to be cumulative to any other remedy available at law or equity, whereby, during the rainy season each year, the city may summarily remove, or require the removal of, structures, trees and other things which have fallen, or which are in imminent danger of falling, into lakes, creeks and streambeds within the city. Such summary removal is necessary because fallen trees, structures, and other things tend to clog drainage channels, bridges and culverts and to restrict and interfere with the free flow of water during periods of heavy runoff, thereby creating an increased danger of flooding. (Prior code § 5221.1)

8.12.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
A. “Dangerous obstruction” means any tree, structure, debris or other thing with a maximum dimension of four feet or more which exists, or which has fallen or is likely to fall during a subsequent flood or wind storm, at a location within or along a streambed where the obstruction could cause interference with or diversion of the stream flow, or could become waterborne during periods of heavy runoff; provided, however, that it shall not mean natural rock or soil formations.
B. “Dry season” means the period extending from May 1st through October 31st of any given year.
C. “Rainy season” means the period extending from November 1st of any given year through April 30th of the succeeding year.
D. “Tree committee” means a technical committee appointed by the council to advise and assist the director of public works in evaluating whether or not any live and standing tree constitutes a dangerous obstruction. (Ord. 1051 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 5221.2)

8.12.030 Enforcement authority.
The director of public works is authorized to make such inspections and take such action as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that a decision by the director of public works that any live and standing tree constitutes a dangerous obstruction shall be of no force and effect for the purpose of this chapter, except in an emergency situation, unless, and until, the tree committee has reviewed and advised the director of their recommendation. Should the recommendation of the tree committee be unacceptable to the director of public works, he or she shall take the issue to the city administrative officer resolution. In the case where the director must act due to an emergency situation he or she shall first advise the city administrative officer. (Ord. 1051 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 5221.3)

8.12.040 Dry season—Inspection for dangerous obstructions—Abatement procedures.
During the period May 1st through September 30th of each year, the director of public works shall inspect all trees, structures and other things within and adjacent to streams, channels and watercourses within the city to determine whether or not any such thing constitutes a dangerous obstruction, as defined in subsection A of Section 8.12.020. Whenever he or she finds any such dangerous obstruction, he or she shall institute public nuisance abatement proceedings for the removal of such obstruction as a hazard, as provided in Chapter 8.24, in sufficient time to permit the completion of the abatement proceedings, including appeals therefrom, before November 1st of the year. (Ord. 1051 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 5221.4)

8.12.050 Rainy season—Inspection for dangerous obstructions—Emergency abatement procedures.
A. Thereafter, during the period extending from November 1st of any given year through April 30th of the succeeding year, the director of public works, after each storm or other occurrence which causes a flow in any stream equal to one-half or more of the capacity of the stream, shall inspect the streambed to determine whether or not there are any dangerous obstructions therein. Any such dangerous obstruction found by him or her is declared to be a public nuisance which may be summarily abated pursuant to the emergency procedures set out in this section.
B. The director of public works shall notify the owner and resident of the real property involved of the existence of a dangerous obstruction upon his or her property by all of the following methods, where applicable:
    1. Posting notice adjacent to the main driveway entrance to the property;
    2. Posting notice upon the main entrance of the principal residence or business building upon the property;
    3. Sending notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person listed on the assessor’s latest equalized roll as to the owner thereof; and
    4. Sending notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the occupant of the principal residence upon the property, addressed to the street address thereof.
C. If no protest has been filed with the city clerk by the owner or resident of the property within five days of the mailing of the letters and the posting of the notices, the city or its contract agent may enter upon the property and abate the dangerous obstruction. The costs of abatement shall be assessed as a tax lien upon the property pursuant to the provisions of Sections 8.24.130 through 8.24.150.
D. If the owner or resident files a protest within the five-day period, the council shall meet in emergency session to determine whether or not the tree, structure or other thing in question constitutes a dangerous obstruction. The decision of the council shall be final and the city may proceed with the summary abatement of any such thing found to be a dangerous obstruction by the council; provided, however, that the council shall first deliver written notice of its intention to proceed with abatement to any adult person found at the residence address within the city given by the owner or resident in the protest; and, further provided, that the summary abatement shall not commence until at least three regular working days after the delivery of the notice. The costs of abatement shall be assessed as a tax lien upon the property pursuant to the provisions of Sections 8.24.130 through 8.24.150.
E. Before the city summarily removes any obstructions under the provisions of subsection D of this section, the city shall prepare and file with the city clerk a detailed report setting forth its reasons for finding the existence of a dangerous obstruction. Wherever possible, photographs should be provided to augment the report. The report and photographs shall be public records available at all times for inspection by the public. (Ord. 1051 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 5221.5)

8.12.060 Rainy season—Removal of dangerous obstruction at public expense pursuant to owner’s prior authorization.
On or before September 30th of each year, the owner of any real property within a streambed may file written authorization with the director of public works for the city to enter upon his or her property and summarily remove any dangerous obstruction found on the property during the ensuing rainy season, without the obligation of providing him or her with further notice or opportunity to be heard. The authorization would assist and expedite the city’s effort to protect the public health, safety and welfare during the rainy season, and the director of public works is authorized to remove any such obstruction at city expense. (Ord. 1051 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 5221.6)

8.12.070 Removing or defacing notices unlawful—Obstructing abatement unlawful.
A. It is unlawful for any person to remove, deface or mutilate any notice, order, statement or resolution posted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any owner or his or her agent or with any representative of the city when engaged in performing any act reasonably necessary for the execution of any order of abatement issued pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 5221.7)

8.12.080 Obstructions of drainage channels—Abatement.
Any structure, fence, conduit, wall, tree, masonry, pipe, lumber or other material which obstructs or constitutes a hazard to the free flow of water through a stream, drainage channel or watercourse is declared to be a public nuisance. Any such public nuisance may be abated under the direction of the director of public works fifteen days after the official has caused a notice of the hazardous condition to be mailed to the concerned property owner or owners by registered mail return receipt requested with a five-day return requested and the cost of such removal shall, after confirmation by the council, constitute a lien and special assessment against the concerned parcel or parcels in accordance with Sections 38773 and 38773.5 of the Government Code of the state, unless the property owner maintaining such nuisance files an appeal from the determination of the director of public works to the council with the city clerk within ten days from the date of mailing the required notice to the property owner. In the event such an appeal to the council is filed, a hearing will be held before the council and no action shall be taken by the director of public works to abate the condition which he or she has classified as a public nuisance until the council has announced its decision. At least ten days prior to the date set for such hearing, the city clerk shall mail a notice by certified or registered mail return receipt requested to the owner of the affected parcel or parcels as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. The owner of the real property on which the nuisance is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement under penalty of perjury in time for consideration at the hearing explaining why, in his or her opinion, the condition of the property does not constitute a nuisance or why the cost of abating the public nuisance should not be assessed against the property upon which the nuisance is located. (Ord. 1051 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 5220.10)

8.12.090 Abatement charges made lien.
If the property owner fails to appeal to the city council within the allotted time or if the council finds that the condition of the property noted by the city engineer constitutes a public nuisance and that the property owner should be responsible for the cost of removing such nuisance, the full cost of abating the public nuisance shall be made a special assessment against the concerned parcel or parcels. The precise cost of the removal shall be announced and confirmed by the city council at a duly noticed hearing of the council as soon as the final costs have been ascertained. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subjected to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment. (Prior code § 5220.11)

8.12.100 Drainage improvements—Approval required.
Any and all drainage improvements on private property must be approved by the city engineer prior to installation. Failure to secure such approval shall render the improvement subject to the public nuisance abatement procedure set forth in Section 8.12.080. (Prior code § 5220.12)

Chapter 8.14 TOBACCO RETAILER LICENSES

Sections:
8.14.010     Purpose.
8.14.020     Definitions.
8.14.030     Requirement for tobacco retailer license.
8.14.040     Application procedure.
8.14.050     Issuance of license.
8.14.060     Display of license.
8.14.070     Fees for license.
8.14.080     Licenses nontransferable.
8.14.085     Noncompliance with tobacco related laws—License violation.
8.14.090     License compliance monitoring.
8.14.100     Suspension or revocation of license.
8.14.110     Appeal of suspension and/or revocation.
8.14.120     Administrative fine—Penalties—Enforcement.
8.14.130     Severability.

8.14.010 Purpose.
It is the intent of the city of San Luis Obispo, in enacting this chapter, to discourage violations of laws which prohibit or regulate the sale or distribution of tobacco products to minors, but not to expand or reduce the degree to which the acts regulated by state or federal law are criminally proscribed or to alter the penalty provided therefor. (Ord. 1440 § 1 (part), 2003)

8.14.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
A. “Electronic smoking device” means an electronic device which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or any other substances (excluding cannabis), including any component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately, including flavored vape juices and liquids used in such devices. “Electronic smoking device” includes any such electronic smoking device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor.
B. “Person” means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.
C. “Proprietor” means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten percent or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have, or can or does share, ultimate control over the day-today operations of a business.
D. “Tobacco product” means any product containing, made from, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, electronic smoking devices or any other preparation of tobacco including Indian cigarettes called “bidis.” “Tobacco product” does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes and is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
E. “Tobacco retailer” means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration tobacco, or tobacco products; “tobacco retailing” shall mean the doing of any of these things.
F. “Licensing agent” means a city employee designated by the city administrative officer to serve in this capacity.
G. “Enforcement agency” means the San Luis Obispo police department.
H. “Hearing officer” means the city employee designated by the city administrative officer to serve in this capacity. (Ord. 1676 § 1 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 1613 § 2, 2015: Ord. 1440 § 1 (part), 2003)

8.14.030 Requirement for tobacco retailer license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer’s license pursuant to this chapter for each location at which that activity is to occur.
No license will be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at other than a fixed location; itinerant tobacco retailing and tobacco retailing from vehicles are prohibited.
No license will be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at any location that is licensed under state law to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises (e.g., an “on-sale” license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control); tobacco retailing in bars and restaurants serving alcoholic beverages is prohibited..
The sale or distribution by an establishment of an electronic smoking device is prohibited in the city of San Luis Obispo, including all nonflavored and flavored electronic smoking device products, including mint and menthol where the electronic smoking device:
A. Requires premarket review under 21 U.S.C. § 387j, as may be amended from time to time; and
B. Does not have a premarket review order under 21 U.S.C. § 387j(c)(1)(A)(i), as may be amended from time to time.
Licenses are valid for one year and each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer’s license prior to its expiration. The conference of a tobacco retailer license does not confer any new rights under any other law and does not exempt any business that otherwise would be subject to the smoke-free workplace provisions within the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code and Labor Code Section 6404.5. (Ord. 1676 § 2 (Exh. A), 2020: Ord. 1440 § 1 (part), 2003)

8.14.040 Application procedure.
A. Application for a tobacco retailer’s license shall be submitted to the licensing agent in the name of each proprietor/person proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be signed by such person or an authorized agent thereof. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the licensing agent and shall contain the following information:
    1. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
    2. The business name, address, and telephone number of each location for which a tobacco retailer’s license is sought.
    3. Such other information as the licensing agent deems necessary for enforcement of this chapter.
    4. Whether or not any proprietor has previously been issued a license pursuant to this chapter that is, or was at any time, suspended or revoked and, if so, the dates of the suspension period or the date of revocation. (Ord. 1440 § 1 (part), 2003)

8.14.050 Issuance of license.
Upon the receipt of an application for a tobacco retailer’s license, the licensing agent shall issue a license unless substantial record evidence demonstrates one of the following bases for denial:
A. The application is incomplete or inaccurate; or
B. The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing by a person or at a location for which a suspension is in effect pursuant to Section 8.14.100 of this chapter; or
C. The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing in an area that is in violation of city zoning pursuant to Title 17 of this code or that is unlawful pursuant to any other local, state, or federal law. (Ord. 1440 § 1 (part), 2003)

8.14.060 Display of license.
Each license shall prominently display the license in a public place at each location where tobacco retailing occurs. (Ord. 1440 § 1 (part), 2003)

8.14.070 Fees for license.
The fee for a tobacco retailer’s license shall be established by resolution of the city council of the city of San Luis Obispo. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the total cost, but no more than the total cost, of license administration and enforcement, including, for example, but not limited to, issuing the license, administering the license program, retailer education, retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violation, and prosecution of violators. The fee for tobacco retailer’s license shall be paid to the licensing agent. (Ord. 1440 § 1 (part), 2003)

8.14.080 Licenses nontransferable.
A tobacco retailer’s license is nontransferable. For example, if a proprietor to whom a license has been issued changes business location, that proprietor must apply for a new license prior to acting as a tobacco retailer at the new location. Or if the business is sold, the new owner must apply for a license for that location before acting as a tobacco retailer. (Ord. 1440 § 1 (part), 2003)

8.14.085 Noncompliance with tobacco related laws—License violation.
Compliance with all local, state and federal tobacco-related laws shall be a condition of a city tobacco retailer license and it shall be a violation of a license for a licensee or his or her agents or employees to violate any local, state or federal tobacco-related law. (Ord. 1473 § 1, 2005)

8.14.090 License compliance monitoring.
Compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the San Luis Obispo police department. At least four compliance checks of each tobacco retailer shall be conducted during each twelve-month period. The cost of compliance monitoring shall be incorporated into the license fee. (Ord. 1440 § 1 (part), 2003)

8.14.100 Suspension or revocation of license.
A. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer’s license may be suspended or revoked if the city finds, after notice to the licensee and opportunity to be heard, that the licensee or his or her agents or employees has violated the conditions of the license imposed pursuant to this chapter.
    1. Upon a finding by the city of a first license violation within any five-year period, the license shall be suspended for thirty days.
    2. Upon a finding by the city of a second license violation within any five-year period, the license shall be suspended for ninety days.
    3. Upon a finding by the city of a third license violation within any five-year period, the license shall be suspended for one year.
    4. Upon a finding by the city of a fourth license violation within any five-year period, the license shall be revoked.
B. A tobacco retailer’s license shall be canceled if the city finds, after notice and opportunity to be heard, that one of the following conditions exists. The revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new application for a license.
    1. The application is incomplete for failure to provide the information required by Section 8.14.040.
    2. The information contained in the application, including supplemental information, if any, is found to be false in any material respect.
    3. The application seeks authorization for a license for tobacco retailing that is unlawful. (Ord. 1440 § 1 (part), 2003)

8.14.110 Appeal of suspension and/or revocation.
A. A decision of the city to revoke or suspend a license is appealable to a hearing officer and must be filed with the hearing officer at least ten working days prior to the commencement date of the license suspension or revocation. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the appealed action. Following appeal, the decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the city administrative officer or his or her designee. A decision of the city administrative officer or his or her designee shall be the final decision of the city.
B. During a period of license suspension, the tobacco retailer must remove from public view all tobacco products. (Ord. 1440 § 1 (part), 2003)

8.14.120 Administrative fine—Penalties—Enforcement.
A. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person is a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in Chapter 1.12, Section 1.12.030 of this code. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person is also subject to administrative fines as provided in Chapter 1.24 of this code.
B. If the city of San Luis Obispo finds, based on substantial record evidence, that any unlicensed person has engaged in tobacco retailing activities in violation of Section 8.14.030 of this chapter, the city shall fine that person as follows. Each day that an unlicensed person offers tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco for sale or exchange shall constitute a separate violation and assessed a fine in accordance with Sections 1.12.080 and 1.24.070(A) of this code.
C. Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances.
D. In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city attorney, including but not limited to administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. (Ord. 1440 § 1 (part), 2003)

8.14.130 Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remaining sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter or the rules adopted hereby. The city council of the city of San Luis Obispo hereby declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases hereof be declared invalid or unenforceable. (Ord. 1440 § 1 (part), 2003)

Chapter 8.16 SMOKING PROHIBITED AND SECONDHAND SMOKE CONTROL

Sections:
8.16.010     Purpose.
8.16.020     Definitions.
8.16.030     Prohibition of smoking in public places, places of employment, and certain other areas.
8.16.040     Prohibition of smoking and tobacco products in outdoor recreational areas.
8.16.050     Where smoking is not regulated.
8.16.060     Reasonable distance required.
8.16.070     Posting of signs.
8.16.080     Compliance.
8.16.090     Violations and penalties.
8.16.100     Severability.

8.16.010 Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to:
A. Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places under circumstances where other persons will be exposed to secondhand smoke;
B. Assure a cleaner and more hygienic environment for the city, its residents, and its natural resources, including its creeks and streams;
C. Strike a reasonable balance between the needs of persons who smoke and the needs of nonsmokers, including children, to breathe smoke-free air, recognizing the threat to public health and the environment which smoking and tobacco causes; and
D. Recognize the right of residents and visitors to the city of San Luis Obispo to be free from unwelcome secondhand smoke. (Ord. 1545 § 1 (part), 2010)

8.16.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall govern unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
A. “Business” means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, or other entity formed for profit-making purposes or that has an employee, as defined in this section.
B. “Dining area” means any area available to or customarily used by the general public, that is designed, established, or regularly used for consuming food or drink.
C. “Electronic smoking device” means an electronic device which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or any other substances, including any component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. “Electronic smoking device” includes any such electronic smoking device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor.
D. “Employee” means any person who is employed; retained as an independent contractor by any employer, as defined in this section; or any person who volunteers his or her services for an employer, association, nonprofit, or volunteer entity.
E. “Employer” means any person, partnership, corporation, association, nonprofit or other entity who employs or retains the service of one or more persons, or supervises volunteers.
F. “Enclosed” means:
    1. Any covered or partially covered space having more than fifty percent of its perimeter area walled in or otherwise closed to the outside such as, for example, a covered porch with more than two walls; or
    2. Any space open to the sky (hereinafter “uncovered”) having more than seventy-five percent of its perimeter area walled in or otherwise closed to the outside, such as, for example, a courtyard.
G. “Multi-unit residence” means a building or portion thereof that contains more than one dwelling space consisting of essentially complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including, for example, permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. A single-family house shared by roommates is not a multi-unit residence for purposes of this chapter.
H. “Multi-unit residence common area” means any indoor or outdoor common area of a multi-unit residence accessible to and usable by more than one residence, including but not limited to halls, lobbies, laundry rooms, outdoor eating areas, play and swimming areas.
I. “Nonprofit entity” means any entity that meets the requirements of California Corporations Code Section 5003 as well as any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational, political, social or similar purposes, the net proceeds of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this section.
J. “Place of employment” means any area under the legal or de facto control of an employer, business or nonprofit entity that an employee or the general public may have cause to enter in the normal course of operations, but regardless of the hours of operation, including, for example, indoor and outdoor work areas, construction sites, vehicles used in employment or for business purposes, taxis, employee lounges, conference and banquet rooms, bingo and gaming facilities, long-term health facilities, warehouses, and private residences that are used as child care or health care facilities subject to licensing requirements.
K. “Playground” means any park or recreational area designed in part to be used by children that has play or sports equipment installed or has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar facility located on public or private school grounds, or on city grounds.
L. “Public place” means any place, public or private, open to the general public regardless of any fee or age requirement, including, for example, streets, sidewalks, parking lots, parking garages, bars, restaurants, clubs, stores, stadiums, parks, playgrounds, taxis, and buses.
M. “Reasonable distance” means a distance that ensures that occupants of an area in which smoking is prohibited are not exposed to secondhand smoke created by smokers outside the area. This distance shall be a minimum of twenty feet.
N. “Recreational area” means any area, public or private, open to the public for recreational purposes regardless of any fee requirement, including, for example, parks, gardens, sporting facilities, stadiums, and playgrounds.
O. “Service area” means any area designed to be or regularly used by one or more persons to receive or wait to receive a service, enter a public place, or make a transaction whether or not such service includes the exchange of money including, for example, ATMs, bank teller windows, telephones, ticket lines, bus stops, cab stands, and takeout counters.
P. “Significant tobacco retailer” means any tobacco retailer that derives seventy-five percent or more of gross sales receipts from the sale or exchange of tobacco products and tobacco product paraphernalia.
Q. “Smoke” means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization of tobacco products or any other weed or plant product, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts. The term “smoke” includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic smoking device vapors and marijuana smoke.
R. “Smoking” means engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as inhaling, exhaling, burning, or vaporizing any tobacco product or any other weed or plant product intended for human inhalation; or the lighting of any tobacco product or any other weed or plant product intended for human inhalation. “Smoking” shall not include the igniting, combusting or vaporizing of material that contains no tobacco products where the purpose of such igniting, combusting or vaporizing is solely olfactory, such as, for example, smoke from incense.
S. “Tobacco product” means any product containing, made from, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, electronic smoking devices or any other preparation of tobacco including Indian cigarettes called “bidis.” “Tobacco product” does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes and is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. (Ord. 1613 § 3, 2015: Ord. 1545 § 1 (part), 2010)

8.16.030 Prohibition of smoking in public places, places of employment, and certain other areas.
A. Enclosed Places. Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed places within the city of San Luis Obispo, except in places listed in Section 8.16.050:
    1. Public places;
    2. Places of employment;
    3. Multi-unit residence common areas;
    4. Enclosed areas adjacent to an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited by any other section of this code, state law, or federal law and that have a common or shared air space such as, without limitation, openings, cracks, air ventilation systems, doorways, hallways, and stairways. Notwithstanding any other provision, the fact that smoke enters one enclosed area from another enclosed area is conclusive proof that the areas share a common or shared air space;
    5. Enclosed areas that have a common or shared ventilation, air conditioning or heating system with an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited. Notwithstanding any other provision, the fact that smoke enters one enclosed area from another enclosed area is conclusive proof that the areas share a common or shared air space.
B. Unenclosed Places. Smoking shall be prohibited in the following unenclosed places within the city of San Luis Obispo:
    1. Places of employment;
    2. Service areas;
    3. Public places including dining areas, except an unenclosed area of a bar that does not serve food. If smoking is permitted in the unenclosed area of a bar that does not serve food, the entire smoking section must be limited to one clearly designated area prominently marked with signs, and must be located at least five feet from any doorway or opening into an enclosed area. Smoking in an unenclosed area of a bar is only permitted provided the smoke does not enter adjacent areas in which smoking is prohibited by any law or by the owner, lessee or licensee of the adjacent property;
    4. Multi-unit residence common areas;
    5. Ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of transit centers, bus shelters and stops; and
    6. The sites of public events including, for example, sports events, entertainment, speaking performances, ceremonies, pageants, and fairs.
C. No person shall dispose of smoking and tobacco materials, waste or debris within the boundaries of an area in which smoking and tobacco products are prohibited, including inside the perimeter of any reasonable distance required by this chapter.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to conflict with or regulate any area subject to exclusive regulation under existing state or federal law. (Ord. 1545 § 1 (part), 2010)

8.16.040 Prohibition of smoking and tobacco products in outdoor recreational areas.
A. Smoking and all forms of tobacco products shall be prohibited in the following places:
    1. In any city park and all its amenities, parking areas, trails, and walkways, including contiguous sidewalks.
    2. In all city open spaces and ecological areas and all appurtenant trail systems, parking areas, and other amenities.
    3. In all city sports facilities, including:
        a. The municipal golf course;
        b. The San Luis Obispo Swim Center;
        c. Skate park;
        d. Roller hockey rink;
        e. All sports fields.
    4. In all city dog parks.
    5. In all public transportation facilities including all bus shelters and bus stops.
    6. In Mission Plaza and the adjacent creek walk from Mission Plaza to Nipomo Street.
B. No person shall dispose of smoking or tobacco waste within the boundaries of an area in which smoking and tobacco products are prohibited, including inside the perimeter of any reasonable distance required by this chapter. (Ord. 1545 § 1 (part), 2010)

8.16.050 Where smoking is not regulated.
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, smoking is permitted in the following enclosed and/or unenclosed places:
A. Significant tobacco retailers in existence as of May 20, 2010, provided within six months of the effective date a dedicated ventilation system is installed and operational; and provided, that minors are at all times prohibited from entering the store. If the condition of the required ventilation system is not met within the specified time then this exception will be null and void.
B. Private residential units, except those used as a child care or health care facility subject to licensing requirements.
C. Up to twenty-five percent of hotel and motel guest rooms, if the hotel or motel permanently designates particular guest rooms as nonsmoking rooms such that seventy-five percent or more of its guest rooms are nonsmoking and ashtrays and matches are permanently removed from such nonsmoking rooms. Permanent “no smoking” signage shall be posted in nonsmoking rooms.
D. Any outdoor area in which no nonsmoker is present and, due to the time of day or other factors, it is not reasonable to expect another person to arrive. (Ord. 1613 § 4, 2015; Ord. 1545 § 1 (part), 2010)

8.16.060 Reasonable distance required.
Smoking in unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from any entrance, opening, crack, or vent into an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited. (Ord. 1545 § 1 (part), 2010)

8.16.070 Posting of signs.
Signs which designate smoking or nonsmoking areas established by this chapter shall be conspicuously posted in every room, building or other place so covered by this chapter. The manner of such posting shall be at the discretion of the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such room, building, outdoor recreation areas, and other places and areas so long as clarity, sufficiency and conspicuousness are apparent in communicating the intent of this chapter. Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to the violation of any other provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1545 § 1 (part), 2010)

8.16.080 Compliance.
A. The city manager or his or her designated representative shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter as to facilities which are owned, operated or leased by the city. The finance director shall provide each business license applicant with a copy of this chapter.
B. The owner, operator or manager of any facility, business or agency within the purview of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. Such owner, operator or manager shall post or cause to be posted all no smoking signs required by this chapter and shall not allow service to any person who violates this chapter by smoking in a posted no smoking area.
C. Any place of employment conducted or operated without compliance with the provisions of Section 8.16.030 applicable thereto shall be and the same is declared to be a public nuisance. Whenever there is reason to believe such public nuisance exists, any affected employee or any resident of the city, in his or her own name, may maintain an action in equity to abate and prevent such nuisance and to perpetually enjoin the employer from maintaining or permitting it. Upon the granting of equitable relief, in whole or in part, by a court of competent jurisdiction, an employer determined to be in violation of Section 8.16.030 shall be liable for the attorney’s fees, as may be determined by the court, incurred by the party bringing the action.
D. The city manager or his or her designee may enforce Section 8.16.030 by either of the following actions:
    1. Serving notice requiring the correction of any violation of that section; or
    2. Requesting the city attorney to maintain an action for injunction to enforce the provisions of Section 8.16.030, to cause the correction of any such violation, and for assessment and recovery of a civil penalty of such violation, including attorney’s fees.
E. Any employer who violates Section 8.16.030 may be liable for a civil penalty, not to exceed five hundred dollars, which penalty shall be assessed and recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the people of the city. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. Any penalty assessed and recovered in an action brought pursuant to this subsection shall be paid to the finance director of the city.
F. In undertaking the enforcement of Section 8.16.030, the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming any duty or obligation, nor is it imposing any duty or obligation on its officers and employees, nor is it liable in money damages or otherwise to any person who claims that (1) the city or one of its officers or employees breached any such obligation, and (2) the breach proximately caused injury. (Ord. 1545 § 1 (part), 2010)

8.16.090 Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of Section 8.16.030 by smoking in a posted no smoking area, or by failing to post or cause to be posted a no smoking sign required by this chapter, or by serving or accommodating any person who violates this chapter by smoking in a posted no smoking area, or by knowingly or intentionally permitting any person to violate this chapter by smoking in a posted no smoking area, is guilty of an infraction, and is subject to punishment as provided for in Chapter 1.12 (General Penalty) or as provided under Chapter 1.24 (Administrative Code Enforcement Procedures). (Ord. 1545 § 1 (part), 2010)

8.16.100 Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 1545 § 1 (part), 2010)

Chapter 8.17 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES

Sections:
8.17.010     Definitions.
8.17.020     Sale of cigarettes and other tobacco products from vending machines prohibited.
8.17.030     Violations and penalties.
8.17.040     Violative cigarette vending machines.

8.17.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as set forth below:
A. “Cigarette vending machine” means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper bill, or other thing representative of value, which dispenses or releases a tobacco product and/or tobacco accessories.
B. “Electronic smoking device” means an electronic device which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or any other substances, including any component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. “Electronic smoking device” includes any such electronic smoking device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor.
C. “Person” shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association, corporation, estate, trust, trustee, or any other group or combination of the above acting as a unit, excepting, however, the United States of America, the state of California, and any political subdivision or unit thereof.
D. “Tobacco accessories” means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed primarily for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products.
E. “Tobacco product” means any product containing, made from, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, electronic smoking devices or any other preparation of tobacco including Indian cigarettes called “bidis.” “Tobacco product” does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes and is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. (Ord. 1613 § 5, 2015: Ord. 1212 § 1, 1992)

8.17.020 Sale of cigarettes and other tobacco products from vending machines prohibited.
The following provisions shall apply within the city limits of the City of San Luis Obispo:
A. No person shall locate, install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance or use on his, her or its premises of any cigarette vending machine used or intended to be used for the purpose of selling any tobacco products or tobacco accessories therefrom.
B. Any cigarette vending machine in use on the effective date of this chapter shall be removed within one hundred twenty days after the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 1212 § 1, 1992)

8.17.030 Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1212 § 1, 1992)

8.17.040 Violative cigarette vending machines.
Any cigarette vending machine not removed from the premises or converted to a permissible use within the time limit set forth by Section 8.17.020(B) shall be deemed to be a public nuisance, and may be abated by the city as specified in the Municipal Code, or in a civil action or other appropriate legal proceedings. (Ord. 1212 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 8.18 REGULATION OF THE SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS

Sections:
8.18.010     Posting of signs.
8.18.020     Sales to minors.
8.18.030     Self-service sales of tobacco.
8.18.040     Out of package sales.
8.18.050     Violation – Penalty.

8.18.010 Posting of signs.
Any person, business, tobacco retailer, or other establishment subject to this chapter shall post plainly visible signs at the point of purchase of tobacco products which state:SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW, PHOTO I.D. REQUIRED.
The letters of said signs must be at least one-half inch high. (Ord. 1325 § 1 (part), 1997)

8.18.020 Sales to minors.
No person, business, tobacco retailer, or owner, manager, or operator of any establishment subject to this chapter shall sell, offer to sell or permit to be sold any tobacco product to an individual without requesting and examining identification establishing the purchaser’s age as eighteen years or greater unless the seller has some reasonable basis for determining that the buyer is at least eighteen years of age. (Ord. 1325 § 1 (part), 1997)

8.18.030 Self-service sales of tobacco.
A. Sales of Tobacco Products by the Pack. It shall be unlawful for any person, business, or tobacco retailer within the city to sell, offer for sale, or display for sale any tobacco product by means of a self-service display. All tobacco products (other than cartons of cigarettes, multicontainer packages of smokeless tobacco and cigars and pipe tobacco displayed for sale pursuant to subsection B of this section) shall be offered for sale exclusively by means of vendor/employee assistance.
B. Sales of Cartons, Cigars, and Pipe Tobacco. Cartons of cigarettes, multicontainer packages of smokeless tobacco and cigars and pipe tobacco may be sold by means of self-service merchandising displays only when such product displays are under the direct observation of a vendor/employee. Tobacco products shall be deemed to be under direct observation of a vendor/employee only if the tobacco products themselves (and not merely the racks, shelves, kiosks, etc., where the products are displayed) are in the plain and direct view of a store employee at all times. (Ord. 1325 § 1 (part), 1997)

8.18.040 Out of package sales.
No person, business, tobacco retailer or other establishment shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all required health warnings. (Ord. 1325 § 1 (part), 1997)

8.18.050 Violation – Penalty.
Any person, business owner, or proprietor, or employee of any business or establishment subject to the requirements of this chapter who violates any mandatory provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, and is subject to punishment as provided for in Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 1325 § 1 (part), 1997)

Chapter 8.20 FOOD HANDLING

Sections:
8.20.010     Pastries—Refrigeration requirements.
8.20.020     Fruits and vegetables.
8.20.030     Authority to close food or drink establishments for protection of public health.

8.20.010 Pastries—Refrigeration requirements.
All custard or cream filled pastries shall be kept refrigerated at all times between May 1st and October 31st, inclusive, of each calendar year, at a temperature not higher than fifty degrees Fahrenheit, except when actual sale is being made. The apparatus used in filling such pastries shall be made of metal or rubber and cleaned before each use, by means of boiling water or live steam or other suitable method. (Prior code § 6270.8)

8.20.020 Fruits and vegetables.
In or on the premises of any food or drink establishment or any establishment where fruits or vegetables are sold, offered for sale or given away, all fruits or vegetables shall be kept at least eighteen inches above the floor level at all times, unless protected by wood, metal or glass cases. Vegetables, fruits or other products, when delivered to such establishments, shall not be left upon the sidewalk any longer than is absolutely necessary. (Prior code § 6270.9)

8.20.030 Authority to close food or drink establishments for protection of public health.
The health officer, with the approval of the council, is authorized to order the immediate closing of any food or drink establishment when in his or her opinion such action is necessary for the protection of the public health. (Prior code § 6270.10)

Chapter 8.22 OFFENSIVE ODORS

Sections:
8.22.010     Purpose.
8.22.020     Prohibited activities declared a public nuisance.
8.22.030     Continuing violations.
8.22.040     Severability.

8.22.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to define and establish standards for the regulation of persistent odors within the city. The intent of these standards is to ensure that odors emanating from sources or locations within the city do not adversely impact or unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of property. (Ord. 1614 § 2 (part), 2015)

8.22.020 Prohibited activities declared a public nuisance.
A. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance to cause or permit any persistent odors, which are offensive to individuals of normal sensitivity and which adversely impact or unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of property, to emanate across any parcel or property line.
B. An odor shall be presumed offensive to individuals of normal sensitivity if the city receives three or more verified complaints of a persistent odor emanating across a property line from individuals representing separate residences or places of business within the city within a one-month time span concerning an odor emanating from a single source. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require three complaints before the city may initiate enforcement action.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the normal operations of any governmental agency or municipal facility operating pursuant to otherwise applicable law or regulatory permit. (Ord. 1614 § 2 (part), 2015)

8.22.030 Continuing violations.
Each day a violation is allowed to continue in violation of this chapter shall constitute a new and separate offense. (Ord. 1614 § 2 (part), 2015)

8.22.040 Severability.
If any part or subsection of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, unlawful, or unconstitutional, such invalidity, unlawfulness, or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity, lawfulness, or constitutionality of any other part of this chapter. (Ord. 1614 § 2 (part), 2015)

Chapter 8.24 NUISANCE ABATEMENT

Sections:
8.24.010     Title.
8.24.020     Public nuisances designated.
8.24.030     Abatement methods.
8.24.040     Resolution setting public hearing.
8.24.050     Posting notice of public hearing.
8.24.060     Serving notice of public hearing.
8.24.070     Notice—Proof of posting and service.
8.24.080     Hearing by council.
8.24.090     Hearing—Council’s determination.
8.24.100     Time limitation for filing objections to council’s determination.
8.24.110     Resolution order abatement—Service and recordation.
8.24.120     Abatement by City.
8.24.130     Statement of abatement costs.
8.24.140     Confirmation of statement of abatement costs.
8.24.150     Assessment of costs—Notice of lien—Collection.
8.24.160     Prohibited acts.
8.24.170     Alternative methods of abatement or enforcement.
8.24.180     Maintaining a nuisance—Criminal sanctions.
8.24.190     Maintaining a nuisance—Private cause of action.
8.24.200     Severability.

8.24.010 Title.
This chapter may be cited as the “nuisance abatement ordinance of the city”. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400)

8.24.020 Public nuisances designated.
Each of the following shall constitute a public nuisance which may, at the sole discretion of the city, be abated in accordance with the abatement procedures set forth in this chapter. In addition, criminal sanctions may be imposed for the maintenance of a public nuisance as set forth in Section 8.24.180 of this chapter.
A. Any structure, as defined in the Building Code, which exists, or which is maintained or used upon any premises in violation of any requirement or prohibition of any law, ordinance or permit, including, without limitation, requirements or prohibitions related to location, construction, condition, maintenance, use, or time period limitation.
B. Any premises upon which there exists any condition, thing or use in violation of any requirement or prohibition of any law, ordinance or permit related to the condition, maintenance or use of the premises.
C. Any unlawful encroachment which obstructs or interferes with the free passage or use by the public of any public sidewalk, street, alley or right-of-way.
D. The occurrence of more than two loud or unruly assemblages in any sixty-day period that threatens the public peace, health, safety or general welfare and requires a police response to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare. The determination of a public nuisance under this subsection shall expire eighteen months after the date of the resolution ordering abatement as set forth in Section 8.24.110 of this chapter.
E. As applied to this chapter, the determination of a “response” will be when the police department responds to a location, observes a violation of applicable state or municipal violations, and the tenant is issued a disturbance advisement card, a citation, or is arrested for the applicable violation.
F. Anything constituting a public nuisance as specifically defined or declared by any other law or ordinance. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.1)

8.24.030 Abatement methods.
Public nuisances ordered to be abated under the provisions of this chapter may be abated by rehabilitation, repair, demolition, removal or other appropriate action as determined by the council after compliance by the city with the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.2)

8.24.040 Resolution setting public hearing.
A. Whenever the council finds, based upon the recommendations of the city administrative officer or any department head, that a public nuisance may exist upon any premises, the council may, by resolution, declare its intent to hold a public hearing to ascertain whether the same constitutes a public nuisance which may be abated under the procedure set forth in this chapter.
B. The resolution shall describe the premises by street address, referring to the street by the name under which it is officially or commonly known, shall further describe the property by giving the lot, block and tract number thereof where applicable and the parcel number from the assessment roll, shall give a brief description of the facts forming the basis for the finding, and shall contain a brief statement of the possible methods available to abate the alleged nuisance. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.3)

8.24.050 Posting notice of public hearing.
Within thirty days after the passage of the resolution and at least fifteen days before the time fixed for the public hearing, the city clerk shall cause to be conspicuously posted on the premises a certified copy of such resolution, and a notice of the time and place of hearing before the council, which notice shall be titled, “Notice of Public Hearing” in letters not less than one inch in height and shall be substantially in the following form:NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING TO DETERMINE EXISTENCE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE AND TO ABATE IN WHOLE OR PART
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on (date) at the hour of ___.M., the Council of the City of San Luis Obispo will hold a public hearing in the Council Chambers of City Hall, 990 Palm Street, San Luis Obispo, California, to ascertain whether a public nuisance exists upon certain premises situated in said City known and designated as _______________ (street address) and more particularly described as Lot No. ____, Block No. ____, Tract No. ____, and shown as Parcel No. _____ in Book ____, Page ____ in the assessment roll of the County of San Luis Obispo.
    If the Council finds upon the evidence presented at the hearing that a public nuisance does exist, and if the same is not promptly abated by the owner of said premises, said nuisance may be abated by municipal authorities by rehabilitation, repair, demolition, removal or other appropriate action, the cost of which will constitute a lien upon such premises until paid. In addition, the owner may be subject to criminal sanctions for the maintenance of a public nuisance as set forth in San Luis Obispo Municipal Code Section 8.24.180.
    The alleged nuisance consists of the following:_________________________________________________________________________________________________________________.
    All persons having any objection to, or interest in said matters are hereby notified to appear at the public hearing at the aforesaid time and place, when their testimony and evidence will be heard and given due consideration.
    Dated:_______________
__________________
City Clerk”   
(Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.4)

8.24.060 Serving notice of public hearing.
A. At least fifteen days before the time fixed for the public hearing, the city clerk shall cause to be served upon each of the owners thereof one copy of the notice of public hearing and a certified copy of the resolution of the council. “Owner” as used in this chapter shall mean any person known to be in possession and also any person having any legal or equitable interest in the premises as disclosed by a current title search from an accredited title company.
B. Service shall be by personal service upon any owner whose name and address appears upon the last equalized assessment roll and who can reasonably be found within the city limits. Service upon all other owners may be accomplished by depositing a stamped, sealed envelope containing a copy of the notice and resolution in the U.S. Certified or Registered Mail, return receipt requested, addressed to each owner at his or her last known address; and if there is no known address, then in care of the address of the premises. Service shall be deemed to be complete at the time of such deposit. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the abatement proceedings. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.5)

8.24.070 Notice—Proof of posting and service.
Before the commencement of the public hearing, the city clerk shall verify that affidavits or declarations establishing proof of posting of the premises and proof of service upon all owners within the required time periods have been filed in his or her office. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.6)

8.24.080 Hearing by council.
At the time stated in the notice, the city council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive testimony under oath from owners, witnesses, city personnel and interested persons relative to the existence of the alleged public nuisance, the estimated costs of abating the same, and any other matters which the council deems pertinent thereto. The hearing may be continued from time to time by the council. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.7)

8.24.090 Hearing—Council’s determination.
A. After the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall, based upon the hearing, determine whether or not a public nuisance exists upon the premises, or any part thereof.
B. If the council finds that such public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to require the abatement thereof, the council may adopt a resolution declaring the existence of the nuisance upon the premises, and ordering the abatement of the same within thirty days, or within such other time limit as the council may specify, by the manner and means specifically set forth in the resolution. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.8)

8.24.100 Time limitation for filing objections to council’s determination.
Any owner or other interested person having any objections or feeling aggrieved at any proceeding taken by the council in ordering the abatement of any public nuisance under the provisions of this chapter must bring an action to contest such decision within thirty days after the adoption by the council of the resolution ordering the abatement of the nuisance. Otherwise, all objections to such decision shall be deemed waived. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.9)

8.24.110 Resolution order abatement—Service and recordation.
A copy of the resolution ordering the abatement of the nuisance shall be served upon the owners of the property in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.24.060. Any property owner shall have the right to have any such premises rehabilitated or to have such structures demolished, removed or repaired in accordance with the resolution, at his or her own expense, provided the same is done prior to the expiration of the time limit specified in the resolution. Upon such abatement in full by the owner, proceedings under this chapter shall terminate. If the nuisance has not been abated as ordered within the specified time limit, the city clerk shall file in the office of the recorder of the county a certificate describing the property and certifying (1) that the property is a public nuisance and (2) that the owner has been so notified. Whenever thereafter the public nuisance has been abated as ordered, the city clerk shall file a new certificate with the county recorder certifying that the property is no longer a public nuisance. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.10)

8.24.120 Abatement by City.
If such nuisance is not completely abated by the owner within the time limit specified by the council, the council may direct the city administrative officer, or such other city official as may be designated by him or her, to cause the same to be abated by city forces or private contract, and city and contract personnel are expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purpose. Upon request of the designated official, other city departments shall cooperate fully and shall render all reasonable assistance in abating any such nuisance. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.11)

8.24.130 Statement of abatement costs.
A. The city administrative officer shall keep an account of the costs incurred by the city in abating the nuisance, and shall submit to the council an itemized statement for each lot or parcel showing all such costs, including incidental expenses, and noting any salvage value or storage costs of items removed from the property; provided, that before the statement is considered by the council, a copy of the same shall be posted for at least five days upon such lot or parcel, together with a notice of the time and place when the statement will be considered by the council for confirmation. A copy of the statement and notice shall also be served upon the owners of the lot or parcel in the manner provided in Section 8.24.060 for serving the notice of public hearing; provided, that the date of service must be at least prior to the date the council considers the statement. Proof of the posting and service shall be accomplished as provided in Section 8.24.070.
B. The term “incidental expenses” shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in obtaining title reports, in the preparation and service of notices, preparation of specifications, the preparation and award of all contracts, all costs of inspecting any work done pursuant to this chapter, the cost of printing and mailing required under this chapter, the costs of preparing materials for any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, and a reasonable additional sum to cover the cost of administrative overhead. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.12)

8.24.140 Confirmation of statement of abatement costs.
At the time and place for considering the statement, the council shall consider the statement together with any objections or protests thereto by the owners or other interested persons. The decision of the council on all protests shall be final and conclusive, and the council may approve the statement as submitted, or may modify it as the council deems just and equitable. Thereafter, the council shall adopt a resolution confirming the statement as submitted or as modified. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.13)

8.24.150 Assessment of costs—Notice of lien—Collection.
A. Both the owner of the property on which the nuisance was abated and all persons who created, caused, committed or maintained the nuisance shall be personally liable to the city for the abatement costs confirmed by the resolution. In addition, the abatement costs shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the county recorder of a notice of lien, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such assessment.
B. The form for the notice of lien shall be substantially as follows:NOTICE OF LIEN
(Claim of City of San Luis Obispo)
Pursuant to the authority granted by the laws of the State of California and the Charter and ordinances of the City of San Luis Obispo, and in compliance with the provisions thereof, said City has expended the sum of $___ to abate a public nuisance upon the hereinafter described real property, the City Council of said City has adopted Resolution No. ___ confirming said sum as the cost of abatement, and said sum now constitutes a special assessment and lien upon said real property until said sum has been paid in full and discharged of record.
Said real property is situated within the City of San Luis Obispo, County of San Luis Obispo, State of California, more particularly described as follows:
(LEGAL DESCRIPTION)
Dated:__________, 19_________.
_____________________
City Clerk
City of San Luis Obispo
C. After recordation, a certified copy of the notice of lien shall be delivered to the tax collector and thereafter the amount of the lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes, or, after such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.14)

8.24.160 Prohibited acts.
A. It is unlawful for any person to remove, deface or mutilate any notice, order, statement or resolution posted as required in this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any owner or his or her agent or with any representative of the city when engaged in performing any act reasonably necessary for the execution of the order of abatement. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.15)

8.24.170 Alternative methods of abatement or enforcement.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to prevent the city from commencing any civil or criminal proceedings otherwise authorized by law for the declaration or abatement of a nuisance or for the prosecution of a criminal offense which may also constitute a nuisance. The procedures provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and shall not prevent concurrent or consecutive procedures provided in this chapter, the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code or by state law for the abatement of a public nuisance. Abatement of a public nuisance or imposition of criminal sanctions under this chapter shall not prejudice or affect any other civil or criminal action or remedy for the maintenance of a public nuisance. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991: prior code § 4400.16)

8.24.180 Maintaining a nuisance—Criminal sanctions.
If the owner of any premises fails or neglects to remove or otherwise take action to abate the public nuisance, as herein defined, within the time specified in this chapter, the owner of the premises shall be guilty of an infraction for maintenance of such public nuisance. However, a third or subsequent violation of this chapter within a period of one year shall be a misdemeanor. Each and every day any such public nuisance exists constitutes a separate offense. The violations shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991)

8.24.190 Maintaining a nuisance—Private cause of action.
If the owner of any premises fails or neglects to remove or otherwise take action to abate the public nuisance, as herein defined, any aggrieved person may, in addition to any other right or remedy they may possess either at law or in equity, bring a civil action against the owner for damages or injunctive relief for the maintenance of a public nuisance. The court may award the prevailing party in such action the costs of litigation, including reasonable attorney’s fees. Actions under this section must be filed within one year of the act or condition giving rise to a public nuisance. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991)

8.24.200 Severability.
If any part or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, then the remainder of the chapter, including the application of such part or provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force and effect. To this end, provisions of this chapter, in whole and in part, are severable. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 8.28 HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS TRANSPORT

Sections:
8.28.010     Prohibited chemicals.
8.28.020     Exceptions.
8.28.030     Temporary suspension.

8.28.010 Prohibited chemicals.
No person shall transport into or through the city any quantity of chemicals or substances specified as follows:
A. Nitrogen tetroxide.
B. Red fuming nitric acid.
C. Hydrazine.
D. Rocket fuel, or any chemical components thereof. (Ord. 1109 § 1, 1988)

8.28.020 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to chemicals, materials, or rocket fuels shipped by or for the United States Government for military or national security purposes or which are related to national defense. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the disclosure of any defense information or restricted data as defined by federal law, statute or regulation. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 1988)

8.28.030 Temporary suspension.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the fire chief may order the temporary suspension of the transportation of any of the above described material determined to pose an extreme and unreasonable risk to persons residing within the city, pending the acquisition of necessary emergency equipment and the preparation of operational plans and emergency procedures. (Ord. 1109 § 3, 1988)

Chapter 8.32 LIABILITY FOR COSTS OF RESPONSE TO HAZARDOUS WASTE OR SUBSTANCE SPILLS, RELEASES AND OTHER INCIDENTS

Sections:
8.32.010     Purpose and authority.
8.32.020     Definitions.
8.32.030     Liability for unauthorized disposal or release.
8.32.040     Liability for failure to comply with orders.
8.32.050     Computation of costs.
8.32.060     Recovery of costs where real property is the subject of enforcement.
8.32.070     Recovery of costs where real property is not the subject of enforcement.
8.32.080     Levy, collection and enforcement of special assessment upon real property.

8.32.010 Purpose and authority.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish liability for reimbursement of the city’s expenses incurred in connection with corrective action necessitated by violations of the hazardous waste and substance control laws. The authority for this chapter includes the city charter, the general police power; the provisions of Article 6 of Chapter 10 of Part 2 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 38771); Sections 3479 and 3494 of the California Civil Code; Section 510 of the California Health and Safety Code, (hereinafter “Health and Safety Code”), and the provisions of Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section 25100) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1283 § 1, 1995)

8.32.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “City” means the City of San Luis Obispo.
B. “Corrective action” includes, without limitation, any “remedial action” within the meaning of Section 25322 of the Health and Safety Code and any “removal” within the meaning of Section 25323 of the Health and Safety Code.
C. “Disposal” has the meaning assigned to that term by Section 25113 of the Health and Safety Code.
D. “Hazardous waste or substance” means a waste or substance that consists of a material listed in either the List of Chemical Names or the List of Common Names appearing in Section 66680 of Title 22 of the California Administrative Code, a waste or substance as defined in either Section 25280, Section 25316 or Section 25400 of the Health and Safety Code.
E. “Hazardous waste and substance control laws” means Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section 25100) or Chapter 6.7 (commencing with Section 25280) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code or any permit, rule, regulation, standard or requirement issued or promulgated pursuant to such chapters.
F. “Release” has the meaning assigned to that term by Section 25320 and Section 25321 of the Health and Safety Code.
G. “Unauthorized disposal or release” means any disposal of a hazardous waste or substance which is in violation of the provisions of Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section 25100) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code, any “unauthorized release” within the meaning of Section 25280 of the Health and Safety Code, or any release of a hazardous waste or substance which is not “a release authorized or permitted within the meaning of Section 25326 of the Health and Safety Code.
H. “Person” has the meaning assigned to that term by Section 25118 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1283 § 1, 1995)

8.32.030 Liability for unauthorized disposal or release.
If the city takes any corrective action which, in the judgement of either the city administrative officer or his/her appointed officer, is reasonably necessary to remedy or prevent an imminent substantial danger to the public health, domestic livestock, wildlife or the environment arising out of any unauthorized disposal or release of hazardous waste or substance, the following described persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the cost incurred by it in taking any such corrective action:
A. The person or persons whose negligent or willful act or omission proximately caused such disposal or release;
B. The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous waste or substance at the time of such disposal or release, without regard to fault or proximate cause; and
C. The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the container which held such hazardous waste or substance at the time of or immediately prior to such disposal or release, without regard to fault or proximate cause. (Ord. 1283 § 1, 1995)

8.32.040 Liability for failure to comply with orders.
If the city administrative officer or his/her appointed officer issues a lawful order directing any person who has violated or is in violation of any provisions of the hazardous waste or substance control laws to take corrective action respecting such violation, and if such person does not take corrective action on or before the date and time specified in the order, the city may take or contract for the taking of such corrective action. If such corrective action is taken by or contracted for by the city, the person to whom the order was directed shall be liable to the city for the cost incurred by it in taking or contracting for such corrective action. If such corrective action is taken by the person to whom the order is directed or by such person’s agent, the person to whom the order is directed shall be liable to the city for the cost of supervising such corrective action or otherwise verifying compliance to the order. (Ord. 1283 § 1, 1995)

8.32.050 Computation of costs.
The costs referred to in Section 8.32.030 and Section 8.32.040 shall include, in addition to the city’s direct out-of-pocket expenses, the cost of all city personnel engaged in such work computed in accordance with the city’s standard accounting procedures for computing the hourly cost of services by such personnel and any other costs or fees set by resolution. (Ord. 1283 § 1, 1995)

8.32.060 Recovery of costs where real property is the subject of enforcement.
All costs as computed by Section 8.32.050 shall constitute a lien against the real property and special assessment against the real property owned by a person liable under this chapter if said property is the subject of the enforcement. Moreover, all such costs shall also be a personal obligation against the property owner, recoverable in a civil action as provided by Section 8.32.070. (Ord. 1283 § 1, 1995)

8.32.070 Recovery of costs where real property is not the subject of enforcement.
Where real property is not the subject of the enforcement, the amount of such costs for which liability is imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be recoverable in a civil action by the city and shall be in addition to any other fees or penalties authorized by law, provided that any sums actually received by the city in connection with such work pursuant to Chapter 6.8 (commencing with Section 25300) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code shall be credited against any amount recoverable in such civil action (Ord. 1283 § 1, 1995)

8.32.080 Levy, collection and enforcement of special assessment upon real property.
The following procedure shall apply concerning the levy, collection, and enforcement of a special assessment for the recovery of costs as provided by Section 8.32.060.
A. On or before June 1st of each year, the director of finance or his/her appointed officer shall give notice to each real property owner to be levied by causing personal service to be made upon the owner, agent, or person in control of the subject real property, or by depositing such notice in the United States Mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner of the subject real property, at the address shown by the last equalized assessment roll. The notice shall bear the date of personal service or mailing and shall set forth the rights and procedures governing a request of hearing as provided for herein.
B. Within ten days of the date of the notice, the owner or any other person interested in the subject real property may request a hearing on the correct amount of the proposed assessment. Such request shall be in writing and shall state the objections, name and address of the person filing the request. The request shall be filed with the department of finance.
C. If a hearing is requested, notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing, to the party requesting the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the director of finance who shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence and shall hear all facts and testimony he/she deems pertinent. The decision of the director of finance is a final order.
D. Any interested party may appeal the decision of the director of finance by filing a written notice of appeal with the director within five days after his/her decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, modify, or reverse the order or take other action it deems appropriate. The city clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to appellant, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing. In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence.
E. On or before July of each year, the city administrative officer or his/her appointed officer shall prepare a list of parcels of real property which are subject to such costs. On or before the tenth day of July each year, the city administrative officer or his/her appointed officer shall transmit, upon resolution and approval by city council, such list to the county auditor and request the auditor to enter the amounts of the respective assessments against the respective parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll.
F. The assessment shall be included on the bills for taxes levied against respective lots and parcels of real property, and such assessment shall be listed separately on the tax bill. Thereafter, the amounts of such assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as county taxes are collected.
G. San Luis Obispo County may deduct its reasonable costs incurred for its services in connection with such collection before remittal of the balance to the city treasury.
H. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of county taxes are applicable to such special assessment made pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1283 § 1, 1995)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:
9.04         Possession of Open Containers or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages in Public Places
9.05         Underage Persons and Alcohol
9.06         Prohibition on Aggressive Solicitation
9.08         Drug Paraphernalia
9.09         Psychoactive Herbal Incense, Psychoactive Bath Salts and Other Synthetic Drugs
9.10         Cannabis Regulations
9.12         Noise Control
9.13         Unruly Gatherings
9.16         Weapons
9.18         Expired
9.20         Miscellaneous Prohibitions
9.21         Second Response Cost Recovery
9.22         Safety Enhancement Zones
9.30         Nudity in Public Places
9.40         Public Benches
9.50         Curfew

Chapter 9.04 POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES

Sections:
9.04.010     Prohibition.
9.04.020     Exceptions.

9.04.010 Prohibition.
It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession on his or her person, while on any city street, sidewalk, alley, roadway, parking lot, publicly maintained place or any place open to the public any bottle, can or other container or receptacle, containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, or to consume alcoholic beverages while in the above restricted areas. (Ord. 1070 § 1 Ex. A (part), 1986: prior code § 4600)

9.04.020 Exceptions.
A. The prohibition set out in Section 9.04.010 shall not apply to a business licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages or to any person in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 12.20 of this code regarding the consumption of alcohol in a city park.
B. The council, by resolution, may provide for other temporary or limited exceptions to the prohibitions set out in Section 9.04.010. (Ord. 1070 § 1 Ex. A (part), 1986: prior code § 4601)

Chapter 9.05 UNDERAGE PERSONS AND ALCOHOL

Sections:
9.05.010     Hosting a gathering where underage persons consume alcohol.

9.05.010 Hosting a gathering where underage persons consume alcohol.
Except as permitted by Article I, Section 4 of the California Constitution and by state law, it is unlawful for any person to permit, allow, or host a party, gathering, or event at his or her place of residence or other private property, place or premises under his or her control where three or more persons under the age of twenty-one years are present and alcoholic beverages are being possessed or consumed by one or more persons under the age of twenty-one years at that location. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor and deemed to be a threat to the public peace, health, safety, and general welfare and is therefore subject to second response cost recovery pursuant to Section 9.21.050. (Ord. 1525 § 2, 2009)

Chapter 9.06 PROHIBITION ON AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION

Sections:
9.06.010     Definitions.
9.06.020     Prohibition of aggressive soliciting.
9.06.025     Prohibition of solicitation from specified locations.
9.06.030     Demand for services.
9.06.040     Free speech.
9.06.060     Violation—Penalty.

9.06.010 Definitions.
A. General Definition. For the purposes of this chapter, an individual (solicitor) coerces, threatens, hounds, or intimidates another (solicitee) when:
    1. The solicitor’s conduct would cause a reasonable person in the position of the solicitee to fear for his or her safety; or
    2. The solicitor intentionally blocks the path of the solicitee; or
    3. The solicitor persists in following the solicitee closely, while the solicitor continues to demand money or other thing of value, after the solicitee has informed the solicitor by words or conduct that the solicitee does not want to give money or other thing of value to the solicitor to which the person demanding payment is not entitled under law.
B. “Solicit” means to ask for money or goods as a charity, whether by words, bodily gestures, signs or other means.
C. “Solicitor” is one who solicits as defined in subsection (B) of this section.
D. “Fear for Safety” Defined. The following facts, among others, may be considered in deciding whether a reasonable person would be caused to fear for his or her safety:
    1. The occurrence of threatening gestures or other threatening conduct of the solicitor, including following the solicitee.
    2. The proximity of the solicitor to the solicitee and the duration of the solicitation.
    3. The making of physical contact with the solicitee.
E. “Intentionally block” means to walk, stand, sit, lie or place an object in such a manner as to block passage by another person or a vehicle or to require another person or driver of a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact. (Ord. 1243 § 1 (part), 1993)

9.06.020 Prohibition of aggressive soliciting.
It shall be unlawful for any person on the streets, sidewalks, or other places open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned, to intentionally coerce, threaten, hound, or intimidate another person for the purposes of soliciting alms. (Ord. 1243 § 1 (part), 1993)

9.06.025 Prohibition of solicitation from specified locations.
A. In order to promote the safe and orderly flow of traffic and to prevent the harassment and intimidation of citizens and visitors in the vicinity of cash dispensing institutions or facilities, and commercial and retail establishments, no person may solicit or beg for any moneys, goods or services, including offering any services in exchange for moneys, goods or services, while located:
    1. Within twenty-five feet of any ATM or similar cash machine, bank, or savings and loan; or
    2. Within six feet of the entrance to a commercial establishment or driveway thereto, or a driveway serving a shopping center; or
    3. Within ten feet of any intersection of city streets, including intersections of city streets and state highways or state highway on- or off-ramps; or
    4. On any median in any city street; or
    5. On the roadway of any city street intended for the use of vehicular traffic, including approaching and/or attempting to interfere with the movement of any occupied vehicle while such vehicle is being operated on any city street.
B. This section shall not apply to a registered nonprofit organization conducting a fundraising activity within a commercial parking area with the permission of the owner, provided such activity does not interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic entering or exiting the parking area onto city streets and said organization has obtained all necessary permits. (Ord. 1491 § 1, 2006)

9.06.030 Demand for services.
This chapter is not intended to proscribe any demand for payment for services rendered or goods delivered. (Ord. 1243 § 1 (part), 1993)

9.06.040 Free speech.
This chapter is not intended to restrict the exercise of protected free speech. (Ord. 1243 § 1 (part), 1993)

9.06.060 Violation—Penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and is subject to punishment as provided for in Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 1243 § 1 (part), 1993)

Chapter 9.08 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA

Sections:
9.08.010     Title.
9.08.020     Definitions.
9.08.030     Prohibitions.
9.08.040     Exemptions.

9.08.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “drug paraphernalia sale and display regulations of the city.” (Prior code § 4700)

9.08.020 Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:
A. “Drug paraphernalia” shall have the meaning ascribed to it by Section 11364.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.
B. “Minor person” means a person under the age of eighteen years. (Prior code § 4701)

9.08.030 Prohibitions.
A. Except as provided by law, no person maintaining or operating any place of business in which drug paraphernalia is kept, displayed or offered in any manner, sold, furnished, transferred or given away shall allow the display of such drug paraphernalia to a minor unless:
    1. The minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; and
    2. The drug paraphernalia is completely and wholly kept, displayed or offered within a separate room or enclosure. Each entrance to such room or enclosure shall be sign posted in reasonably visible and legible words to the effect that drug paraphernalia is kept, displayed or offered in such room or enclosure and that minors, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, are excluded.
B. Unless authorized by law, no person shall sell, furnish, transfer or give away drug paraphernalia to a minor. (Prior code § 4702)

9.08.040 Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
A. Any pharmacist or authorized person who sells or furnishes hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, into the human body upon the prescription of a physician, dentist, podiatrist or veterinarian.
B. Any physician, dentist, podiatrist or veterinarian who furnishes or prescribes hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, into the human body to his or her patients.
C. Any manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer licensed by the California State Board of Pharmacy to sell or transfer hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, into the human body. (Prior code § 4703)

Chapter 9.09 PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE, PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS AND OTHER SYNTHETIC DRUGS

Sections:
9.09.010     Purpose and intent.
9.09.020     Definitions.
9.09.030     Provision, display for sale, sale or distribution of synthetic drugs prohibited.
9.09.040     Provision, display for sale, sale or distribution of substances claimed or represented to be synthetic drugs prohibited.
9.09.050     Possession of synthetic drugs prohibited.
9.09.060     Public nuisance.
9.09.070     Confiscation of synthetic drugs.
9.09.080     Revocation of business license.
9.09.090     Penalties.
9.09.100     Seizure of evidence.
9.09.110     Exclusions.

9.09.010 Purpose and intent.
Recreational use of psychoactive herbal incense, psychoactive bath salts and similar products known as “synthetic drugs” has been documented to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal ideations, cannibalism and death. While state and federal laws and regulations prohibit some synthetic drugs, the makers of these drugs continually alter the composition of the compounds in their products so as to escape the purview of these laws and regulations.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to prohibit the sale or possession of psychoactive herbal incense and psychoactive bath salts, as those terms are defined herein, in the city to protect and preserve the public peace, safety, health, and welfare of those within the city and to provide the city with reasonable measures to address the dangers to the community posed by synthetic drugs, including those not regulated by state or federal law. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to cease or limit or encroach in any way upon any field of law occupied by federal law or by the laws of the state of California. (Ord. 1622 § 2 (part), 2015)

9.09.020 Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
“Business” shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in Section 5.01.103.
“Consume,” “consuming” or “consumption” shall mean to ingest, inhale, inject, smoke or snort (insufflate).
“Distribute,” “distributing” or “distribution” shall mean to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver or supply, whether for monetary gain or not.
“Person” shall include any natural person, business, firm, company, corporation, public corporation, club, trust, partnership, association or similar organization.
“Possess,” “possessing” or “possession” shall mean to have for consumption, distribution or sale in one’s actual or constructive custody or control, or under one’s authority or power, whether such custody, control, authority or power be exercised solely or jointly with others.
“Provide,” “providing” or “provision” shall mean offering to distribute or sell a product or substance to any person.
“Psychoactive bath salts” shall mean any crystalline or powder product that contains a synthetic chemical compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects. The term “psychoactive bath salts” includes without limitation:
    1. Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects and contain any of the following intoxicating chemical compounds:
        a. Salvia divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as Salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts;
        b. Cathinone (2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone), 4- methylmethcathinone (2-methylamino-1-(4-methylphenyl)propan-1-one), 4-methoxymethcathinone (1-(4-methoxyphenyl)-2-(methylamine)propan-1-one), MDPV (methylenedioxypyrovalerone), MDMA (3, 4- methylenedioxy-N-methylamphetamine), methylene (3,4-methylenedioxy- N-methylcathinone), methcathinone (2-(methylamino)-1-phenyl-propan-1- one), flephedrone (4-fluoromethcathinone), 3-FMC (3- fluoromethcathinone), ethcathinone (2-ethylamino-1-phenyl-propan-1-one), butylone (β-keto-N-methylbenzodioxolylbutamine), a-PPP (a- pyrrolidinopropiophenon), MPPP (4-methyl-a-pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MDPPP (3',4'-methylenedioxy-a-pyrrolidinopriopiophenone), a-PVP (1- phenyl-2-(1-pyrrolidinyl)-1-pentanone) or naphyrone (1-naphthalen-2-yl-2- pyrrolidin-1-ylpentan-1-one), 6-APDB (6(2aminopropyl)2,3 dihydrobenzo-furan), and analogs of MDA (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine);
        c. Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds;
        d. Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical structure similar to the above listed compounds;
        e. Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; or
        f. Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound; and
    2. Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects and are marketed under any of the following trade names: Bliss, Blizzard, Blue Silk, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Cloud Nine, Euphoria, Hurricane, Ivory Snow, Ivory Wave, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Ocean Burst, Pixie Dust, Posh, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Red Dove, Scarface, Snow Leopard, Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White Dove, White Night and White Lightning.
The term “psychoactive bath salts” shall not include any product, substance, material, compound, mixture or preparation that is specifically excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (“UCSA”) (Health and Safety Code Section 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA’s schedules of controlled substances (Health and Safety Code Sections 11053 through 11058), regulated by one of the UCSA’s Synthetic Drug Laws (Health and Safety Code Sections 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401), regulated by the Federal Controlled Substances Act (the “CSA”) (21 USC Section 801 et seq.) or approved by the Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”).
“Psychoactive herbal incense” shall mean any organic product consisting of plant material that contains a synthetic stimulant compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects. The term “psychoactive herbal incense” includes without limitation:
    1. Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects and contain any of the following chemical compounds:
        a. Cannabicyclohexanol (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methylnonan-2-yl)phenol), JWH-018 (naphthalene-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone), JWH-073 (napththalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone), JWH-200 ((1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-2-yl)-naphthalen-1-ylmethanone), HU-210 or 1.1-dimethylheptyl-11-hydroxy-delta8-tetrahydrocannabinol) ((6aR,10aR)-9- (Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol), CP 47, 497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3- hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) and the dimethylhexyl, dimethyloctyl and dimethylnonyl homologues of CP 47,497 (2-[1R,3S)-3- hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) or AM-2201 (1-[(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]-(napthalen-1-yl)methanone), 1-Pentyl-3 (2- methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (also known as JWH-250), 1-Hexyl-3-(1- naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-019), 1-Pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1- naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-398), N-benzylpiperazine (also known as BZP), 1-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl)piperazine (also known as TFMPP);
        b. Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds;
        c. Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical structure similar to the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds;
        d. Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds;
        e. Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound; or
        f. Any other synthetic cannabinoid.
    2. Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects and are marketed under any of the following names: K2, K3, Spice, Genie, Smoke, Potpourri, Buzz, Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake, Black Mamba, Stinger, Ocean Blue, Serenity, and Fake Weed.
The term “psychoactive herbal incense” shall not include any product, substance, material, compound, mixture, or preparation that is specifically excepted by the UCSA (Health and Safety Code Section 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA’s schedules of controlled substances (Health and Safety Code Sections 11053 through 11058) regulated by one of the USCA’s Synthetic Drug Laws (Health and Safety Code Sections 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401), regulated by the CSA (21 USC Section 801 et seq.) or approved by the FDA.
“Psychoactive” or “psychotropic stimulant effects” shall mean affecting the central nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cocaine, methylphenidate or amphetamines.
“Psychoactive” or “psychotropic euphoric effects” shall mean affecting the central nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cannabis.
“Sell,” “selling” or “sale” shall mean to furnish, exchange, transfer, deliver or supply for monetary gain.
“Synthetic drug” shall include psychoactive bath salts and psychoactive herbal incense, as those terms are defined hereinabove. (Ord. 1622 § 2 (part), 2015)

9.09.030 Provision, display for sale, sale or distribution of synthetic drugs prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person to store, provide, display for sale, distribute or sell any synthetic drug within the city of San Luis Obispo.
B. It is unlawful for any person to permit the storage, provision, display for sale, distribution or sale of any synthetic drugs from any real property owned, possessed, managed or controlled by such person in the city of San Luis Obispo.
C. Merely disclaiming a synthetic drug as “not safe for human consumption” will not avoid the application of this section. (Ord. 1622 § 2 (part), 2015)

9.09.040 Provision, display for sale, sale or distribution of substances claimed or represented to be synthetic drugs prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person to claim or represent that a product that person is storing, providing, displaying for sale, distributing or selling is a synthetic drug within the city of San Luis Obispo.
B. To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a product is a synthetic drug, the enforcing officer may consider any of the following evidentiary factors:
    1. The product is not suitable for its marketed use (such as a crystalline or powder product being marketed as “glass cleaner”);
    2. The business providing, displaying for sale, distributing or selling the product does not typically provide, distribute or sell products that are used for that product’s marketed use (such as a liquor store selling “plant food”);
    3. The product contains a warning label that is not typically present on products that are used for that product’s marketed use (such as “not for human consumption,” “not for purchase by minors,” or “does not contain chemicals banned by Section 11357.5”);
    4. The product is significantly more expensive than products that are used for that product’s marketed use (such as half of a gram of a substance marketed as “glass cleaner” costing fifty dollars);
    5. The product resembles an illicit street drug (such as cocaine, methamphetamine or marijuana); or
    6. The product’s name or packaging uses images or slang referencing an illicit street drug (such as “Eight Ballz” or “Green Buddha”).
C. Merely disclaiming a substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug as “not safe for human consumption” will not avoid the application of this section. (Ord. 1622 § 2 (part), 2015)

9.09.050 Possession of synthetic drugs prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to possess any synthetic drug within the city of San Luis Obispo. (Ord. 1622 § 2 (part), 2015)

9.09.060 Public nuisance.
A. It is a public nuisance for any person to store, provide, display for sale, distribute or sell any synthetic drug, or any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug, within the city of San Luis Obispo.
B. It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the storage, provision, display for sale, distribution or sale of any synthetic drug, or any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug, on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within the city of San Luis Obispo.
C. To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a substance or product is a synthetic drug, the enforcing officer may consider any of the evidentiary factors set forth in Section 9.09.040.
D. A criminal conviction is not required for establishing the occurrence of nuisance activity pursuant to this chapter. The occurrence of nuisance activity may be established by documented evidence that the nuisance activity was witnessed by a code enforcement officer, peace officer or other witness willing to testify. (Ord. 1622 § 2 (part), 2015)

9.09.070 Confiscation of synthetic drugs.
Because the use of synthetic drugs has been documented to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal ideations, cannibalism and death, any violation of this chapter presents a grave and imminent danger not only to the person consuming the synthetic drug, but also to the public at large. Any police officer who issues a criminal citation under this chapter shall confiscate any synthetic drugs and store them, pending the conclusion of the criminal case. (Ord. 1622 § 2 (part), 2015)

9.09.080 Revocation of business license.
No person holding a city business license and owning or operating a business in the city may use that business to store, provide, distribute or sell any synthetic drug or any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug. A violation of this section by the holder of a city business license shall constitute grounds for modification, suspension, revocation, or any combination thereof, of said license. (Ord. 1622 § 2 (part), 2015)

9.09.090 Penalties.
A. Misdemeanor Violation. Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period not exceeding six months or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by both; provided, that where the city attorney determines that such action would be in the interest of justice, he/she may specify in the accusatory pleading that the offense shall be an infraction.
B. Infraction Violation. Where the city attorney determines that, in the interest of justice, a violation of this chapter is an infraction, such infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional infraction violation of the same provision within one year.
C. The fine amounts set forth above may be modified, from time to time, by city council resolution. In no event shall such fine amounts exceed the amounts authorized by state law.
D. Each person committing, causing, or maintaining a violation of this chapter or failing to comply with the requirements set forth herein shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, maintained, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.
E. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any public nuisance under this chapter may be abated by the city by civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. The city shall also be entitled to recover its full reasonable costs of abatement. The prevailing party in any proceeding associated with the abatement of a public nuisance shall be entitled to recovery of attorneys’ fees incurred in any such proceeding, where the city has elected at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees.
F. In lieu of issuing a criminal citation, the city may issue an administrative citation pursuant to Chapter 1.16 to any person responsible for committing, causing or maintaining a violation of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from also issuing a citation upon the occurrence of the same offense on a separate day.
G. The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative and additional to any and all other legal remedies available whether set forth elsewhere in the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code, or in state or federal laws, regulations, or case law. (Ord. 1622 § 2 (part), 2015)

9.09.100 Seizure of evidence.
Any product(s) or substance(s) possessed, stored, provided, distributed or sold in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be seized by the enforcing officers and removed, stored and disposed of in accordance with law. (Ord. 1622 § 2 (part), 2015)

9.09.110 Exclusions.
A. This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully prescribed or to intoxicating chemical compounds that have been approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration or which are specifically permitted by California law, including without limitation intoxicating chemical compounds that are specifically excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Health and Safety Code Section 11000 et seq.).
B. This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances that are prohibited by state or federal law, including without limitation California Health and Safety Code Sections 11357.5, 11375.5, 11401 and the federal Controlled Substances Act.
C. This chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit any act that is positively permitted, prohibited or preempted by any state or federal law or regulation. (Ord. 1622 § 2 (part), 2015)

Chapter 9.10 CANNABIS REGULATIONS

Sections:
9.10.010     Purpose and intent.
9.10.020     Definitions.
9.10.030     Personal cultivation limited.
9.10.040     Commercial cannabis/city permit and state license required.
9.10.050     Regulations and fees.
9.10.060     Display and production of permits.
9.10.070     Commercial cannabis operator permit application procedures and requirements.
9.10.080     Renewal of permit.
9.10.090     Suspension or revocation of permit.
9.10.100     Appeal.
9.10.110     Right to occupy and to use property for commercial cannabis activity.
9.10.120     Prohibition on transfer of commercial cannabis operator permits.
9.10.130     Records and reports.
9.10.140     Inspection and enforcement.
9.10.150     Outdoor commercial cannabis cultivation and activities prohibited.
9.10.160     Indemnification, insurance, reimbursement, consent.
9.10.170     Compliance with laws.
9.10.180     Permit violation.
9.10.190     Permit compliance monitoring.
9.10.200     Permit holder responsible for violations by employees or agents.
9.10.210     Consumption or use prohibited on site and in public—Cannabis event prohibited.
9.10.220     Concurrent alcohol or tobacco sales or service prohibited.
9.10.230     Minors.
9.10.240     Sale of cannabis products or cannabis accessories by vending machine prohibited.
9.10.250     Security and public safety measures.
9.10.260     Limitations on city’s liability.
9.10.270     Fees deemed debt to city.
9.10.280     Violation and penalties.
9.10.290     Severability.

9.10.010 Purpose and intent.
A. It is the primary purpose and intent of this chapter to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city of San Luis Obispo from the negative impacts of illegal commercial and noncommercial cannabis activity, and of state authorized cannabis activity, by enforcing city ordinances, rules and regulations consistent with applicable state law, including, but not limited to, the Compassionate Use Act, the Medical Marijuana Program Act, the Adult Use of Marijuana Act, and the Medicinal and Adult Use of Cannabis Regulatory and Safety Act.
B. This chapter is not intended to, and shall not be construed to, prohibit or interfere with any right, defense or immunity under Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 (the Compassionate Use Act), or under Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq. (the Medical Marijuana Program Act).
C. This chapter is not intended to, and shall not be construed to, prohibit or interfere with any right, defense or immunity of any person twenty-one years of age or older relating to the adult personal possession or cultivation of cannabis or marijuana consistent with the provisions of the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act and the Medicinal and Adult Use of Cannabis Regulatory and Safety Act.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the cultivation, possession or use of marijuana for any purpose inconsistent with state or local law.
E. Any reference to California statutes includes any regulations promulgated thereunder and is deemed to include any successor or amended version of the referenced statute or regulation. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.020 Definitions.
A. State-Defined Terms. Words or terms used in this chapter that are defined words or terms in Business and Professions Code Section 26001 or Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 (the “Statutes”) shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Statutes as they now read, or as they may be amended to read. These state-defined words and terms include, but are not limited to, “cannabis,” “cannabis accessories,” “cannabis concentrate,” “cannabis products,” “commercial cannabis activity,” “cultivation,” “delivery,” “distribution,” “license,” “live plants,” “manufacture,” “operation,” “person,” “premises,” “sell,” “sale,” “to sell.” Some of these terms are also set forth in Chapter 17.156. In the event of conflict in the definitions, the definitions in Chapter 17.156 shall control; provided the terms defined in subsection B of this section shall control over any other definition.
B. City-Defined Terms. The following words or terms used in this chapter have the following meanings:
    1. “Commercial cannabis business” means any person or entity engaging in any business, operation or activity which is commercial cannabis activity under state law in the city.
    2. “Commercial cannabis operator permit” means a permit required by the city of San Luis Obispo pursuant to this chapter to conduct commercial cannabis activity or a commercial cannabis business in the city.
    3. “Responsible party(ies)” shall be one or more individuals who have an ownership interest in a commercial cannabis activity and are designated to be personally responsible for compliance with all terms and conditions of the commercial cannabis operator permit, all other permits required by the city, and all ordinances and regulations of the city. Any person having an ownership interest of more than fifty percent in a commercial cannabis activity shall be designated a responsible party on the application. If no individual owns more than fifty percent of a commercial cannabis activity, the individual owning the largest share shall be a responsible party, and if multiple individuals have the same percentage interest, each one shall be a responsible party. More than one individual can be designated a responsible party.
    4. “Cannabis event” means a public or private event where compensation is provided or exchanged, either directly or indirectly or as part of an admission or other fee for service, for the provision, hosting, promotion or conduct of the event where consumption of cannabis is part of the activities. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.030 Personal cultivation limited.
A. Maximum Six Plants Outdoors per Parcel. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, process, maintain, possess or store outdoors, more than six live cannabis plants on any parcel containing one or more private residences. This limitation on outdoor personal cannabis activities applies per parcel, regardless of the number of residents in each private residence, and regardless of the number of residences on the parcel. This limitation applies to cannabis live plants for either adult recreational use or medicinal purposes. Outdoor personal cultivation shall comply with applicable provisions of Section 17.86.080.
B. Maximum Six Plants per Private Residence, Indoors and Outdoors. It shall be unlawful for the cumulative total of cannabis plants per private residence, indoors and outdoors, to exceed six cannabis live plants, regardless of number of persons residing in the private residence. This limitation applies to cannabis live plants for either adult recreational use or medicinal purposes. Any live cannabis plants grown indoors shall comply with applicable provisions of Section 17.86.080.
C. No Outdoor Cultivation on Parcel without Private Residence. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, process, maintain, possess or store any cannabis live plants outdoors on a parcel that does not have a private residence used for residential dwelling purposes by the person cultivating the cannabis live plants.
D. Neighborhood Impacts of Personal Cultivation. There shall be no exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring at the property visible by normal unaided vision from a public place or the public right-of-way and any outdoor cultivation shall comply with provisions of Section 17.86.080(D). Personal cultivation of cannabis, for recreational adult use or for medicinal purposes, shall not create odors, dust, heat, noise, light, glare, smoke or other impacts to people of normal sensitivity living, working or lawfully present in the vicinity of the personal cultivation site. Impacts that cross the nearest property line of any other parcel, beyond that parcel on which the personal cultivation is conducted, or that are visible or noticeable with normal unaided vision, from a public place or the public right-of-way, or from any separately owned, leased or controlled private residence or business on the same parcel as the private residence responsible for the personal cultivation, are unlawful.
E. No Hazardous Personal Cultivation. Personal cultivation, harvesting, drying, or processing of cannabis, for recreational adult use or medicinal purposes, that uses or stores hazardous or toxic chemicals or materials, creates hazardous or toxic products or wastes, or uses volatile processes or other methods or substances that pose a significant risk to public health or safety, is prohibited and unlawful. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.040 Commercial cannabis/city permit and state license required.
A. City Commercial Cannabis Operator Permit Required. No person shall engage in commercial cannabis activity or have an ownership interest in, operate, or manage a commercial cannabis business without obtaining and continuously maintaining a commercial cannabis operator permit pursuant to this chapter.
B. Commercial Cannabis Operator Permit and State License(s) Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, conduct, manage, operate, engage or participate in, or work or volunteer at a commercial cannabis activity or commercial cannabis business that does not have a valid commercial cannabis operator permit issued pursuant to this chapter and other city permits or licenses required by this code, in addition to the appropriate license(s) required by state law to conduct the commercial cannabis activity. Any commercial cannabis business or commercial cannabis activity conducted without all required city and state permits and licenses is prohibited and unlawful and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.050 Regulations and fees.
The city council shall by resolution or ordinance adopt such forms, fees, regulations and procedures as are necessary to implement this chapter with respect to the application and qualification for, and the selection, future selection, investigation, process, issuance, renewal, revocation, and suspension of, commercial cannabis operator permits. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.060 Display and production of permits.
A. Dual Permits Posted and Visible. A copy of the commercial cannabis operator permit issued by the city of San Luis Obispo pursuant to this chapter, together with a copy of the appropriate state license(s) for the commercial cannabis activity being conducted, shall be posted and readily visible to the public at all times, at each location where commercial cannabis activity occurs.
B. Production of Originals for Inspection. Any owner, operator, employee or person in charge of a commercial cannabis activity shall produce for inspection and copying, upon request of a city inspector, code enforcement officer, or city police officer during normal operating hours, the original of the current and valid city of San Luis Obispo commercial cannabis operator permit and the appropriate, current and valid license(s) of the state of California for the commercial cannabis activity(ies) or commercial cannabis business(es) being conducted. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.070 Commercial cannabis operator permit application procedures and requirements.
A. Application. A person shall apply for a commercial cannabis operator permit by submitting an application to the city during the annual application period or any other period established by the city manager. The city council will, by resolution, adopt criteria by which all applications will be reviewed, applicants qualified and, in the case of retail and cultivation businesses, also ranked. Those applicants that are selected will have the opportunity to apply for a use permit as outlined in Section 17.86.080. Each application shall designate at least one responsible party. If a person is not selected to receive a commercial cannabis operator permit, the person may reapply during the next annual application period or any subsequent application period established by the city manager.
B. Application Submittal Time Frame. A person may only submit one application per permit type, per application period, for a commercial cannabis operator permit, during the annual application period designated by resolution of the city council or any subsequent application period established by the city manager. An applicant who is unsuccessful in any application period may submit another application in any subsequent application period. The commercial cannabis operator permit will be valid for twelve months. Once a permit is obtained, the applicant can apply annually for renewal. There is no guarantee that an applicant will receive a commercial cannabis operator permit in the first instance. Due to limitations on the number of certain permits, even a highly ranked applicant for a retail or cultivation permit may not receive a commercial cannabis operator permit and even an applicant who receives a commercial cannabis operator permit is not guaranteed that any subsequent, required land use permit, as outlined in Section 17.86.080, will be approved.
C. Grounds for Automatic Disqualification. In addition to any other reason that may be established by the city council as a basis for disqualification, an applicant shall be disqualified from applying for, or obtaining, a commercial cannabis operator permit if:
    1. The applicant fails to timely file an application during the annual application period.
    2. The responsible party refuses to sign the application and agree to be personally responsible for compliance, and personally liable for failure to comply, with the provisions of this chapter.
    3. The applicant, or any of its officers, directors or owners, or any person listed in the application, has been convicted of a felony or offense referenced in Business and Professions Code Section 26057; or has been subject to fines, penalties, or sanctions for cultivation or production of a controlled substance on public or private lands or for unauthorized commercial cannabis activities as specified in Business and Professions Code Section 26057; or has had a commercial cannabis license suspended or revoked by the state of California or any city or county in any state, within the three years preceding the date the application is filed, or is ineligible to apply for a state cannabis license. No person who has been convicted of such a felony or offense, or subject to such fines, penalties, sanctions, suspension or revocation, may be engaged (actively or passively) in the operation, management or ownership of any commercial cannabis business. A conviction within the meaning of this chapter means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction or diversion following a plea of nolo contendere.
    4. The applicant made one or more false or misleading statements or omissions in the application process.
    5. Any person listed on the application is a licensed physician making patient recommendations for medical or medicinal cannabis pursuant to state law.
    6. Any person listed in the application is less than twenty-one years of age.
D. Duration and Activation of Permit. Each commercial cannabis operator permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire twelve months after the date of its activation. The permittee may apply for renewal prior to expiration in accordance with this chapter. Each commercial cannabis operator permit must be activated within twelve months of issuance. The permit is activated by the issuance of a use permit for the commercial cannabis activity pursuant to Section 17.86.080, together with all other applicable city permits and state licenses, and the commercial cannabis operator thereafter opening and continuously operating the commercial cannabis activity. Failure to timely activate the permit shall be deemed abandonment of the permit and the permit shall automatically lapse. (Ord. 1673 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2020; Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.080 Renewal of permit.
A. Renewal Application Filing Deadline. An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis operator permit shall be filed at least sixty calendar days, but not more than one hundred twenty calendar days, prior to the expiration date of the permit with the city manager or his/her designee. If the complete application and fees are timely submitted but the city does not act to approve or reject the renewal prior to expiration, the permittee may continue to operate under the expired permit until the city approves or rejects the application for renewal.
B. Rejection of Renewal Application. An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis operator permit shall be rejected if any of the following exists:
    1. The commercial cannabis operator permit is revoked at the time of the application or renewal.
    2. The applicant conducted unpermitted commercial cannabis activities in the city or continued to conduct formerly permitted commercial cannabis activities after expiration of the permit, other than as expressly permitted by this section.
    3. Any of the grounds for disqualification for prequalification set forth in Section 9.10.070(C), or as established by the city council, exist at the time of application for renewal, or the date of renewal.
    4. The permittee fails to renew any required state of California license(s), or the state revokes or suspends the license. Revocation, termination, nonissuance or suspension of a license issued by the state of California, or any of its departments or divisions, shall immediately, concurrently revoke, terminate, or suspend, respectively, the commercial cannabis operator permit. Such automatic suspension makes it illegal for a commercial cannabis business or activity to operate within the city of San Luis Obispo until the state of California, or its respective department or division, reinstates or issues the state license.
An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis operator permit may be denied if any of the following exists:
    1. The application is filed less than sixty days before its expiration.
    2. The applicant has received an administrative citation for violating any provision of this code relating to its commercial cannabis activity(ies) in the city during the last twelve months, and the administrative citation has not been resolved in the applicant’s favor by the date of application for renewal. A pending, unresolved appeal of an administrative citation shall not result in rejection of an otherwise timely and complete application, but resolution of an appeal in a manner that upholds the violation against the applicant during the application review period shall result in the immediate rejection of the application.
    3. The commercial cannabis business has not been in regular and continuous operation in the three months immediately prior to the renewal application.
    4. The commercial cannabis business fails to conform to the requirements of this chapter, any regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, or the conditions imposed as part of any use permit or zoning requirements under Section 17.86.080.
    5. The commercial cannabis operator permit is suspended at the time of application or renewal.
C. Effect of Rejection of Application for Renewal—Operations to Cease Pending Appeals. If a renewal application is rejected, the commercial cannabis operator permit expires on the expiration date set forth in the permit, even if an appeal has been filed. All commercial cannabis activities in the city under the expired permit must stop until all appeals have been exhausted. A person or entity whose renewal application is rejected, and who loses his/her/its appeal, must go through the annual commercial cannabis business operator permit application process. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.090 Suspension or revocation of permit.
In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a commercial cannabis operator permit may be suspended or revoked if the city finds, after notice to the permittee and opportunity to be heard, that the permittee or his or her agents or employees have violated any condition of the permit imposed pursuant to, or any provision of, this chapter.
A. Upon a finding by the city of a first permit violation within any five-year period, the permit shall be suspended for thirty days.
B. Upon a finding by the city of a second permit violation within any five-year period, the permit shall be suspended for ninety days.
C. Upon a finding by the city of a third permit violation within any five-year period, the permit shall be revoked. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.100 Appeal.
A. Qualification—Ranking of Retailers and Cultivators. A decision of the city to not qualify an applicant for a commercial cannabis operator permit, or to rank applicants for retail or cultivation licenses, or to allow qualified applicants with the highest rankings the first opportunity to apply for a commercial cannabis operator permit, shall be the final action of the city and not appealable.
B. Nonrenewal, Revocation or Suspension. A decision of the city to reject an application for renewal, or to revoke or suspend a commercial cannabis operator permit, is appealable to the city manager. An appeal must be filed with the city manager within ten working days after the renewal has been denied, suspended or revoked. A decision of the city manager or his or her designee is appealable to the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.20.
C. Effect of Suspension. During a period of license suspension, the commercial cannabis business shall remove from public view all cannabis and cannabis products, and shall not conduct any commercial cannabis activity.
D. Revocation—Notice to State. Pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 26200(c), the city manager or his or her designee shall promptly notify the Bureau of Cannabis Control within the Department of Consumer Affairs upon the city’s revocation of any local license, permit, or authorization for a state licensee to engage in commercial cannabis activity within the city. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.110 Right to occupy and to use property for commercial cannabis activity.
As a condition precedent to the city’s issuance of a commercial cannabis operator permit pursuant to this chapter, any person intending to open and operate a commercial cannabis business shall provide evidence satisfactory to the city of the applicant’s legal right to occupy and use the proposed location for the proposed use, together with the approval of a use permit from the city for cannabis activity at the location. In the event the proposed location is owned by or to be leased from another person, the applicant for a permit under this chapter shall provide a signed and notarized statement from the property owner agreeing to the operation of a commercial cannabis business on the property. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.120 Prohibition on transfer of commercial cannabis operator permits.
A. Business Restriction to Location on Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer a commercial cannabis operator permit to a location not specified on the permit, or to operate a commercial cannabis business at any place or location other than that identified on the commercial cannabis operator permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
B. Transfer or Assignment Prohibited. No person or entity shall encumber, mortgage, lien, hypothecate, give, bequeath, sell, assign or transfer, by operation of law or otherwise, any portion of the ownership or control of a commercial cannabis business or a commercial cannabis operator permit to any person who does not have a commercial cannabis operator permit from the city prior to the effective date of any action described in this sentence. The commercial cannabis operator permittee proposing such an action shall:
    1. Notify the city in writing of the proposed action, comply with applicable regulations and provide such information as the city reasonably requests regarding the identity and qualifications of the persons involved, and pay all applicable fees and charges; and
    2. Provide proof that the proposed lender, lienholder, recipient, heir, buyer, assignee, transferee, or other potential recipient of any portion of the ownership or control, at the time of the notice and effective date of the proposed action, is qualified by the city to apply for a commercial cannabis operator permit; and the proposed action is conditioned on the city issuing to the person a new or amended commercial cannabis operator permit.
    3. Notify the city in writing within ten calendar days of the action becoming final with the names and contact information of the new persons involved, together with a request that the city issue either a new or amended commercial cannabis operator permit, as applicable.
C. Assignment Null and Void. Any attempt to transfer, sell, assign, give, or lien, or any transfer, sale, assignment, gift or lien, of a commercial cannabis operator permit issued pursuant to this chapter, by operation of law or otherwise, in violation of this chapter, is prohibited. Any such action immediately voids, nullifies and terminates the commercial cannabis operator permit, which shall be of no further force or effect. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.130 Records and reports.
A. City Access to Records. Subject to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations, each commercial cannabis business shall allow city of San Luis Obispo officials to have access to the commercial cannabis business’s books, records, accounts, and any and all data relevant to its permitted activities for the purpose of conducting an audit, examination or inspection. Books, records, accounts, and any and all relevant data will be produced no later than twenty-four hours after receipt of the city’s request or within a reasonable time as authorized in writing by the city.
B. Annual Audit. Each commercial cannabis business shall file with the city manager or his/her designee an audit of its financial operations for the previous fiscal year, complete and certified by an independent certified public accountant in accordance with generally accepted auditing and accounting principles. The audit shall include but not be limited to a discussion, analysis, and verification of each of the records required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter. The information contained in the audit shall be made available in standard electronic format which shall be compatible with programs and software used by the city, and which can easily be imported into either Excel, Access or any other contemporary software designated by the city manager.
C. Inventory Control System. All commercial cannabis businesses shall maintain an inventory control and reporting system that accurately documents the present location, amounts, and descriptions of all cannabis and cannabis products for all stages of the growing and production or manufacturing, laboratory testing and distribution processes until sold or distributed. All commercial cannabis businesses shall maintain records of all sales or transfers of cannabis and cannabis products.
D. Employee Registry. Each owner and/or operator of a commercial cannabis business shall maintain a current register of the names and the contact information (including the name, address, and telephone number) of all employees currently employed by the commercial cannabis business and shall disclose such register to any city of San Luis Obispo official upon request.
E. Reporting and Tracking of Product and of Gross Sales. Each commercial cannabis business shall have in place a point-of-sale tracking system to track and to report on all aspects of the commercial cannabis business including, but not limited to, such matters as cannabis tracking, inventory data, and gross sales (by weight and by sale) and shall ensure that such information is compatible with the city’s recordkeeping systems. The system must have the capability to produce historical transactional data for review by the city of San Luis Obispo. All information provided to the city pursuant to this subsection shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed, except as may otherwise be required under law.
F. Maintenance of Records. All records required by this chapter shall be maintained by the commercial cannabis business for a period of not less than seven years and shall otherwise keep accurate records of all commercial cannabis business activity and provide such records for inspection consistent with this code or any rules the city council may adopt by resolution or ordinance. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.140 Inspection and enforcement.
A. Unscheduled Inspection during Business Hours. The city manager or his/her designee and any other city of San Luis Obispo official or inspector charged with enforcing any provisions of this code may enter a commercial cannabis business at any time during the hours of operation without notice for the purpose of inspecting the commercial cannabis business for compliance with the provisions of this code, the terms and conditions of the commercial cannabis operator permit or any other city permit or state license, including inspection of the recordings and records maintained pursuant to this chapter or the applicable provisions of state law. The right to inspect under this section includes the right to copy recordings and records.
B. Interference with Inspection. It is unlawful for any person who owns, operates, manages or is employed by, or has any responsibility over the operation of, a commercial cannabis business to refuse to allow, or to impede, obstruct, or interfere with, an inspection by the city, or the city’s review or copying of recordings (including audio and video recordings) and records, or to conceal, destroy, alter or falsify any recordings or records.
C. Obtaining Samples. The city manager or his/her designee or any other person charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter may enter the location of a commercial cannabis business at any time during the hours of operation and without notice to obtain samples of cannabis and cannabis products to test for law enforcement and/or public safety purposes. Any samples obtained by the city of San Luis Obispo shall be logged, recorded, and maintained in accordance with city of San Luis Obispo police department standards for evidence. At all other times, the city manager or his/her designee may enter the location of a commercial cannabis business to obtain samples of cannabis upon reasonable notice, as otherwise authorized by law or pursuant to a warrant. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.150 Outdoor commercial cannabis cultivation and activities prohibited.
A. Outdoor Commercial Cultivation Prohibited. Outdoor commercial cannabis cultivation, including, but not limited to, cultivation in greenhouses, hoop structures, and by mixed light (part daylight/part artificial light), is prohibited and unlawful. This section prohibits all outdoor commercial cannabis cultivation, including cultivation for profit or not-for-profit cultivation, and including commercial cultivation for adult recreational use or medicinal purposes. For purposes of this section, outdoor cultivation of cannabis by cooperatives is prohibited. All commercial cannabis cultivation shall be conducted only inside a fully enclosed structure by a person or entity with a commercial cannabis operator permit, a city use permit, and appropriate state license(s). See also Section 17.86.080(E)(7)(c).
B. Outdoor Commercial Cannabis Activities Prohibited. Outdoor storage, harvesting, drying, processing, or manufacturing of commercial cannabis or cannabis products is prohibited and unlawful. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.160 Indemnification, insurance, reimbursement, consent.
As a condition of approval of any commercial cannabis operator permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall, at a minimum:
A. Execute an agreement to protect, indemnify, defend (at its sole cost and expense with counsel approved by city), and hold the city of San Luis Obispo and its officers, employees, attorneys, representatives, and agents harmless from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, damages, injuries, costs, expenses (including attorneys’ fees), fines, penalties, or liabilities arising from, related to or associated with: the issuance of a commercial cannabis operator permit or use permit; the permitting or approving the operation of a commercial cannabis activity; the collection of any fees, taxes, or charges from a commercial cannabis business; the commercial cannabis business’s or any of its owners’, operators’, managers’, employees’, or agents’ violation of any federal, state or local laws; the city’s suspension, revocation or refusal to renew the commercial cannabis operator permit.
B. Maintain insurance with standard city coverages and limits, but with additional conditions thereon as deemed necessary by the city attorney.
C. Reimburse the city of San Luis Obispo for any and all costs, expenses, attorney fees, fines, penalties and court costs that the city of San Luis Obispo may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge related to the city’s approval of a commercial cannabis operator permit pursuant to this chapter or any other city permit or the city of San Luis Obispo’s approval of the operation of a commercial cannabis activity. The city of San Luis Obispo may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action, but such participation shall not relieve the obligations imposed under this chapter.
D. Consent to unscheduled inspections, production of records and recordings, and obtaining of samples of cannabis and cannabis products by authorized city officials during normal operating hours as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.170 Compliance with laws.
The commercial cannabis business shall operate all times in compliance with all applicable state and local laws, regulations, and any specific, additional operating procedures or requirements which may be imposed as conditions of approval of the commercial cannabis operator permit or use permit or state license(s). Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any action which violates state law or local law with respect to the operation of a commercial cannabis activity. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.180 Permit violation.
Compliance with all local and state cannabis-related laws shall be a condition of a city commercial cannabis operator permit and it shall be a violation of a commercial cannabis operator permit for a permittee or his or her agents or employees to violate any local or state cannabis-related law. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.190 Permit compliance monitoring.
Compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the San Luis Obispo police department, code enforcement staff and/or any other duly authorized agent of the city. Any compliance checks pursuant to this chapter shall be in addition to any under any other ordinances, regulations or permits. At least four compliance checks of each cannabis retailer shall be conducted during each twelve-month period. At least two compliance checks of each commercial cannabis business other than a retailer shall be conducted during each twelve-month period. The cost of compliance monitoring shall be incorporated into the annual renewal fee. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.200 Permit holder responsible for violations by employees or agents.
The responsible person and any entity to whom a commercial cannabis operator permit is issued pursuant to this chapter shall be responsible for all violations of the regulations and ordinances of the city of San Luis Obispo committed by the permittee or any employee or agent of the permittee, which violations occur in or about the premises of the commercial cannabis business, even if the responsible person is not present. Violations by an employee or agent may result in the termination or nonrenewal of the permit by the city. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.210 Consumption or use prohibited on site and in public—Cannabis event prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person or entity:
    1. To sell, give, exchange, dispense or distribute cannabis or cannabis products for on-site consumption, use or sampling on any business premises; or
    2. To consume or use cannabis or cannabis products, whether by smoking, vaping, inhaling, eating, drinking or any other means:
        a. In, on or about the premises of any commercial cannabis business;
        b. In, on or about any publicly owned or operated property; any place open to or accessible by the public; any place smoking is prohibited; or any place visible from any public place with normal unaided vision;
        c. In on or about any other business, club, cooperative or commercial event, regardless if open to the public or only to members, ticket holders or event invitees;
        d. Any location where an entry or other fee is charged to attendees or to the host or where a thing of value or consideration is received or exchanged, directly or indirectly, for or related to the provision of cannabis.
B. It is unlawful for any person to conduct a cannabis event in the city. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.220 Concurrent alcohol or tobacco sales or service prohibited.
A. No person shall dispense, serve, store, give away or consume, or cause or permit the sale, dispensing, serving, giving away or consumption of alcoholic beverages or tobacco in or on the premises of a commercial cannabis business.
B. No person shall conduct any commercial cannabis activity at any location where alcohol is sold or served. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.230 Minors.
A. Minors shall not be allowed on the premises of a commercial cannabis business having either an “A” or “M” license, or both, even if accompanied by a parent or guardian.
B. No person under twenty-one years of age shall be allowed on the premises of a commercial cannabis business having either an “A” or “M” license or both.
C. Every entrance to an “A” or “M” licensed commercial cannabis business shall be clearly and legibly posted with the following notice: “ENTRY ONTO THESE PREMISES BY PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. VALID PHOTO ID REQUIRED.” Each letter of the notice must be at least two inches high and clearly visible.
D. No person, business, or other entity conducting a commercial cannabis activity with either an “A” or “M” state license shall employ any person who is not at least twenty-one years of age. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.240 Sale of cannabis products or cannabis accessories by vending machine prohibited.
A. No person shall locate, install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance or use on his, her or its premises of, any cannabis vending machine used or intended to be used for the purpose of selling any cannabis products or cannabis accessories therefrom.
B. No person, business, or other entity shall sell, offer for sale, or display for sale any cannabis product by means of a self-service display or vending machine. All cannabis products shall be offered for sale exclusively by means of vendor/employee assistance.
C. “Vending machine” means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper bill, or debit or credit card, or other thing representative of value, which device or appliance dispenses or releases cannabis, cannabis product(s) and/or cannabis accessories. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.250 Security and public safety measures.
A. The city manager or his/her designee(s) is authorized to promulgate all regulations necessary to implement the requirements and fulfill the purposes and policies of this chapter, including but not limited to enforcement, background checks for applicants, approval and enforcement of a commercial cannabis activity security plan, including audio and video recordings of operations, and verification of compliance.
B. Every commercial cannabis activity shall have a security plan approved by the chief of police or designee prior to issuance of a city commercial cannabis operator permit.
C. Hours of Operation. 
    1. Retail Storefront. Retail storefront commercial cannabis business shall not operate between the hours of eight p.m. and nine a.m.
    2. Retail Non-Storefront (Delivery Services). Retail non-storefront (delivery services) commercial cannabis business shall not operate between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m.
    3. Commercial Other than Retail. All commercial cannabis activity other than retail is prohibited between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.260 Limitations on city’s liability.
The city shall not be liable for issuing, or failing or refusing to issue, suspending, revoking or failing to renew a commercial cannabis operator permit pursuant to this chapter or otherwise approving or disapproving the operation of any commercial cannabis business pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.270 Fees deemed debt to city.
The amount of any fee, cost or charge imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city of San Luis Obispo that is recoverable in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.280 Violation and penalties.
A. Misdemeanor. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in Section 1.12.030; provided, that where the city attorney determines that such action would be in the interest of justice, he/she may specify in the accusatory pleading that the offense shall be an infraction. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person is also subject to administrative fines as provided in Chapter 1.24.
B. Infraction Violation. Where the city attorney determines that, in the interest of justice, a violation of this chapter is an infraction, such infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional infraction violation of the same provision within one year.
C. The fine amounts set forth above may be modified, from time to time, by city council resolution. In no event shall such fine amounts exceed the amounts authorized by state law.
D. If the city of San Luis Obispo finds, based on substantial record evidence, that any person has engaged in commercial cannabis activity in violation of this chapter, the city shall fine that person as follows: Each day that person without a commercial cannabis operator permit offers cannabis or cannabis products for sale or exchange shall constitute a separate violation and assessed a fine in accordance with Sections 1.12.080 and 1.24.070(A).
E. Each person committing, causing, or maintaining a violation of this chapter or failing to comply with the requirements set forth herein shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, maintained, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.
F. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and contrary to the public interest. Any public nuisance under this chapter may, at the city’s discretion, be abated by the city by civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. The city shall also be entitled to recover its full reasonable costs of abatement. The prevailing party in any proceeding associated with the abatement of a public nuisance shall be entitled to recovery of attorneys’ fees incurred in any such proceeding if the city has elected at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees.
G. In lieu of issuing a criminal citation, the city may issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for committing, causing or maintaining a violation of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from also issuing a citation upon the occurrence of the same offense on a separate day.
H. The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any and all other remedies available at law or equity, whether set forth elsewhere in the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code, or in state or federal laws, regulations, or case law. In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city attorney, including but not limited to administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

9.10.290 Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remaining sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter or the rules adopted hereby. The city council of the city of San Luis Obispo hereby declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases hereof be declared invalid or unenforceable. (Ord. 1647 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2018)

Chapter 9.12 NOISE CONTROL

Sections:
9.12.010     Declaration of policy.
9.12.020     Definitions.
9.12.030     Authority and duties of the noise control office(r) (NCO).
9.12.040     General noise regulations.
9.12.050     Prohibited acts.
9.12.060     Exterior noise limits.
9.12.070     Interior noise standards.
9.12.080     Motor vehicle noise limits.
9.12.090     Special provisions (exemptions).
9.12.100     Exceptions.
9.12.110     Enforcement.

9.12.010 Declaration of policy.
A. In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying noise and vibration in the city, it is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit such noise and vibration generated from or by all sources as specified in this chapter. It shall be the policy of the city to maintain quiet in those areas which currently exhibit low noise levels and to implement programs aimed at reducing noise in those areas within the city where noise levels are above acceptable values.
B. It is determined that certain noise levels and vibrations are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety, and are contrary to public interest. Therefore, the council ordains and declares that creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to be created, caused or maintained, any noise or vibration in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such in any manner provided by law, including but not necessarily limited to the filing of a civil or criminal action. (Ord. 1032 § 2 (part), 1985)

9.12.020 Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:
A. Terminology. All terminology used in this chapter, not defined in this chapter shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
B. “A-weighted sound level” means the sound level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(a) or dBA.
C. “Agricultural property” is designated on the official zoning map of the city.
D. “Ambient noise level” means the composite of noise from all sources near and far. In this context, the ambient noise level constitutes the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location.
E. “Commercial area” means those areas designated C-N, C-R, C-C, and C-T on the official zoning map of the city.
F. “Commercial limited” are those areas designated O and PF on the official zoning map of the city.
G. “Construction” means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.
H. “Cumulative period” means an additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted.
I. “Decibel” means a unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty micropascals.
J. “Demolition” means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or Similar property.
K. “Emergency work” means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency.
L. “Fixed noise source” means a stationary device which creates sound while fixed or motionless, including, but not limited to, residential, agricultural, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air-conditioners, and refrigeration equipment.
M. “Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)” means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating, which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used;
N. “Impulsive sound” means sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms.
O. “Industrial area” is designated on the official zoning map of the city.
P. “Intrusive noise” means that noise which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at a given location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon its amplitude, duration, frequency and time of occurrence, and tonal or informational content as well as the prevailing ambient noise level.
Q. “Mobile noise source” means any noise source other than a fixed noise source.
R. “Motor vehicle” means and includes any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Vehicle Code, including all on-highway type motor vehicles subject to registration under the Code, and all off-highway type motor vehicles subject to identification under the code.
S. “Muffler or sound dissipative device” means a device consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates, or other mechanical design, for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine, and effective in reducing noise.
T. “Noise control office(r) (NCO)” means the municipal agencies or departments, having lead responsibility for this chapter, or their employees.
U. “Noise disturbance” means any sound which (a) endangers or injures the safety or health of human beings or animals, or(b) annoys or disturbs reasonable persons of normal sensitivities, or (c) endangers or injures personal or real property, or (d) violates the factors set forth in Section 9.12.060 of this chapter. Compliance with the quantitative standards as listed in this chapter shall constitute elimination of a noise disturbance.
V. “Noise zone” includes any defined areas or regions of a generally consistent land use wherein the ambient noise levels are within a range of 5 dB.
W. “Person” means any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state.
X. “Powered model vehicle” means any self propelled, airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel, or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
Y. “Public right-of-way” means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
Z. “Public space” means any real property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
AA. “Pure tone” means any sound which can be judged as audible as a single pitch or a set of single pitches by the noise control officer, the purposes of this chapter, a pure tone shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands by 5 dB for center frequencies of 500 Hz and above and by 8 dB for center frequencies between 160 and 400 HZ and by 15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz.
AB. “Real property boundary” means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real property divisions.
AC. “Residential area” means any area within the city including R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 as defined by the city zoning ordinance.
AD. “Sound amplifying equipment” means any device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound, excluding standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is installed, and, as used in this chapter, warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes.
AK. “Sound level meter” means an instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels, which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for type S2A meters in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters, S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof.
AF. “Sound truck” means any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle, regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment.
AG. “Vibration perception threshold” means the minimum ground or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. The perception threshold shall be presumed to be a motion velocity of 0.01 in/see over the range of 1 to 100 Hz. (Ord. 1159 §§ 2, 3, 1990; Ord. 1032 § 2 (part), 1985)

9.12.030 Authority and duties of the noise control office(r) (NCO).
Lead (Agency/Official). The noise control program established by this chapter shall be administered by the community development department (administration/special exceptions of time periods greater than forty-eight hours/ zoning enforcement) and the police department (noise violation enforcement/special exceptions of time periods less than forty-eight hours). (Ord. 1032 § 2 (part), 1985)

9.12.040 General noise regulations.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, or permit or allow to be made or continued any noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes any discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the area.
No permit shall be issued for any activity that may violate this section.
The factors which may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. The sound level of the objectionable noise;
B. The sound level of the ambient noise;
C. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
D. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
E. The number of persons affected by the noise source;
F. The time of day or night the noise occurs;
G. The duration of the noise and its tonal, informational or musical content;
H. Whether the noise is continuous, recurrent or intermittent;
I. Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. (Ord. 1159 § 4, 1990; Ord. 1032 § 2 (part), 1985)

9.12.050 Prohibited acts.
A. Noise Disturbances Prohibited. No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, or permit or allow to be made or continued, any noise disturbance in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from the noisemaker; provided, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any noise which does not penetrate beyond the boundaries of the noisemaker’s own premises or does not constitute an unreasonable disturbance to people lawfully on said premises.
B. Specific Prohibitions. The acts, as set forth in this section, arid the causing or permitting thereof, are declared to be in violation of this chapter.
    1. Radios, Television Sets, Musical Instruments and Similar Devices. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television set, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, or similar device which produces or reproduces sound:
        a. Between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 9.12.060 of this chapter, except for activities for which a exception has been issued by the noise control office.
        b. In such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth for public space in Table 1 of Section 9.12.060 of this chapter, measured at a distance of at least fifty feet (fifteen meters) from such device operating on a public right-of-way or public space.
    2. Loudspeakers (Amplified Sound). Using or operating for any purpose any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system or similar device between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m., such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property line, or at any time violates the provisions of Section 9.12.060 of this chapter, except for any noncommercial public speaking, public assembly or other activity for which an exception has been issued by the noise control office.
    3. Street Sales. Offering for sale, selling anything or advertising by shouting or outcry within any residential or commercial area of the city except by exception issued by the noise control office. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses or other similar licensed or permitted public entertainment events.
    4. Animals and Birds. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird which frequently or for long duration, howls, barks’ meows, squawks or makes other sounds which create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or within a noise sensitive zone.
    5. Loading and Unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials or similar objects between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 9.12.060 of this chapter.
    6. Construction/Demolition. 
        a. Operating or causing the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration or demolition work between weekday hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m., or any time on Sundays or holidays, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line, except for emergency work of public service utilities or by exception issued by the community development department. (This section shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools as specified in subsection B 10 of this section.
        b. Noise Restrictions at Affected Properties. Where technically and economically feasible, construction activities shall be conducted in such a manner that the maximum noise levels at affected properties will not exceed those listed in the following schedule:
            i. At Residential Properties. 
            +--------------------------+---------------+--------------+--------------------+
            |                          | Single-Family | Multi-family | Mixed Residential/ |
            |                          |  Residential  | Residential  |     Commercial     |
            +--------------------------+---------------+--------------+--------------------+
            | Daily, except Sundays    | 75 dBA        | 80 dBA       | 85 dBA             |
            | and legal holidays 7:00  |               |              |                    |
            | a.m. to 7:00 p.m.        |               |              |                    |
            +--------------------------+---------------+--------------+--------------------+
            | Daily, 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 | 60 dBA        | 65 dBA       | 70 dBA             |
            | a.m. and all day Sunday  |               |              |                    |
            | and legal holidays       |               |              |                    |
            +--------------------------+---------------+--------------+--------------------+
            +--------------------------+---------------+--------------+-------------------+
            |                          | Single-Family | Multi-family | Mixed Residential |
            |                          |  Residential  | Residential  |    /Commercial    |
            +--------------------------+---------------+--------------+-------------------+
            | Daily, except Sundays    | 60 dBA        | 65 dBA       | 70 dBA            |
            | and legal holidays 7:00  |               |              |                   |
            | a.m. to 7:00 p.m.        |               |              |                   |
            +--------------------------+---------------+--------------+-------------------+
            | Daily, 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 | 50 dBA        | 55 dBA       | 60 dBA            |
            | a.m. and all day Sunday  |               |              |                   |
            | and legal holidays       |               |              |                   |
            +--------------------------+---------------+--------------+-------------------+
            ii. At Business Properties. Mobile Equipment
            Maximum noise levels for nonscheduled, intermittent, short-term operation of mobile equipment: Daily, including Sunday and legal holidays, all hours; maximum of 85 dBA.Stationary Equipment
            Maximum noise levels for repetitively scheduled and relatively long-term operations of stationary equipment: Daily, including Sundays and legal holidays, all hours; maximum of 75 dBA.
            All mobile or stationary internal combustion engine powered equipment or machinery shall be equipped with suitable exhaust and air intake silencers in proper working order.
    7. Vibration. Operating or permitting the operation of any device that creates a vibration which is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the property boundary of the source if on private property or at one hundred fifty feet (forty-six meters) from the source if on a public space or public right-of-way.
    8. Powered Model Vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of powered model vehicles:
        a. Between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m. so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 9.12.070 of this chapter.
        b. In such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth for public space land use in Table 1 of Section 9.12.060 measured at a distance not less than one hundred feet (thirty meters) from any point on the path of a vehicle operating on public space or public right-of-way.
    9. Emergency Signaling Devices. 
        a. The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes or for testing, as provided in subsection B 9 b of this section.
        b. 
            i. Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall not occur before seven a.m. or after seven p.m. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed sixty seconds.
            ii. Testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signaling device, and the personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall not occur before seven a.m. or after ten p.m. The time limit specified in subsection B 9 b i of this section shall not apply to such complete system testing.
        c. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm is terminated within thirty minutes of activation.
    10. Domestic Power Tools, Machinery. 
        a. Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool or similar tool between ten p.m. and seven a.m., so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line.
        b. Operating a power blower in a residential zone or within two hundred feet of a residential zone between six p.m. and eight a.m., seven days a week.
        c. Operating a power blower in any nonresidential zone between six p.m. and seven a.m., Monday through Saturday, or between six p.m. and eight a.m. Sunday.
        d. Operating a power blower in such a manner as to exceed the following standard:
        +-------------------------+--------------------------+
        |  Location Measurement   | Maximum Noise Level, dBA |
        +-------------------------+--------------------------+
        | 50 feet from the blower | 70dB                     |
        +-------------------------+--------------------------+
        e. Operating a gasoline-fueled blower any time on a Sunday.
        f. Any motor, machinery, or pump, such as swimming pool equipment, etc., shall be sufficiently enclosed or muffled and maintained so as not to create a noise disturbance in accordance with Section 9.12.060 of this chapter.
    11. Residential Air-Conditioning or Air-Handling Equipment. Operating or permitting the operation of any air-conditioning or air-handling equipment in such a manner as to exceed any of the following sound levels:
    +--------------------------------------------+-----------------+--------------------+
    |            Measurement Location            | Units Installed |  Units Installed   |
    |                                            |     Before      | on or After 1-1-80 |
    |                                            |  1-1-80 dB(A)   |       dB(A)        |
    +--------------------------------------------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Any point on neighboring property line,    | 60              | 55                 |
    | five feet above grade level, no closer     |                 |                    |
    | than three feet from any wall              |                 |                    |
    +--------------------------------------------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Outside the neighboring living area window | 55              | 50                 |
    | nearest the equipment location, not        |                 |                    |
    | more than three feet from the window       |                 |                    |
    | opening, but at least three feet from      |                 |                    |
    | any other surface                          |                 |                    |
    +--------------------------------------------+-----------------+--------------------+
(Ord. 1327 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1273 § 2, 1994; Ord. 1261 § 2, 1994; Ord. 1159 § 5, 1990; Ord. 1032 § 2 (part), 1985)

9.12.060 Exterior noise limits.
A. Maximum Permissible Sound Levels at Receiving Land Use. 
    1. The noise standards for the various categories of land use identified by the noise control office(r) as presented in Table 1 of Section 9.12.070 shall, unless otherwise specifically indicated, apply to all such property within a designated zone.
    2. No person shall cause or allow to cause, any source of sound at any location within the incorporated city or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level when measured on any other property, either incorporated or unincorporated, to exceed:
        a. The noise standard for that land use as specified in Table 1 of Section 9.12.070 for a cumulative period of more than thirty minutes in any hour; or
        b. The noise standard plus 5 dB for a cumulative period of more than fifteen minutes in any hour; or
        c. The noise standard plus 10 dB for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or
        d. The noise standard plus 15 dB for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or
        e. The noise standard plus 20 dB for any period of time.
    3. If the measured ambient level differs from that permissible within any of the first four noise limit categories of this section, the allowable noise exposure standard shall be adjusted in 5 dB increments in each category as appropriate to encompass or reflect said ambient noise level.
In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under this category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level.
    4. If the measurement location is on a boundary between two different zones, the noise level limit applicable to the lower noise zone plus 5 dB shall apply.
    5. If possible, the ambient noise should be measured at the same location along the property line utilized in Section 9.12.060, with the alleged offending noise source inoperative. If for any reason the alleged offending noise source cannot be shut down, the ambient noise may be estimated by performing a measurement in the same general area of the source but at a sufficient distance such that the noise from the source is at least 10 dB below the ambient in order that only the ambient level be measured. If the difference between the ambient plus the noise source and noise source is 5 to 10 dB, then the level of the source itself can be reasonably determined by subtracting a one decibel correction to account for the contribution of the source.
B. Correction for Character of Sound. In the event the alleged offensive noise, as determined by the noise control officer, contains a steady, audible tone such as whine, screech or hum, or is a repetitive noise such as hammering or riveting, or contains music or speech, the standard limits set forth in Table 1 of this section shall be reduced by 5 dB.
+--------------------------+------------------------+-------------------+
|     Zoning Category      |      Time Period       | Noise Level (dBA) |
+--------------------------+------------------------+-------------------+
| R-1 and R-2 C/OS         | 10:00 p.m. – 7:00 a.m. | 50                |
| Low Density Residential  |                        |                   |
+--------------------------+------------------------+-------------------+
|                          | 7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m. | 55                |
+--------------------------+------------------------+-------------------+
| R-3 and R-4              | 10:00 p.m. – 7:00 a.m. | 50                |
| High Density Residential |                        |                   |
+--------------------------+------------------------+-------------------+
|                          | 7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m. | 55                |
+--------------------------+------------------------+-------------------+
| O, PF                    | 10:00 p.m. – 7:00 a.m. | 55                |
| Ltd. Commercial          |                        |                   |
+--------------------------+------------------------+-------------------+
|                          | 7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m. | 60                |
+--------------------------+------------------------+-------------------+
| C-N, C-R, C-C, C-T       |                        | 60                |
+--------------------------+------------------------+-------------------+
| Commercial               | 10:00 a.m. – 7:00 p.m  | 60                |
+--------------------------+------------------------+-------------------+
|                          | 7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m. | 65                |
+--------------------------+------------------------+-------------------+
| C-S                      | Any Time               | 70                |
| Light Industrial         |                        |                   |
+--------------------------+------------------------+-------------------+
| M                        | Any Time               | 75                |
| Heavy Industrial         |                        |                   |
+--------------------------+------------------------+-------------------+
    1. The classification of different areas of the community in terms of environmental noise zones shall be determined by the Noise Control Office(r), based upon community noise survey data. Additional area classifications should be used as appropriate to reflect both lower and higher existing ambient levels than those shown. Industrial noise limits are intended primarily for use at the boundary of industrial zones rather than for noise reduction within the zone. (Ord. 1032 § 2 (part), 1985)

9.12.070 Interior noise standards.
A. Maximum Permissible Dwelling Interior Sound Levels. 
    1. The interior noise standards for multifamily residential dwellings as presented in Table 1 of this section shall apply, unless otherwise specifically indicated, within all such dwellings with windows in their normal seasonal configuration.
    +-----------------+-----------------+-------------------+--------------------+
    |                                Table No. 1                                 |
    +-----------------+-----------------+-------------------+--------------------+
    
    +-----------------+-----------------+-------------------+--------------------+
    |   Noise Zone    |     Type of     |   Time Interval   | Allowable Interior |
    |                 |    Land Use     |                   | Noise Level (dBA)  |
    +-----------------+-----------------+-------------------+--------------------+
    
    +-----------------+-----------------+-------------------+--------------------+
    | All Residential | All Multifamily | 10:00 p.m. – 7:00 | 40                 |
    | Zones           | Residential     | a.m.              |                    |
    +-----------------+-----------------+-------------------+--------------------+
    | "               | Land Uses       | 7:00 a.m. – 10:00 | 45                 |
    |                 |                 | p.m.              |                    |
    +-----------------+-----------------+-------------------+--------------------+
    2. No person shall operate or cause to be operated within a dwelling unit, any source of sound or allow the creation of any noise which causes the noise level when measured inside a neighboring receiving dwelling unit to exceed:
        a. The noise standard as specified in Table 1 of this section for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour, or
        b. The noise standard plus 5 db for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or
        c. The noise standard plus 10 dB or the maximum measured ambient, for any period of time.
    3. If the measured ambient level differs from that permissible within any of the noise limit categories of this section, the allowable noise exposure standard shall be adjusted in 5 dB increments in each category as appropriate to reflect the ambient noise level.
B. Correction for Character of Sound. In the event the alleged offensive noise, as determined by the noise control officer, contains a steady, audible tone such as a whine, screech or hum, or is a repetitive noise such as hammering or riveting, or contains music or speech conveying informational content, the standard limits set forth in Table 1 of this section shall be reduced by 5 dB. (Ord. 1032 § 2 (part), 1985)

9.12.080 Motor vehicle noise limits.
A. Refuse Collection Vehicles. No person shall collect refuse with a refuse collection vehicle between the hours of seven p.m. and six-thirty a.m. within or adjacent to a residential area.
B. Motorized Recreational Vehicles Operating Off Public Right-of-way. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motorized recreational vehicle off public right-of-way in such a manner that the sound levels emitted therefrom violate the provisions of Section 9.12.070 of this chapter. This section shall apply to all motorized recreational vehicles, whether or not duly licensed and registered, including, but not limited to, commercial or noncommercial racing vehicles, motorcycles, go carts, amphibious craft, campers, snowmobiles and dune buggies, but not including motorboats.
C. Vehicle, Motorboat or Aircraft Repair and Testing. 
    1. Repairing, rebuilding modifying or testing any motor vehicle, motorboat or aircraft in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property line, or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 9.12.070 of this chapter.
    2. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit, restrict, penalize, enjoin or in any manner regulate the movement of aircraft which are in all respects conducted in accordance with, or pursuant to, applicable federal laws or regulations.
D. Standing Motor Vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any motor vehicle with a gross weight rating (GVWR) in excess of ten thousand pounds, or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle, for a period longer than fifteen minutes in any hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion, or a public right-of-way or public space within one hundred fifty feet (forty-six meters) of a residential area, between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. (Ord. 1032 § 2 (part), 1985)

9.12.090 Special provisions (exemptions).
A. Emergency Exemption. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: (a) the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or (b) the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
B. Warning Devices. Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety, as for example, police, fire and ambulance sirens, and train horns, shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter.
C. Outdoor Activities. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting and entertainment events, provided such events are conducted pursuant to a permit or license issued by the city relative to the staging of the events.
D. Exemptions from Exterior Noise Standards. The provisions of Section 9.12.060 of this chapter shall not apply to activities covered by the following sections:
    1. Section 9.12.050(B)(3), Street Sales;
    2. Section 9.12.050(B)(6), Construction/Demolition;
    3. Section 9.12.050(B)(10), Domestic Power Tools, Machinery;
    4. Section 9.12.050(B)(11), Residential Air-Conditioning or Air-Handling Equipment;
    5. Section 9.12.080(A), Refuse Collection Vehicles.
E. Agricultural Operations. All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment associated with agricultural operations conducted on agricultural property unless, if in the vicinity of residential land uses, in which case an exception permit is required (Section 9.12.100 of this chapter) to operate noise producing devices, with the following stipulations:
    1. Operations do not take place between eight p.m. and six-thirty a.m.; or
    2. Such operations and equipment are utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions; or
    3. Such operations and equipment are associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide application, provided the application is made in accordance with permits issued by or regulations enforced by the noise control officer; or
    4. Such devices utilized for pest control which incorporate stationary or mobile noise sources (electromechanical bird scare devices, etc.) are operated only by permit issued by the noise control office(r). The allowable hours and days for operation of these devices will be specified in the permit.
    5. All equipment and machinery powered by internal combustion engines shall be equipped with a proper muffler and air intake silencer in good working order.
F. Federal or State Preempted Activities. Any other activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law shall be exempted from the regulations of this chapter.
G. Preexisting Noise Sources. Those commercial and/or industrial operations in existence prior to the date of adoption of this chapter, if in compliance with local zoning statutes, shall be granted a two year period from the date of adoption with which to comply with the provisions of this chapter. If, at the end of the two year period, it can be shown that compliance with the provisions in this chapter constitutes a hardship in terms of technical and economic feasibility, an exception may be granted on an annual basis until such time as compliance may be effected. No more than three exceptions will be allowed on a specific project. (Ord. 1032 § 2 (part), 1985)

9.12.100 Exceptions.
A. Special Exceptions. 
    1. The noise control office(r) is authorized to grant exceptions from any provision of this chapter, subject to limitations as to area, noise levels, time limits and other terms and conditions as the noise control office(r) determines are appropriate to protect the public health, safety and welfare from the noise emanating therefrom. This section shall in no way affect the duty to obtain any permit or license required by law for such activities.
    2. Any person seeking an exception pursuant to this section shall file an application with the noise control office(r). The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the exception is sought into compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by council resolution. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership, or several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one application. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the exception may file a statement with the noise control office(r) containing any information to support his or her claim. If at any time the noise control office(r) finds that a sufficient controversy exists regarding an application, a public hearing will be held.
    3. In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the noise control office(r) shall balance denial as a hardship on the applicant against (1) the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of other persons affected; (2) the adverse impact on property affected; and (3) any other adverse impacts of granting the exception. Applicants for exceptions and persons contesting exceptions shall be required to submit such information as the noise control office(r) may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the noise control office(r) shall keep on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the exception.
    4. Exceptions shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity. The exception shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the exception shall terminate the exception and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this chapter for which the exception was granted.
    5. An exception will not exceed three hundred sixty-five days from the date on which it was granted. Application for extension of time limits specified in exceptions or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial exceptions under subsection (B) of this section.
    6. Exceptions lasting for a duration of less than forty-eight hours may be granted by the chief of police or his or her designated noise control officer. Exceptions lasting for a duration of more than forty-eight hours or dealing with zoning conflicts or machine-generated noise may be granted by the community development department director or his or her designated noise control officer.
B. Exceptions for Time to Comply. 
    1. Within ninety days following the effective date of this chapter, the owner of any commercial or industrial source of sound may apply to the noise control office(r) for an exception in time to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The noise control office(r) shall have the authority, consistent with this section, to grant an exception (not to exceed one hundred eighty days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter). The same procedures and considerations by the noise control office(r) as followed under this section shall likewise apply.
C. Appeals. Appeals of an adverse decision under this section of the police department’s noise control office(r) shall be made to the community development department. Review of the community development department shall be limited to whether the decision is supported by substantial evidence. (Ord. 1159 § 6, 1990; Ord. 1032 § 2 (part), 1985)

9.12.110 Enforcement.
A. Prima Facie Violation. Any noise exceeding the noise level limits for a designated noise zone as provided in Table 1 of Section 9.12.060 and Table 1 of Section 9.12.070, or the prohibited actions as provided in Section 9.12.050, shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Violations. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor or be subject to administrative citation. Each hour such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
C. Abatement Orders. 
    1. In lieu of issuing a notice of violation as provided for in subsection B of this section, the noise control office(r) or police department responsible for enforcement of any provision of this chapter may issue an order requiring abatement of a sound source alleged to be in violation, within a reasonable time period and according to guidelines which the noise control office(r) may prescribe.
    2. No complaint or further action shall be taken in the event that the cause of the violation has been removed, the condition abated or fully corrected within the time period specified in the written notice.
D. Continued Violations. Once a violation of any provision of this chapter has been verified by a noise control or police officer, the owner(s) of the property where the violation occurred may be subject to administrative action or citation for allowing a subsequent violation of this chapter to occur on the property within nine months after the date of a previous violation, provided the property owner has received notification from the city of the previous violation and at least fourteen days have passed since the date the notification was mailed to the property owner(s). (Ord. 1540 § 2, 2010)

Chapter 9.13 UNRULY GATHERINGS

Sections:
9.13.010     Declaration of policy.
9.13.020     Definitions.
9.13.030     Unruly gatherings prohibited.
9.13.040     Notice of unruly gathering—Mailing to property owner.
9.13.050     Persons liable for a response to an unruly gathering.
9.13.060     Enforcement.
9.13.070     Collection of delinquent costs.

9.13.010 Declaration of policy.
A. In order to control unnecessary disturbances caused by unruly gatherings in the city, it is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit unruly gatherings that create a substantial disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property in a significant segment of a neighborhood as specified in this chapter.
B. It is determined that unruly gatherings are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety, and are contrary to the public interest. Therefore, the council declares that creating, maintaining, causing, or allowing to be created, maintained, or caused, any unruly gathering in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such in any manner provided by law, including but not necessarily limited to the filing of a civil or criminal action. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 2010)

9.13.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
A. “Gathering” means a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling for a party or social event, occasion or activity on private property.
B. “Responsible person” means and includes, but is not limited to: (1) the person who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise has legal control of the property where the gathering takes place; or (2) the person who caused the gathering to occur.
C. “Juvenile” means and includes any person under the age of eighteen.
D. “Minor” means and includes any person at least eighteen years old but under the age of twenty-one.
E. “Unruly gathering” shall mean a gathering of twenty or more persons on private property that results in conduct that causes a substantial disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property in a significant segment of an immediate neighborhood or presents a threat to the health, welfare and safety of those in attendance, responding enforcement personnel, or nearby residents or properties. For purposes of this chapter, “conduct that causes a substantial disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property in a significant segment of an immediate neighborhood, or presents a threat to the health and safety…” shall include, but is not limited to, any or all of the following: a noise disturbance; obstruction of public streets or rights-of-way by people or vehicles; public drunkenness; unlawful possession of alcohol or drugs; serving alcohol to minors; fights; disturbances of the peace; urinating or defecating in public; setting off fireworks; vandalism; littering on public property or private property not belonging to the host of the gathering; presence of persons on rooftop areas not designed for occupancy; unpermitted live bands, amplified music or DJs; and throwing bottles or other objects or substances at law enforcement or any other person. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 2010)

9.13.030 Unruly gatherings prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance, as defined in Chapter 8.24, for any responsible person(s) to cause or allow an unruly gathering to occur on any private property within the city. An unruly gathering may be abated by the city by all reasonable means including, but not limited to, an order requiring the unruly gathering to be disbanded, the issuance of citations, and/or the arrests of any law violators under any applicable local laws and state statutes.
B. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to attend or participate in an unruly gathering in a manner that contributes to the unruly gathering by engaging in conduct that causes a substantial disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property in a significant segment of an immediate neighborhood, or presents a threat to the health, welfare, and safety of those in attendance, responding enforcement personnel, or nearby residents or properties, as defined in Section 9.13.020(E). (Ord. 1621 § 2, 2015: Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 2010)

9.13.040 Notice of unruly gathering—Mailing to property owner.
When a peace officer has determined that an unruly gathering has occurred, and either the unruly gathering was hosted by a person or persons other than the owner or responding personnel are unable to determine whether the owner was the host, the police department shall mail a notice to the owner of the property where the unruly gathering occurred. The notice shall advise the property owner(s) that any subsequent violation of this chapter at the same property may result in the property owner being subject to administrative action and penalties as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 1621 § 3, 2015: Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 2010)

9.13.050 Persons liable for a response to an unruly gathering.
If the city is required to respond to an unruly gathering, the following persons shall be jointly and severally liable for civil penalties as set forth in Section 9.13.060, in addition to liability for any injuries to city personnel or damage to city property:
A. The person or persons who own the property where the unruly gathering took place; provided, that notice has been mailed to the owner of the property as set forth herein and a subsequent unruly gathering occurs at least two weeks after the mailing of such notice.
B. The responsible person or persons; provided, however, that if the responsible person is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of the juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for penalties and liabilities herein.
C. Any persons in attendance at and engaging in conduct contributing to the unruly gathering as set forth in Section 9.13.030(B).
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose liability on a property owner or responsible person for the conduct of persons who are present without the express or implied consent of the property owner/responsible person as long as the property owner/responsible person has taken reasonable steps to exclude such uninvited participants from the property. Where an invited person engages in conduct which the property owner/responsible person could not reasonably foresee and the conduct is an isolated instance of a person at the gathering violating the law which the property owner/responsible person is unable to reasonably control without the intervention of the police, the unlawful conduct of that person shall not be attributable to the property owner/responsible person for the purposes of determining whether the gathering constitutes an unruly gathering. (Ord. 1621 § 4, 2015: Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 2010)

9.13.060 Enforcement.
A. Any citation issued for an unruly gathering as defined in Section 9.13.020(E) shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this chapter for purposes of administrative enforcement.
B. Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and is subject to criminal, civil or administrative enforcement as provided in this code. Each hour such violation is committed or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and may be punishable as such.
C. If administrative enforcement is initiated in accordance with Chapter 1.24, penalties shall be assessed against all responsible persons, and individuals liable for the city’s intervention to abate an unruly gathering pursuant to Section 9.13.050, in the following amounts:
    1. The initial violation of this chapter will result in a penalty in the sum of seven hundred dollars against responsible persons, other than the owner(s) of the property who was not present and responsible for the gathering, and/or individual attendees as provided in Section 9.13.050(C).
    2. Subsequent violations of this chapter in any twelve-month period following the date of the first violation will result in a penalty of one thousand dollars against responsible persons, other than the owner(s) of the property who was not present and responsible for the gathering.
    3. The person(s) who owns the property where the unruly gathering took place will be assessed a penalty of five hundred dollars, provided the owner(s) was not present during the gathering, and proper notice of a prior violation at the property was provided to the owner pursuant to Section 9.13.040.
    4. The initial violation of this chapter by an individual present and contributing to the unruly gathering, as provided in Section 9.13.050(C), will result in the assessment of penalty in the sum of three hundred fifty dollars. A second violation of this chapter by the same individual within one year of the initial violation will result in the assessment of a penalty in the sum of seven hundred dollars and each subsequent violation within one year of the initial violation will result in the assessment of a penalty in the sum of one thousand dollars.
    5. The administrative citation penalties provided herein shall be in addition to any other penalties imposed by law for particular violations of law committed during the course of an unruly gathering.
D. Continued Violations. Once a peace officer has determined there has been a violation of this chapter, the owner(s) of the property where the violation occurred may be subject to administrative action for allowing a subsequent violation of this chapter to occur on the property, provided the property owner has received notice as required by Section 9.13.040, and at least fourteen days have elapsed since the date the notice was mailed to the property owner(s). The city may defer or delay administrative action against any property owner who can demonstrate due diligence in preventing future unruly gatherings, such as evicting those responsible for such gatherings. (Ord. 1621 § 5, 2015: Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 2010)

9.13.070 Collection of delinquent costs.
The penalties assessed as a result of a city response to an unruly gathering shall constitute a debt of all persons liable for the penalties in favor of the city and may be collected in any manner authorized by Chapter 1.24. (Ord. 1546 § 1 (part), 2010)

Chapter 9.16 WEAPONS

Sections:
9.16.010     Dangerous and deadly weapons—Defined.
9.16.020     Dangerous and deadly weapons—Discharge or carrying prohibited.
9.16.030     Dangerous and deadly weapons—Use in violation of Section 9.16.020 declared a nuisance—Disposition of weapon.

9.16.010 Dangerous and deadly weapons—Defined.
A. The term “dangerous and deadly weapon” as used in this chapter includes, but is not limited to, any revolver, pistol, shotgun, rifle or firearm which may be used for the explosion of cartridges, and any air gun, “B-B” gun, gas-operated gun, spring gun, slingshot, hunting bow and arrow, blow gun, and any weapon or device capable of catapulting, dispelling or discharging any projectile, missile or object of any type.
B. The term “dangerous and deadly weapon” as used in this chapter shall also include, but not be limited to:
    1. Any knife having a blade of three inches or more in length;
    2. Any ice pick or similar sharp stabbing tool;
    3. Any straight edge razor or any razor blade fitted to a handle;
    4. Any cutting, stabbing or bludgeoning weapon or device capable of inflicting grievous bodily harm, other than a knife as permitted herein;
    5. Any dirk, dagger or bludgeon. (Ord. 1484 § 6 (part), 2005: prior code § 4285)

9.16.020 Dangerous and deadly weapons—Discharge or carrying prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person to fire, discharge or cause to be emitted any projectile, missile or object from any dangerous or deadly weapon in the city, unless the person has first obtained permission in writing from the chief of police, and then only in compliance with all the conditions contained in the permit. This section does not apply to any peace officer or member of the Armed Forces of the United States in the discharge of his or her duty or to the discharge of a dangerous or deadly weapon at any rifle, pistol, sports or testing range approved by the chief of police.
B. Except as expressly permitted by state or federal law, it is unlawful for any person to carry upon his or her person or to have in his or her possession or under his or her control in any public place within the city any dangerous weapon specified in Section 9.16.010(B); provided, that it shall be a defense to any prosecution for a violation of this section if, at the time of the alleged violation, the instrument or device alleged to be a dangerous weapon was in good faith carried upon the person of the accused or was in good faith in his or her possession or control for use in his or her lawful occupation or employment or for the purpose of lawful recreation; and provided further, that the prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the commission of any act which is made a public offense by any law of this state, including but not limited to Penal Code Sections 653k, 12020 and 12025. (Ord. 1484 § 6 (part), 2005: Ord. 971 § 1, 1983: prior code § 4285.1)

9.16.030 Dangerous and deadly weapons—Use in violation of Section 9.16.020 declared a nuisance—Disposition of weapon.
Any dangerous or deadly weapon used in violation of Section 9.16.020 is declared to be a nuisance and the same shall be taken from the person violating said section, and surrendered to the chief of police, and shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of, as provided by the provisions of Section 12028 of the Penal Code of the state. (Ord. 1484 § 6 (part), 2005: prior code § 4285.2)

Chapter 9.18 RENTAL PROTECTIONS
(Expired)

Chapter 9.20 MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITIONS

Sections:
9.20.010     Repealed.
9.20.020     Automatic calling devices.
9.20.030     Regulation of vehicle use upon private property.
9.20.040     Cardrooms.
9.20.050     Urination in public.

9.20.010 Fortunetelling.
Repealed by Ord. 1346. (Prior code § 4221)

9.20.020 Automatic calling devices.
A. No person, except a public utility engaged in the business of providing communications, services and facilities, shall use or operate, attempt to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, or arrange, adjust, program or otherwise provide or install any device or combination of devices that will, upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other automatic means, initiate an intrastate call and deliver a recorded message to any telephone number used for the receipt of emergency or governmental administrative messages by the city police department or the city fire department.
B. The term “telephone number” includes any additional numbers associated with such emergency or governmental administrative telephone number through the use of a rotary or other system whereby additional telephone calls to the number are connected to other numbers when the first number is in use. (Prior code § 4227)

9.20.030 Regulation of vehicle use upon private property.
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle for recreational, sporting or competitive activities upon the unimproved portions of any lands belonging to or occupied by another without having and, upon request of a peace officer, displaying written permission from the owner of such lands or his or her agent, or the person in lawful possession thereof.
B. If a person arrested or cited for a violation of this section has been arrested or cited by the police department for a previous violation of this section within the preceding twelve-month period, the arresting officer shall impound the vehicle or device involved in the violation. The owner of the vehicle or device may reclaim it upon proof satisfactory to the chief of police (1) that it will not be so unlawfully used in the future, or (2) that the previous arrest or citation was invalid or erroneous.
C. For the first vehicle impounded under this section for any owner, the written representations of the adult owner, or the parents of a juvenile owner, that the vehicle will not be so used again shall be deemed to be “proof satisfactory.” Any person dissatisfied with a ruling of the chief of police may appeal the ruling directly to the council. (Prior code § 4289)

9.20.040 Cardrooms.
A. No person shall conduct, maintain, manage, operate, carry on or cause to be conducted, maintained, managed, operated or carried on, any cardroom or other business where tables or other items of furniture are used directly or indirectly for playing cards or card games and for the use of which a fee, commission or compensation is directly or indirectly charged to, or accepted or received from, players or participants in any such playing of cards or card games.
B. A “cardroom” means any space, room or enclosure furnished or equipped with a table or tables, or other items of furniture, used or intended to be used as a card table for the playing of cards, and the use of which is available to the public or any portion of the public; provided, that “cardroom” shall not include a room in which the sole card game played is bridge.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a bona fide nonprofit society, club or organization; provided, the society, club or organization shall pay no salary or other consideration to the people employed in or by it; and further provided, the entire receipts from the operation of a cardroom business otherwise prohibited by this section be used solely for charitable or benevolent purposes. (Ord. 987 § 1, 1983: prior code § 4550)

9.20.050 Urination in public.
No person shall urinate or defecate while on any city street, sidewalk, alley, roadway, parking lot, publicly maintained place or while in any other place, public or private, which is open to public view. (Ord. 1083 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 9.21 SECOND RESPONSE COST RECOVERY

Sections:
9.21.010     Issuance of written warning.
9.21.020     Content of warning.
9.21.030     Costs for special security services.
9.21.040     Collection of costs.
9.21.050     Debt owed to city.

9.21.010 Issuance of written warning.
When a police officer determines that a party, gathering or assemblage (“the event”) is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the police officer shall issue a written warning to the person responsible for control of the location of the event and/or the person responsible for the event, or if either of those persons is a minor, the parents or guardians of that minor. (Ord. 1163 § 1 (part), 1990)

9.21.020 Content of warning.
The written warning shall state that if police department personnel are required to return to the location of the event within the following twenty-four-hour period and the responding personnel determine that the subsequent event is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, each such response shall constitute the provision of special security services. The warning shall state that the person receiving the warning shall be charged for the cost of the city providing such special security services for the event. (Ord. 1163 § 1 (part), 1990)

9.21.030 Costs for special security services.
The costs of providing these special security services shall include, but not be limited to, all direct and indirect costs attributable to the subsequent response to the event. (Ord. 1163 § 1 (part), 1990)

9.21.040 Collection of costs.
The collection costs for these special security services shall not be in excess of five hundred dollars for each subsequent response. The city shall have the option to pursue any other legal remedies for recovery when such costs exceed five hundred dollars per response. (Ord. 1163 § 1 (part), 1990)

9.21.050 Debt owed to city.
The amount of such costs charged shall be deemed a debt to the city of the person or persons responsible for use of the special security services and, if minors, their parents or guardians. Any person required to pay such costs shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such costs, including reasonable attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 1163 § 1 (part), 1990)

Chapter 9.22 SAFETY ENHANCEMENT ZONES

Sections:
9.22.010     Designation process.
9.22.020     Safety enhancement zone penalties and violations.
9.22.030     Prosecution criminally or administratively.
9.22.040     City of San Luis Obispo safety enhancement zone.

9.22.010 Designation process.
The city council may by ordinance, or by resolution upon a finding that there is a need to take immediate action to protect the public health, safety and welfare, designate a specific geographical area as a “safety enhancement zone” and specify the date and/or time that the designation is effective upon a finding that the geographical area is subject to unique conditions and circumstances during a specific period of time that create the potential for a significant threat to public health and safety and that the threat would be reduced by enhanced penalties for violations of provisions of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code. The ordinance or resolution establishing a safety enhancement zone shall contain the following provisions:
A. A description of the geographical area comprising the safety enhancement zone; and
B. The date and time, or other specific description of the time period during which the safety enhancement zone designation is applicable to the geographical area. (Ord. 1469 § 1 (part), 2004)

9.22.020 Safety enhancement zone penalties and violations.
A. Any violation of designated sections of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code that is committed within an area that has been designated by the city council as a safety enhancement zone, and during the time that designation is effective, shall be subject to a fine that is twice the amount of the fine specified for the designated municipal code sections, up to a maximum of one thousand dollars.
B. Safety Enhancement Zone Violations. Fines for violations committed in the safety enhancement zone shall apply to the following provisions: Chapter 9.04 (possession of open containers or consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places), Chapter 9.05 (hosting a gathering where underage persons consume alcohol), Chapter 9.12 (noise control), Chapter 9.13 (unruly gatherings), Chapter 9.16 (dangerous and deadly weapons), and Chapter 9.20 (urination in public). A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed whenever a person repeats the act that constitutes the violation. (Ord. 1548 § 2, 2010)

9.22.030 Prosecution criminally or administratively.
A violation under this chapter may be prosecuted either criminally or administratively pursuant to Chapter 1.24. (Ord. 1469 § 1 (part), 2004)

9.22.040 City of San Luis Obispo safety enhancement zone.
A. The entire area within the city limits of San Luis Obispo is designated a safety enhancement zone during the Mardi Gras period, effective from 12:01 a.m. on the Thursday preceding “Fat Tuesday” until seven a.m. on the Wednesday following “Fat Tuesday.”
B. The entire area within the city limits of San Luis Obispo is designated a safety enhancement zone from 12:01 a.m. on March 17th (St. Patrick’s Day) until seven a.m. on March 18th of each year.
C. The entire area within the city limits of San Luis Obispo is designated a safety enhancement zone from 12:01 a.m. on October 31st (Halloween) until seven a.m. on November 1st of each year. If Halloween falls on a Thursday, Friday, Saturday or Sunday, the safety enhancement zone period will be effective at 12:01 a.m. on the Thursday falling on or preceding October 31st until seven a.m. on the Monday following October 31st.
D. The entire area within the city limits of San Luis Obispo is designated a safety enhancement zone from 12:01 a.m. on the first day of Cal Poly University’s housing move-in day until seven a.m. of the Monday following the first weekend of the fall academic school year. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 2013)

Chapter 9.30 NUDITY IN PUBLIC PLACES

Sections:
9.30.010     Nudity prohibited in any public place during specified times.
9.30.020     Exceptions.

9.30.010 Nudity prohibited in any public place during specified times.
It shall be an infraction for any person to appear nude in any place within the city open to the public, or any place visible from a place open to the public, at any time period during which the city council determines, by resolution, that such conduct is likely to create the potential for incidents of public disorder or to threaten the public health, safety or welfare. “Nude” within the meaning of this section means the absence of an opaque covering which covers the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anus or anal region of any person or any portion of the breast at or below the areola thereof of any female person. (Ord. 1480 § 1, 2005: Ord. 1456 § 1 (part), 2004)

9.30.020 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. Any person ten years old or younger.
B. Any female exposing her breast to the extent such exposure is necessary to breast-feed a child.
C. Performers who are engaged in live theatrical performances performed in a theater, concert hall or other such establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances.
D. Models in art studios or art classes. (Ord. 1456 § 1 (part), 2004)

Chapter 9.40 PUBLIC BENCHES

Sections:
9.40.010     Infraction established.

9.40.010 Infraction established.
It shall be an infraction for any person to sit, lay, or remain upon any public bench for any continuous period of time in excess of one hour, or for any period of time in excess of three hours in any twenty-four-hour period; or to arrange one’s personal property on or in front of any portion of any public bench in a manner that obstructs or precludes the use of the bench by another person. (Ord. 1491 § 2, 2006)

Chapter 9.50 CURFEW

Sections:
9.50.010     Definitions.
9.50.020     Curfew regulations.
9.50.030     Penalties for violations.

9.50.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
A. “Curfew hours” means: (1) the period from eleven p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until five a.m. the following day; and (2) the period from 12:01 a.m. until five a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
B. “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury, loss of life or major damage to real property. “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
C. “Establishment” means any privately-owned place of business to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
D. “Guardian” means (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.
E. “Minor” means any person under sixteen years of age.
G. “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person.
H. “Private place” means any place that is neither a public place nor an establishment.
I. “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, parks, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, local transportation facilities and shops.
J. “Responsible adult” means a person at least eighteen years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor, and not engaged in any unlawful activity. (Ord. 1562 § 1 (part), 2011)

9.50.020 Curfew regulations.
A. It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city of San Luis Obispo during curfew hours.
B. It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor knowingly to permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city of San Luis Obispo during curfew hours.
C. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection A or B of this section that the minor was:
    1. Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult;
    2. On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, or the responsible adult, without any detour or stop;
    3. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
    4. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning from an employment activity to a private place without any detour or stop;
    5. Involved in an emergency;
    6. On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence;
    7. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of San Luis Obispo, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning from an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of San Luis Obispo, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor to or from a private place without any detour or stop;
    8. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, or going to or returning from the exercising of those First Amendment rights to or from a private place without any detour or stop;
    9. Travelling from an activity listed in this subsection C to another activity listed in this subsection C, without any detour or stop;
    10. Emancipated pursuant to law;
    11. Going to or returning from any private place, without detour or stop.
D. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The police officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under subsection C of this section is present or applicable.
E. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1562 § 1 (part), 2011)

9.50.030 Penalties for violations.
A. Any minor violating Section 9.50.020(A) is guilty of an infraction punishable by (1) a warning for the first violation; (2) a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars and/or ten hours of community service for the second violation; (3) a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars and/or twenty hours of community service for the third or subsequent violation of this section. Community service shall be served during a time other than the minor’s hours of school attendance or employment.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, when a minor is charged with a violation of this chapter, and a police officer issues a notice to appear, the charge shall be deemed an infraction unless another disposition is elected under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 601 or 602 or other applicable state laws.
C. Any parent or guardian violating Section 9.50.020(B) is guilty of an infraction punishable by (1) a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars and/or ten hours of community service for the first violation; (2) a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars and/or twenty-five hours of community service for the second violation; (3) a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars and/or fifty hours of community service for the third or subsequent violation of this section. (Ord. 1562 § 1 (part), 2011)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:
10.04        Definitions
10.08        Administration
10.12        Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations
10.14        Traffic-Control Devices
10.16        Turning Movements
10.20        One-Way Streets and Alleys
10.24        Special Stops Required
10.28        Miscellaneous Driving Rules
10.32        Pedestrian Regulations
10.34        Overnight Camping Prohibited on City Streets and City-Owned Parking Areas
10.36        Stopping, Standing and Parking for Certain Purposes or in Certain Places
10.40        Stopping, Standing or Parking Restricted or Prohibited in Certain Areas
10.44        Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only
10.48        Restricted Use of Certain Streets
10.52        Parking Meters
10.56        Speed Zones
10.60        Obstructions to Visibility
10.64        Parking Revenues, Fines and Forfeitures
10.68        Inoperative Vehicles
10.72        Bicycles
10.76        Coasters, Roller Skates and Similar Devices
10.80        Oversize and Overweight Vehicles
10.84        Minimum Penalty for Traffic Violations

Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
10.04.010    Generally.
10.04.020    Alley.
10.04.030    Bicycle.
10.04.040    Central traffic district.
10.04.050    Curb.
10.04.060    Divisional island.
10.04.070    Holidays.
10.04.080    Loading zone.
10.04.090    Official time standard.
10.04.100    Park.
10.04.110    Parking meter.
10.04.120    Parkway.
10.04.130    Passenger loading zone.
10.04.140    Pedestrian.
10.04.150    Police department employee.
10.04.160    Police officer.
10.04.170    Skateboard.
10.04.180    Stop.
10.04.190    Stop or stand.
10.04.200    Vehicle Code.

10.04.010 Generally.
A. The words and phrases set out in this chapter when used in this title shall, for the purposes of this title, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter.
B. Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.020 Alley.
“Alley” means that roadway defined in Section 110 of the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.030 Bicycle.
“Bicycle” means a light vehicle as defined in the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.040 Central traffic district.
“Central traffic district” means all streets and portions of streets within the area described in Section 10.76.010. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.050 Curb.
“Curb” means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by curbing construction, or not so marked; the word “curb” as used in this title shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from the tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.060 Divisional island.
“Divisional island” means a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.070 Holidays.
Within the meaning of this title, “holidays” are the first day of January (New Year’s Day), the third Monday in January (Martin Luther King, Jr. Day), the third Monday in February (President’s Day), the last Monday in May (Memorial Day), the fourth day of July (Independence Day), the first Monday of September (Labor Day), the eleventh day of November (Veterans’ Day), the fourth Thursday in November (Thanksgiving Day), the Friday after Thanksgiving Day, the twenty-fourth day of December (Christmas Eve), and the twenty-fifth day of December (Christmas Day). If any of the aforementioned days falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be observed; if on a Sunday, the Monday following is a holiday. The city administrative officer is also authorized to declare a (meter/parking) holiday under special circumstances or for special events. (Ord. 1484 § 8, 2005: Ord. 1037 § 1, 1985: prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.080 Loading zone.
“Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.090 Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this title, they shall mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use in this city. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.100 Park.
“Park” means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.110 Parking meter.
“Parking meter” means a mechanical device installed within or upon the curb or sidewalk area immediately adjacent to a parking space, for the purpose of controlling the period of time occupancy of such parking meter space by any vehicle. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.120 Parkway.
“Parkway” means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.130 Passenger loading zone.
“Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.140 Pedestrian.
“Pedestrian” means any person afoot or who is using a means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.150 Police department employee.
“Police employee” means persons other than police officers who are authorized and trained to enforce traffic regulations. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.160 Police officer.
“Police officer” means every officer of the police department of this city or any employee authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violation of traffic regulations. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.170 Skateboard.
“Skateboard” means a wheeled object as defined in Section 10.76.010. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.180 Stop.
“Stop,” when required, means complete cessation of movement. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.190 Stop or stand.
“Stop or stand,” when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

10.04.200 Vehicle Code.
“Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 3200 (part))

Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:
10.08.010    Authority to place and maintain traffic-control devices.
10.08.020    Powers and duties.
10.08.030    Traffic-control devices and markings—Installation and maintenance.
10.08.040    Traffic committee—Established—Membership.
10.08.050    Traffic committee—Duties.
10.08.060    Annual traffic safety report—Preparation—Contents.
10.08.070    Enforcement.

10.08.010 Authority to place and maintain traffic-control devices.
The public works director or their designee(s) shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in Section 10.08.020 and in the traffic regulations of this city. Whenever the public works director or their designee(s) is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic-control devices or signals, he or she may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained. (Ord. 1628 § 1, 2016: prior code § 3201)

10.08.020 Powers and duties.
It shall be the responsibility of the public works director or their designee(s) to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such traffic signals and other traffic control devices upon streets and highways as required hereunder and may place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such appropriate signs, signals, or other traffic control devices as may be authorized hereunder or as may be necessary to properly indicate and to carry out the provisions of this code and the California Vehicle Code to warn or guide traffic within the city of San Luis Obispo. These duties shall generally include but are not limited to (A) the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices and signals, (B) conducting engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, (C) conducting engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions, (D) recommending traffic-control devices for inclusion in the capital improvement program and present plans for consideration by the council, (E) approving field modifications of traffic control devices through work conducted by city staff or contractors, (F) to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and (G) to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. Whenever, by the provisions of this title, a power is granted to the public works director or their designee(s) or a duty imposed upon him or her, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by him or her. (Ord. 1628 § 2, 2016: prior code § 3201.1)

10.08.030 Traffic-control devices and markings—Installation and maintenance.
The physical maintenance of traffic-control devices and markings shall be handled by the public works department. The installation of devices, signs or markings authorized by the public works director or their designee(s) will be either by contract or through the public works department. (Ord. 1628 § 3, 2016: prior code § 3201.2)

10.08.040 Traffic committee—Established—Membership.
There is established an advisory traffic committee to serve without compensation, consisting of the following members or their representatives: the city traffic engineer, the chief of police, the chief of the fire department, and representing the public a traffic engineer from the Southern California Auto Club and a traffic engineer from the California Department of Transportation. (Prior code § 3201.3)

10.08.050 Traffic committee—Duties.
It shall be the duty of the traffic committee to consider public suggestions having to do with traffic matters and recommend to the legislative body of this city and to the city traffic engineer, the chief of police, and other city officials ways and means of improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations. A report of all actions considered by the committee shall be submitted to the council. (Prior code § 3201.4)

10.08.060 Annual traffic safety report—Preparation—Contents.
The police department shall annually or as required prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the council. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows:
A. Number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data;
B. The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police;
C. The plans and recommendations of the police department for future traffic safety activities. (Prior code § 3201.5)

10.08.070 Enforcement.
All adopted state and city parking ordinances shall be administered and enforced by the police chief, the fire chief, and the director of public works department of the city, or such other persons as they shall designate as enforcing officers. (Ord. 1331 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.12 ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS

Sections:
10.12.010    Traffic direction—Police and fire department officials authority.
10.12.020    Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.
10.12.030    Obedience to traffic regulations—Required.
10.12.040    Obedience to traffic regulations—Persons riding bicycles or animals.
10.12.050    Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers prohibited.
10.12.060    Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
10.12.070    Exemption of certain vehicles.
10.12.080    Report of damage to certain property required.
10.12.090    Removal of vehicles from street by police officers or designated employees permitted when.
10.12.100    Vehicles deemed in violation of Section 10.12.090 if not moved a minimum of five hundred feet from initial parking place before being parked again.

10.12.010 Traffic direction—Police and fire department officials authority.
Officers of the police department and such employees as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signals in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians officers and employees of the police department, or members of the fire department, may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding that provisions to the contrary are contained in this title or the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 3202)

10.12.020 Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.
No person other than an officer of the police department or members of the fire department or a person authorized by the chief of police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as provided in this title, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the public works director or their designee(s). (Ord. 1628 § 4, 2016: prior code § 3202.1)

10.12.030 Obedience to traffic regulations—Required.
It is a misdemeanor or infraction for any person driving any vehicle or other conveyance upon any street, or any pedestrian, to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required as applicable to any such person under this title. (Prior code § 3202.2)

10.12.040 Obedience to traffic regulations—Persons riding bicycles or animals.
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Prior code § 3202.3)

10.12.050 Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers prohibited.
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. (Prior code § 3202.4)

10.12.060 Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
The provisions of this title shall apply to the operation of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any said operator to violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 3202.5)

10.12.070 Exemption of certain vehicles.
A. The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire departments, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this subsection is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.
B. The exemption set out in subsection A of this section shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his or her wilful disregard to the safety of others.
C. The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Postal Service while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of the United States mail. (Prior code § 3202.6)

10.12.080 Report of damage to certain property required.
A. The operator of any vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including, but not limited to, any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty-four hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the police department of this city.
B. Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident.
C. The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he or she is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he or she shall make a report as required in subsection A of this section within twenty-four hours after regaining ability to make such report. (Prior code § 3202.7)

10.12.090 Removal of vehicles from street by police officers or designated employees permitted when.
Any regularly employed and salaried officer or designated employee of the police department or the public works department of this city may remove or cause to be removed:
A. Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two or more consecutive hours;
B. Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal;
C. Any vehicle which is parked or left upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size and the parking of such vehicles would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal;
D. Any vehicle which is blocking designated fire lanes or alleys where parking is prohibited. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 2018: prior code § 3202.8)

10.12.100 Vehicles deemed in violation of Section 10.12.090 if not moved a minimum of five hundred feet from initial parking place before being parked again.
For the purposes of enforcement of Section 10.12.090, a vehicle is in violation if, once it has been parked or left standing upon a street, it is not moved a minimum distance of five hundred feet from the initial parking place before being again parked. (Prior code § 3202.9)

Chapter 10.14 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES

Sections:
10.14.010    Authority to place and maintain.
10.14.020    Traffic-control signs required for enforcement purposes.
10.14.030    Obedience required.
10.14.040    Traffic signal installation.
10.14.050    Lane marking.
10.14.060    Distinctive roadway markings—Authority to place.
10.14.070    Removal, relocation and discontinuance—Authority.
10.14.080    Hours of operation.
10.14.090    Unauthorized painting on curbs prohibited.

10.14.010 Authority to place and maintain.
A. The public works director or their designee(s) shall have the power and duty to place or cause to be placed official traffic-control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title.
B. Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.
C. The public works director or their designee(s) may also place or cause to be placed such additional traffic-control devices as he or she may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he or she shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this chapter or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the council. (Ord. 1628 § 5, 2016: prior code § 3203)

10.14.020 Traffic-control signs required for enforcement purposes.
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic regulations. (Prior code § 3203.1)

10.14.030 Obedience required.
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with this title unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. (Prior code § 3203.2)

10.14.040 Traffic signal installation.
A. The public works director or their designee(s) is directed to install official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.
B. The public works director or their designee(s) shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his or her determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the Traffic Manual issued by the California Department of Transportation.
C. Whenever the public works director or their designee(s) installs an official traffic signal at any intersection, he or she shall likewise erect at such intersection street name signs visible to the principal flow of traffic unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection. (Ord. 1628 § 6, 2016: prior code § 3203.3)

10.14.050 Lane marking.
The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. (Ord. 1628 § 7, 2016: prior code § 3203.4)

10.14.060 Distinctive roadway markings—Authority to place.
The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to place distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such markings or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to the provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1628 § 8, 2016: prior code § 3203.5)

10.14.070 Removal, relocation and discontinuance—Authority.
The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this title whenever he or she shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist. (Ord. 1628 § 9, 2016: prior code § 3203.6)

10.14.080 Hours of operation.
The public works director or their designee(s) shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. (Ord. 1628 § 10, 2016: prior code § 3203.7)

10.14.090 Unauthorized painting on curbs prohibited.
No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this city pertaining thereto. (Prior code § 3203.8)

Chapter 10.16 TURNING MOVEMENTS

Sections:
10.16.010    Turning markers—Authority to place—Obedience to required.
10.16.020    Restricted turn signs—Authority to place.
10.16.030    No-turn signs—Obedience required.
10.16.040    No free right turn on red light signs—Obedience required—Sign posting.

10.16.010 Turning markers—Authority to place—Obedience to required.
A. The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to place markers, buttons or other official traffic-control signs within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right- or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance.
B. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. (Ord. 1628 § 11, 2016: prior code § 3204)

10.16.020 Restricted turn signs—Authority to place.
The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Ord. 1628 § 12, 2016: prior code § 3204.1)

10.16.030 No-turn signs—Obedience required.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such sign. (Prior code § 3204.2)

10.16.040 No free right turn on red light signs—Obedience required—Sign posting.
A. No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is sign-posted giving notice of such restriction as provided in subsection B of this section.
B. The public works director or their designee(s) shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he or she determines that the making of right turns against a traffic signal “stop” indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. (Ord. 1628 § 13, 2016: prior code § 3204.3)

Chapter 10.20 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS

Sections:
10.20.010    Sign posting.

10.20.010 Sign posting.
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the public works director or their designee(s) shall place signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord. 1628 § 14, 2016: prior code § 3205)

Chapter 10.24 SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED

Sections:
10.24.010    Stop signs—Erection—Removal—Obedience to required.
10.24.020    Vehicles emerging from an alley, driveway or building.

10.24.010 Stop signs—Erection—Removal—Obedience to required.
The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to erect stop signs at those locations where he or she deems such controls to be necessary or remove those signs no longer warranted in order to protect the public safety. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop at the entrance or entrances to such intersections. (Ord. 1628 § 15, 2016: prior code § 3206)

10.24.020 Vehicles emerging from an alley, driveway or building.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. (Prior code § 3206.1)

Chapter 10.28 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES

Sections:
10.28.010    Driving through funeral procession.
10.28.020    Commercial vehicles using private driveways.
10.28.030    Riding or driving on sidewalk.
10.28.040    Riding or driving on new pavement markings.
10.28.050    Driving on limited access roadways.
10.28.060    Barriers and signs—Placing or erecting—Tampering with—Obedience to required.
10.28.070    Entering intersections and crosswalks.

10.28.010 Driving through funeral procession.
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade; provided, that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the police department. (Prior code § 3207)

10.28.020 Commercial vehicles using private driveways.
A. No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited.
B. For the purpose of this section, a “commercial vehicle” means a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. (Prior code § 3207.2)

10.28.030 Riding or driving on sidewalk.
No person shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled, any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that the sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the public works director or their designee(s). Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from six p.m. to six a.m. (Ord. 1628 § 16, 2016: prior code § 3207.3)

10.28.040 Riding or driving on new pavement markings.
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier, sign, cone-marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Prior code § 3207.4)

10.28.050 Driving on limited access roadways.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Prior code § 3207.5)

10.28.060 Barriers and signs—Placing or erecting—Tampering with—Obedience to required.
No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the public works director or their designee(s) or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this city. (Ord. 1628 § 17, 2016: prior code § 3207.7)

10.28.070 Entering intersections and crosswalks.
No operator of any vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (Prior code § 3207.8)

Chapter 10.32 PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS

Sections:
10.32.010    Crosswalks—Establishment.
10.32.020    Crosswalks—Use required when.

10.32.010 Crosswalks—Establishment.
A. The public works director or their designee(s) shall establish and designate crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:
Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such districts, and at other places within or outside the district where the public works director or their designee(s) determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway, subject to the limitations contained in subsection B of this section.
B. Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at midblock.
C. The public works director or their designee(s) may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. (Ord. 1628 § 18, 2016: prior code § 3208)

10.32.020 Crosswalks—Use required when.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district. (Prior code § 3208.1)

Chapter 10.34 OVERNIGHT CAMPING PROHIBITED ON CITY STREETS AND CITY-OWNED PARKING AREAS

Sections:
10.34.010    Purpose.
10.34.020    Overnight camping prohibited on city streets and city-owned parking areas.
10.34.030    Enforcement and penalties.

10.34.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is to make public streets and other public areas readily accessible to the public for their intended and supported purposes and to limit the overnight parking of vehicles on public streets and public areas for purposes of human habitation, temporary or permanent residential occupation, camping, or sleeping (also referred to herein as “overnight camping”), which uses of public streets and areas are hereby deemed to be unsafe, unsanitary, and incompatible with the intended and supported uses of streets and other public areas. (Ord. 1584 § 2 (part), 2012)

10.34.020 Overnight camping prohibited on city streets and city-owned parking areas.
A. Prohibition. No occupied vehicle shall be parked for the purposes of allowing the occupants thereof to establish a temporary or permanent residential use, camp or sleep within the vehicle during the hours of ten p.m. to six a.m. For the purpose of this section, any occupied motor vehicle parked on the public streets or specified public areas during the times mentioned herein, which (1) contains a person or persons sleeping therein, or (2) contains bedding or camp paraphernalia arranged for the purpose of, or in such a way as will permit, the occupants thereof to remain overnight shall be deemed to be in violation of this section.
B. Applicability. This section shall prohibit the parking of vehicles for purposes of overnight camping on any city public right-of-way, including all public streets, and any city-owned parking areas within the city of San Luis Obispo. Camping or sleeping in vehicles on private property or areas not within the public right-of-way, public streets, or any city-owned parking areas is subject to the requirements of Section 17.16.015.
C. Exceptions. This chapter is not applicable to “safe parking” programs or similar vehicular sheltering programs or the expansion of such programs approved by the city council in support of the homeless community of San Luis Obispo.
D. Notice. Public notice of this section shall be in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 22507 with signage at each entrance to the city. (Ord. 1584 § 2 (part), 2012)

10.34.030 Enforcement and penalties.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the city’s police department or such other departments or persons designated by the chief of police.
B. Any violation of this chapter shall be a parking violation, the amount of penalties for which shall be set by the council by resolution. (Ord. 1584 § 2 (part), 2012)

Chapter 10.36 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES OR IN CERTAIN PLACES

Sections:
10.36.010    Applicability of provisions—Temporary alteration of parking controls and regulations by public works director or their designee(s).
10.36.020    Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited.
10.36.030    Maintenance of no stopping and no parking zones—Public works director or their designee(s) duty—Compliance with markings required.
10.36.040    No parking areas.
10.36.050    Storage of vehicles upon streets prohibited.
10.36.060    Repealed.
10.36.070    Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets prohibited—Exception.
10.36.080    Washing or polishing vehicles on public streets.
10.36.090    Parking adjacent to schools.
10.36.100    Parking prohibited on narrow streets.
10.36.110    Parking on grades.
10.36.120    Peddlers, vendors—Unlawful parking.
10.36.130    Emergency parking signs.
10.36.140    Parking of large or commercial vehicles near intersections.
10.36.150    Nighttime parking of large vehicles.
10.36.160    Nighttime parking of vehicles with operating air-conditioning or refrigeration units.
10.36.170    Designation of residential parking permit areas—Adoption of resolution.
10.36.180    Designation of residential parking permit areas—Content of resolution.
10.36.190    Designation of residential parking permit areas—Sign posting.
10.36.200    Limitations on parking in a residential permit parking area.
10.36.210    Reserved.
10.36.220    Residential parking permit—Issuance.
10.36.221    Lost, stolen, or defaced permit replacement.
10.36.230    Residential parking permits—Display required.
10.36.232    Enforcement.
10.36.233    Repealed.
10.36.235    Restricted parking in city parking facilities.
10.36.240    Violation—Penalty.

10.36.010 Applicability of provisions—Temporary alteration of parking controls and regulations by public works director or their designee(s).
A. The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times as specified in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.
B. The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
C. The public works director or their designee(s) or his or her designated alternate may, at his or her discretion, set aside, suspend or relocate parking controls and regulations on a temporary basis when it is found to be in the public interest or required for traffic safety. Before any such temporary change may become effective, the public works director or their designee(s) shall receive the police department’s approval for the change and have the change posted. (Ord. 1628 § 19, 2016: prior code § 3209)

10.36.020 Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Prior code § 3209.1)

10.36.030 Maintenance of no stopping and no parking zones—Public works director or their designee(s) duty—Compliance with markings required.
A. Public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this chapter.
B. When the curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1628 § 20, 2016: prior code § 3209.2)

10.36.040 No parking areas.
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:
A. Within any divisional island, unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings;
B. On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;
C. In any area where the public works director or their designee(s) determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;
D. In any area established by resolution of the council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;
E. Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track;
F. In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;
G. On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the effective time of such no parking;
H. At any place within twenty feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the midblock end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;
I. At any place within fifteen feet of a crosswalk at an intersection when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface, except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop;
J. Within fifteen feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device. (Ord. 1628 § 21, 2016; prior code § 3209.3)

10.36.050 Storage of vehicles upon streets prohibited.
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours. (Prior code § 3209.4)

10.36.060 Parking for demonstration prohibited.
Repealed by Ord. 1484. (Prior code § 3209.5)

10.36.070 Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets prohibited—Exception.
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. (Prior code § 3209.6)

10.36.080 Washing or polishing vehicles on public streets.
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any street in this city, when a charge is made for such service. (Prior code § 3209.7)

10.36.090 Parking adjacent to schools.
A. The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
B. When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 1628 § 22, 2016: prior code § 3209.8)

10.36.100 Parking prohibited on narrow streets.
A. The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet.
B. When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Ord. 1628 § 23, 2016; prior code § 3209.9)

10.36.110 Parking on grades.
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Prior code § 3209.10)

10.36.120 Peddlers, vendors—Unlawful parking.
Except as otherwise provided in this section or in Chapter 5.16, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, foodstuffs, or services are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating cart or vehicle, on any portion of any street within this city, except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. (Ord. 1594 § 4, 2014: prior code § 3209.11)

10.36.130 Emergency parking signs.
A. Whenever the chief of police shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the chief of police shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the chief of police shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the chief of police shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.
B. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Prior code § 3209.12)

10.36.140 Parking of large or commercial vehicles near intersections.
No person shall park any vehicle greater than six feet in height, including any load thereon, within one hundred feet of any intersection at any time. This section shall not apply to any particular intersection until signs or markings giving adequate notice thereof have been placed as determined appropriate by public works director or their designee(s). (Ord. 1628 § 24, 2016: Ord. 1062 § 1, 1986: prior code § 3209.14)

10.36.150 Nighttime parking of large vehicles.
Between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m., it is unlawful to park or leave standing upon any public right-of-way within two hundred feet of any dwelling, any vehicle exceeding (1) twenty feet in length, or (2) six thousand pounds unladen weight, except trailer coaches, housecars, campers or motorhomes. (Prior code § 3209.15)

10.36.160 Nighttime parking of vehicles with operating air-conditioning or refrigeration units.
Between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m., no person shall park or leave standing on any street or public right-of-way any vehicle, except a passenger vehicle, with an operating refrigeration or other unit to cool, heat, humidify, or otherwise air-condition the cargo area, except for locations at least two hundred feet distant from the nearest dwelling. (Prior code § 3209.16)

10.36.170 Designation of residential parking permit areas—Adoption of resolution.
A. The council should, by resolution, designate an area of the city as a residential parking permit area if the council finds that:
    1. The area is predominantly residential;
    2. The streets in the area are congested with vehicles parked by persons not residing in the area and the designation is supported by a majority of the affected households as indicated by a city survey of the affected households in which a sixty percent majority of participating households is required; or
    3. Limiting the parking of vehicles along the streets in the area to vehicles registered or controlled and exclusively used by persons residing in the area is necessary in order to preserve the character of the existing neighborhood as defined in resident petition and approved by a sixty percent majority of households in the area. Households will be determined using the city’s address database (there may be more than one household per parcel) and will be limited to non-multifamily units of less than five dwelling units.
B. In determining whether limiting the parking of vehicles along the streets in the area to vehicles registered to or controlled and used exclusively by persons residing in the area is necessary in order to preserve the character of the existing neighborhood for the persons residing in the area, the council shall consider the negative effect of vehicles parked by persons not residing in the area on:
    1. Environmental characteristics such as ambient noise levels and air pollution levels;
    2. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety in the area; and
    3. The burden on persons residing in the area gaining access to their residences.
C. The council may, by resolution, designate an area of the city as a residential parking permit area after holding a public hearing and making a finding that the establishment of the district represents the desire of a majority of the households of the area. The hearing on any such resolution should only be held after the council receives a request, in a form acceptable to the council. (Ord. 1454 § 1, 2004: Ord. 1412 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord. 1264 § 1, 1994: prior code § 3209.17)

10.36.180 Designation of residential parking permit areas—Content of resolution.
The resolution designating an area of the city as a residential permit parking area shall describe the designated area in which parking will be limited to vehicles displaying a parking permit issued by the public works department for that purpose and shall set forth the hours and days, as specified by a sixty percent majority of the households in the district, when parking will be limited to those vehicles. (Ord. 1454 § 2, 2004: Ord. 1412 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 1264 § 2, 1994: prior code § 3209.18)

10.36.190 Designation of residential parking permit areas—Sign posting.
Upon adoption of a resolution by the council designating an area of the city as a residential parking permit area, the public works director or their designee(s) shall cause appropriate signs to be erected along the streets identified in the resolution which shall give notice of the limitation on the parking of vehicles in the area as provided in Section 10.36.170, and shall indicate the hours and days when such limitations shall be in effect. (Ord. 1628 § 25, 2016: prior code § 3209.19)

10.36.200 Limitations on parking in a residential permit parking area.
It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle on any street identified in a resolution adopted by the council designating a residential permit parking area during the hours and on the days set forth in such resolution except:
A. Those vehicles described in Section 10.36.180 displaying a valid permit issued as provided for by Section 10.36.220 and parked within the street block in front of the household to which the permit is issued or within one adjoining district block; or
B. Any emergency vehicle, including, but not limited to, an ambulance, fire engine, or police vehicle; or
C. A vehicle with commercial plates which is under the control of a person, who does not reside within the district, providing service for hire to property located in the designated residential permit parking area, including but not limited to a delivery vehicle; or
D. District residents wishing to sponsor special one-day events which will exceed the number of parking permits available may contact the city parking manager and request a temporary, special-event exemption to the residential permit requirement. If the temporary exemption is granted by the parking manager, all vehicles which have as their destination a qualified residential permit address, shall display in clear view on the dashboard, written confirmation of the street address and date and time of the event. Further, special events shall be deemed infrequent occurrences and any regular requests for parking permit exemption will not be authorized. This section shall not be interpreted to allow the daily parking of vehicles. Any vehicle not displaying the proper or authorized identification shall be subject to citation. (Ord. 1454 § 3, 2004: Ord. 1264 § 3, 1994: prior code § 3209.20)

10.36.210 Reserved.*
*Ord. 1264, adopted June 7, 1994, repealed former § 10.36.210, relative to fee for residential parking permit application, which derived from prior code § 3209.22.

10.36.220 Residential parking permit—Issuance.
Annually, the director of public works shall issue two residential parking permits to the registered property owner, or the registered property owner’s representative, as authorized in writing, of each property shown with a unique number on the latest county of San Luis Obispo assessment roll within each residential parking permit area established by resolution as set forth in Section 10.36.180. Qualified households that have multiple, separate dwelling units shall be eligible for additional permits, providing the total number of permits issued to one parcel does not exceed twice the number of residential dwelling units on the parcel. All parking permits may be picked up in person at the office of the city parking manager or will be mailed to the address of the property on written request of the property owner.
Parking permits may be transferred by the residents to any vehicle that is to be parked on the street and will be recognized by the city, providing they are displayed clearly. The parking permits shall be issued annually. Fees for residential parking permits shall be established by city council resolution. The permits shall be considered part of the residential property and shall be transferred to the new property owner upon sale of the residence. (Ord. 1565 § 1, 2011: Ord. 1454 § 4, 2004: Ord. 1264 § 4, 1994: prior code § 3209.21)

10.36.221 Lost, stolen, or defaced permit replacement.
Any permit lost, stolen, defaced or otherwise altered shall be deemed invalid and a replacement permit shall be issued to the qualified property owner for a fee of fifteen dollars. If the replacement permit is again lost, stolen, or defaced, a replacement permit will be issued for a fee of twenty-five dollars. No additional replacement permits shall be issued within a twelve-month period. All permits shall be picked up by the property owner or a representative authorized in writing by the registered property owner, with proof of identification, at the office of the city parking manager. The property owner or a representative authorized in writing by the owner shall certify that the original permit was lost, stolen, or in the case of damaged permits shall submit the damaged permit, stating the permit shall be used by qualified residents and their bona fide visitors.
Any resident and/or property owner found to misrepresent themselves for the purposes of fraudulently obtaining residential parking permits shall lose their right to said permits and no permits will be issued to the household until the beginning of the next permit year and shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1454 § 5, 2004: Ord. 1264 § 5, 1994)

10.36.230 Residential parking permits—Display required.
Parking permits issued under Section 10.36.220 shall be displayed on a vehicle in a manner prescribed by the director of public works. The method of display shall be clearly stated on the rear of the permit. (Ord. 1264 § 6, 1994: prior code § 3209.23)

10.36.232 Enforcement.
Enforcement of the residential parking permit district shall be on a regular and routine basis, and may be on a complaint basis by residents within the district boundaries. Enforcement personnel shall be dispatched on an as-available basis as determined by the city parking manager/police department. All parking citations issued for noncompliance with the parking permit requirement shall be governed by the civil proceedings set forth in the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1412 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 1264 § 7, 1994)

10.36.233 Parking in yard.
Repealed by Ord. 1579. (Ord. 1264 § 8, 1994)

10.36.235 Restricted parking in city parking facilities.
No person shall stop, stand, park or leave standing a motor vehicle in any city parking facility or space where vehicular parking has been restricted by a resolution adopted by the council; provided, that signs specifying the restrictions, or conditions under which parking is permitted, shall have been posted at all entrances to such property or at designated spaces. Such signs shall be approved both as to wording and posting by the public works director or their designee(s). (Ord. 1655 § 2, 2018: prior code § 4220.10)

10.36.240 Violation—Penalty.
Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine for each separate offense as provided in Section 10.64.030. (Prior code § 3209.99)

Chapter 10.40 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS

Sections:
10.40.010    Timed parking.
10.40.020    Backing into parking space.
10.40.030    Repealed.
10.40.040    Parking parallel on one-way streets.
10.40.050    Diagonal parking.
10.40.060    Parking space markings.
10.40.070    No stopping zones.
10.40.080    All night parking prohibited—Exception.

10.40.010 Timed parking.
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the public works director or their designee(s) to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours established by Section 10.52.030, for a period of time longer than designated time posted by sign, parking meter or curb marking. Green curb markings shall mean no standing or parking of time longer than ten minutes up to one hour. All other time designations shall be from one hour up to ten hours. Once the designated time at an occupied space has elapsed, a vehicle may not return to a parking space in the same block face or within five hundred feet of where previously parked on the same block face or to the same city parking facility for a three-hour period. (Ord. 1655 § 3, 2018: Ord. 1628 § 26, 2016: Ord. 1577 § 1, 2012: Ord. 1331 § 2, 1998: prior code § 3210)

10.40.020 Backing into parking space.
No vehicle shall back in or park backwards in any city parking facility space with the exception of two-wheeled motorized vehicles. (Ord. 1655 § 4, 2018: Ord. 1331 § 3, 1998: prior code § 3210.1)

10.40.030 Two-hour parking.
Repealed by Ord. 1331. (Prior code § 3210.2)

10.40.040 Parking parallel on one-way streets.
A. Subject to other more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.
B. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.
C. The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway or a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.
D. The requirements of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb; provided, that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. (Ord. 1628 § 27, 2016; prior code § 3210.3)

10.40.050 Diagonal parking.
A. On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle except:
    1. At the angle to the curb indicated by sign or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of the allotted space;
    2. With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of the curb.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 10.40.040 shall be complied with. (Prior code § 3210.4)

10.40.060 Parking space markings.
A. The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings on city streets and in city parking facilities where authorized parking is permitted.
B. When such parking space markings are placed on the highway or in city parking facilities, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space, unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Ord. 1655 § 5, 2018: Ord. 1628 § 28, 2016; Ord. 1076 § 1, 1986: prior code § 3210.5)

10.40.070 No stopping zones.
A. The public works director or their designee(s) shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited.
B. During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop said vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by the public works director or their designee(s) as no stopping zones. (Ord. 1628 § 29, 2016: prior code § 3210.6)

10.40.080 All night parking prohibited—Exception.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street upon which signs are posted in the central traffic district between the hours of three a.m. and five a.m. of any day or between the hours established by resolution of the council; provided, that this section shall not apply to a vehicle of any regularly licensed physician when actually engaged in making professional calls; and provided, that the physician’s vehicle is plainly marked and identifiable. (Prior code § 3210.7)

Chapter 10.44 STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY

Sections:
10.44.010    Loading zones—Marking—Authority.
10.44.020    Curb markings—Meanings—Authority to place.
10.44.030    Yellow loading zone—Time restrictions for loading and unloading.
10.44.040    Passenger zones—Time restrictions for loading and unloading.
10.44.050    Standing in any alley.
10.44.060    Bus zones—Establishment—Authority.
10.44.070    Handicapped parking.
10.44.080    Violation—Penalty.

10.44.010 Loading zones—Marking—Authority.
A. The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:
    1. At any place in the central traffic district or any business district;
    2. Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.
B. Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top and side of all curbs in the zones.
C. Passenger loading zones shall be:
    1. Indicated by white paint upon the top and side of all curbs in the zones; or
    2. Traffic control signs indicating hours of operation and use times as set by resolution or ordinance of the council; or
    3. A combination of the above. (Ord. 1666 § 1, 2019: Ord. 1655 § 6, 2018: Ord. 1628 § 30, 2016; prior code § 3211)

10.44.020 Curb markings—Meanings—Authority to place.
The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and the curb markings shall have the meanings as set forth in this section.
A. “Red” means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.
B. “Yellow” means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. every Monday to Saturday, and between one p.m. and six p.m. every Sunday, unless otherwise indicated by posted signage, for any purpose other than the commercial loading or unloading of materials by a commercially registered and licensed vehicle or a professionally signed passenger vehicle that displays an authorized commercial loading zone permit or for the purpose of loading and unloading of passengers by passenger vehicles. The commercial loading zone permit requirements and fee shall be established by resolution.
C. “White” means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than ten minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. every Monday to Saturday, and between one p.m. and six p.m. every Sunday, and except as follows:
    1. When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times.
    2. When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times.
D. When the public works director or their designee(s) as authorized under this chapter has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb markings in violation of any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1655 § 7, 2018: Ord. 1628 § 31, 2016: Ord. 1567 § 1, 2011: Ord. 1343 § 1, 1998: Ord. 1331 § 5, 1998: Ord. 1096 § 1, 1987; Ord. 927 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 3211.1)

10.44.030 Yellow loading zone—Time restrictions for loading and unloading.
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading materials or passengers for such time as is permitted in this section.
B. The loading or unloading of materials shall be allowed only for those deliveries made by commercially registered and licensed vehicles or professionally signed passenger vehicles displaying an authorized commercial loading zone permit that is used for commercial business deliveries; also, the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. The loading or unloading of materials shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than thirty minutes. Evidence that there was no activity involving the loading or unloading of materials into or from a vehicle during any continuous period of time of eight minutes or longer shall constitute prima facie evidence that the vehicle was parked longer than the time necessary for loading or unloading. The council may, by resolution, temporarily extend the time for unloading and loading of materials at select locations when it is deemed in the best interest of the public due to temporary conditions such as construction, street or public parking lot closures.
C. The loading or unloading of passengers shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes and during such time no person shall leave any such vehicle unattended. (Ord. 1655 § 8, 2018: Ord. 1447 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1343 § 2, 1998: Ord. 1331 § 6, 1998: Ord. 927 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 3211.2)

10.44.040 Passenger zones—Time restrictions for loading and unloading.
A. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in this section or by resolution of the council.
B. Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than ten minutes and during such time the vehicle may be left unoccupied to accommodate the use. (Ord. 1666 § 2, 2019: Ord. 1655 § 9, 2018: Ord. 927 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 3211.3)

10.44.050 Standing in any alley.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. Time limits for loading shall be as established in Sections 10.44.020, 10.44.030 and 10.44.040, except that these limitations shall apply twenty-four hours per day seven days a week, including Sundays and holidays. (Prior code § 3211.5)

10.44.060 Bus zones—Establishment—Authority.
A. The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to establish bus zones for the loading and unloading of buses and common carriers or passengers, and to determine the location thereof.
B. Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. (Ord. 1628 § 32, 2016: prior code § 3211.6)

10.44.070 Handicapped parking.
No person other than a person described in Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 shall stop, stand or park in a parking space designated expressly for the use of handicapped persons.
A. The public works director or their designee(s) shall designate special “blue curb” parking spaces for the purpose of providing on-street parking for exclusive use by disabled persons.
B. The public works director or their designee(s) shall designate parking stalls or spaces in publicly owned, leased or controlled off-street parking facilities for exclusive use by disabled persons.
C. The city declares that there are privately owned and operated parking facilities which may reserve parking space for exclusive use by disabled persons.
D. Designation of parking spaces for disabled persons shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from same a sign consisting of the international symbol of access; on-street spaces shall be designated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to the space.
All off-street parking facilities shall display a white on blue sign not less than seventeen inches by twenty-two inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, which clearly states:This facility is subject to public traffic regulations and control. Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing license plates or placards issued for physically handicapped persons will be issued citations and towed away at owners expense.
This sign shall also display the international symbol of access, and shall be posted at the entrance to the parking facility or immediately adjacent to and visible from the reserved space(s).
E. No person shall park or stand any vehicle in a disabled persons parking space designated as required in subsection D of this section, unless the vehicle bears a special license or displays a special placard issued under the provisions of Section 9105 or Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code.
F. Blue curb on-street parking spaces shall be operative twenty-four hours a day, Sundays and holidays included; off-street disabled persons parking spaces shall be operative at all times the parking facilities in which they are located are open.
G. Parking zones for disabled persons are subject to any temporary parking prohibitions established by the city including daily prohibitions necessary for traffic control, construction and street maintenance.
H. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10.64.030, fines for violation of this section shall be as set out in Vehicle Code Section 42001(a). (Ord. 1628 §§ 33, 34, 2016; prior code § 3211.7)

10.44.080 Violation—Penalty.
Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine for each separate offense as provided in Section 10.64.030. (Prior code § 3211.99)

Chapter 10.48 RESTRICTED USE OF CERTAIN STREETS

Sections:
10.48.010    Vehicles prohibited in central traffic district at certain times of day—Permit issuance for emergency deliveries.
10.48.020    Advertising vehicles.
10.48.030    Non-motor-drawn vehicles.
10.48.040    Truck routes.
10.48.050    Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets—Sign posting.
10.48.060    Maximum gross weight limits of vehicles on certain streets.

10.48.010 Vehicles prohibited in central traffic district at certain times of day—Permit issuance for emergency deliveries.
A. No person shall operate any of the following vehicles in the central traffic district between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day:
    1. Any freight vehicle more than eight and one-half feet in width, with load, or any freight vehicle so loaded that any part of its load extends more than twenty feet to the front or rear of the vehicle;
    2. Any vehicle in excess of one-ton capacity, carrying building material that has not been loaded, or is not to be unloaded, at some point within the central traffic district;
    3. Any vehicle conveying refuse, rubbish, garbage or dirt.
B. Provided, that the chief of police may, by written permit, authorize the operation of any such vehicle for the purpose of making necessary emergency deliveries to or from points within the central traffic district. (Prior code § 3212)

10.48.020 Advertising vehicles.
No person, without prior permission of the council, shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loud speaking device upon any street or alley at any time within the central traffic district. (Prior code § 3212.1)

10.48.030 Non-motor-drawn vehicles.
A. No person shall drive any animal-drawn vehicle into or within the central business district, and no person shall operate any non-motor-driven vehicle, cart, cab or other device for hire within the central business district, except by special permit of the chief of police.
B. The chief of police shall establish, and make available upon request, administrative procedures and standards for permit processing and approval.
C. A nonrefundable fee, as established by council resolution, may be required with each permit application to defray administrative costs for processing and inspection. (Ord. 1123 § 1, 1988: prior code § 3212.2)

10.48.040 Truck routes.
A. Whenever the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five tons, the public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as “truck routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five tons.
B. When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of five tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of five tons coming from a “truck route” having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups and deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to (1) passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, (2) any vehicle owned by a public utility, or (3) any vehicle under contract to the city.
D. The following streets and parts of streets are declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles that exceed a maximum gross vehicle weight of five tons:
    1. Santa Rosa Street from Marsh Street northwesterly to the city limits;
    2. Higuera Street between Santa Rosa and Osos Streets;
    3. Marsh Street, between Osos and Santa Rosa Streets;
    4. Osos Street, between Higuera Street and Santa Barbara Street;
    5. Santa Barbara Street;
    6. Broad Street (Highway 227), southerly of South Street;
    7. South Street, between Broad Street and Higuera Street;
    8. Higuera Street, southerly of South Street;
    9. Madonna Road, between Higuera Street and Los Osos Valley Road;
    10. Los Osos Valley Road, northwesterly of Highway 101;
    11. Prado Road, between Higuera Street and Highway 101.
Said streets are also shown on the map attached to the ordinance codified in this section, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk.
E. For purposes of complying with California Vehicle Code Section 35702, the city council identifies as an alternate route for trucks wishing to use the restricted portions of Route 227 northerly of South Street, the following truck routes:
    1. Santa Rosa Street, from Marsh Street northwesterly to Highway 101;
    2. Higuera Street, between Santa Rosa and Osos Streets;
    3. Marsh Street, between Osos and Santa Rosa Streets;
    4. Osos Street, between Higuera Street and Santa Barbara Street;
    5. Santa Barbara Street;
    6. South Street, between Broad Street and Higuera Street;
    7. Higuera Street, South Street to Madonna Road;
    8. Madonna Road, between Higuera Street and Highway 101. (Ord. 1628 § 35, 2016; Ord. 1095 § 1, 1987: Ord. 924 § 1, 1982: prior code § 3212.3)

10.48.050 Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets—Sign posting.
A. Whenever any resolution of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the public works director or their designee(s) shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such designation.
B. Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission or under contract to the city. (Ord. 1628 § 36, 2016; prior code § 3212.4)

10.48.060 Maximum gross weight limits of vehicles on certain streets.
No commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of six thousand pounds shall use the following streets, except those vehicles which are subject to the provisions of Sections 1031 to 1036, inclusive, of the Public Utilities Code of the state, and as allowed in Section 10.48.040(B):
Atascadero Street;
Avalon Street;
Balboa Street;
Boronda Street;
Cayucos Drive;
Drake Circle;
Galleon Way;
Garcia Drive;
Gulf Street;
Huasna Drive;
Lakeview Street;
Lima Drive;
Mariner’s Cove;
Newport Street;
Oceanaire Court;
Oceanaire Drive;
Pereira Drive;
Perfumo Street;
Pico Court;
Pinecove Drive;
Royal Way;
Seaward Street;
Sola Court;
Vicente Drive. (Prior code § 3212.5)

Chapter 10.52 PARKING METERS

Sections:
10.52.010    Parking meter zone—Rates.
10.52.020    Installation.
10.52.030    Time of operation.
10.52.040    Operational procedure to be followed.
10.52.050    Unlawful to allow vehicle to remain parked after expiration of time.
10.52.060    Unlawful to increase or extend parking time.
10.52.070    Deposit of slugs—Tampering with or injury of.
10.52.080    Use of for certain purposes prohibited.
10.52.090    Rule of evidence.
10.52.100    Application of other provisions.
10.52.110    Motorcycle spaces.
10.52.120    Violation—Penalty.

10.52.010 Parking meter zone—Rates.
A. Within the area enclosed by a solid line on the parking rate zone map (Exhibit A) and the area enclosed by the shaded line on Slack Street parking meter zone map (Exhibit B) (more particularly described as: the north side of Hathway Avenue adjacent to Cal Poly to Longview Lane, the east side of Longview Street from Hathway Avenue to Slack Street, the north side of Slack Street from Longview Lane to Grand Avenue, and the south side of Slack Street adjacent to the San Luis Coastal Unified School District parcel from the midblock point of Slack Street (between Longview Lane and Grand Avenue) to Grand Avenue), the parking of vehicles on streets or in municipal parking lots may be controlled and regulated with the aid of parking meters.
B. Unless established otherwise below, the parking meter rate on streets or in municipal parking lots in the lower rate zone shall be one dollar per hour effective January 1, 2018, and these parking meter rates shall increase to one dollar twenty-five cents per hour effective July 1, 2020.
C. Within the area designated on the parking rate zones map (Exhibit A) the rate for parking meters on streets or in municipal parking lots shall be one dollar fifty cents per hour effective January 1, 2018, and these parking meter rates shall increase to one dollar seventy-five cents per hour effective July 1, 2020.
D. Within the area designated on the parking rate zones map (Exhibit A), the rate for parking meters on streets or in municipal lots shall be one dollar seventy-five cents per hour effective January 1, 2018, and these parking meter rates shall increase to two dollars per hour effective July 1, 2020.
E. Within the shaded area of the map entitled Slack Street parking meter zone map (Exhibit B) the parking of vehicles on streets may be controlled and regulated with the aid of parking meters. The parking meter rate shall be one dollar per hour if controlled by meter.Exhibit A
[IMAGE: <10.52.010_1.png>]Exhibit B
[IMAGE: <10.52.010_2.png>]
(Ord. 1635 § 1 (Exhs. A, B), 2017: Ord. 1620 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 1568 § 1, 2011: Ord. 1552 § 2, 2010; Ord. 1532 § 2, 2009; Ord. 1492 § 1, 2006: Ord. 1233 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1194 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1099 § 1, 1987: prior code § 3213)

10.52.020 Installation.
A. The public works director or their designee(s) may cause parking meters to be installed and maintained in all parking meter zones.
B. Parking meters shall be installed upon the curb or sidewalk area immediately adjacent to each parking space. Each meter shall be placed in such manner as to show or display by a sign or signal that the parking space adjacent thereto is or is not legally in use.
C. Each parking meter shall be set to display, after the operational procedure has been completed, a sign or signal indicating legal parking for that period of time conforming to the limit of parking time for the zone in which the parking meter is installed, and shall continue to operate from the time of the completion of the operational procedure until the expiration of the time fixed as the parking limit or a portion thereof for the part of the street upon which the meter is placed. Each meter shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of the legal parking time, it will indicate by a mechanical operation and by proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired. (Ord. 1628 § 37, 2016; prior code § 3213.1)

10.52.030 Time of operation.
The provisions of this chapter relating to the operation of parking meters shall be effective between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. every Monday to Saturday and one p.m. to six p.m. every Sunday; provided, that for good cause and upon a finding that such action will not jeopardize meter revenues as a necessary source of revenue for payment of outstanding bonded indebtedness, the council by resolution may temporarily suspend the parking meter operating provisions of this chapter for any or all of the city’s parking meters. (Ord. 1566 § 1, 2011: Ord. 1099 § 2, 1987: prior code § 3213.2)

10.52.040 Operational procedure to be followed.
No person shall cause, allow or permit any vehicle to remain parked in any metered parking space unless a sign or signal indicating that meter fees have been paid is displayed by the adjacent parking meter. (Ord. 1655 § 10, 2018: prior code § 3213.4)

10.52.050 Unlawful to allow vehicle to remain parked after expiration of time.
No operator of any vehicle shall permit the vehicle to remain parked in any parking space during any time that the meter is showing a sign or signal indicating that such space is illegally in use other than such time immediately after the original occupancy as is necessary to operate the meter to show legal parking. (Ord. 1655 § 11, 2018: prior code § 3213.4)

10.52.060 Unlawful to increase or extend parking time.
No person shall follow the operational procedure or any part of the operational procedure for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been established for the parking space adjacent to which the parking meter is placed. (Prior code § 3213.5)

10.52.070 Deposit of slugs—Tampering with or injury of.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any defaced or bent coin, or any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States, or deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. (Prior code § 3213.6)

10.52.080 Use of for certain purposes prohibited.
No person shall attach any unauthorized thing to or allow a bicycle, newsrack or any other article or thing to lean against a parking meter or a parking meter standard. (Prior code § 3213.7)

10.52.090 Rule of evidence.
The parking or standing of any motor vehicle in a parking space, at which space the parking meter displays the sign or signal indicating illegal parking, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the vehicle has been parked or allowed to stand in such space for a period longer than permitted by this chapter. (Prior code § 3213.8)

10.52.100 Application of other provisions.
No section of this chapter shall be construed as permitting any parking in violation of any other provision of this code. (Prior code § 3213.10)

10.52.110 Motorcycle spaces.
The public works director or their designee(s) may designate and cause to be installed and maintained parking spaces for the exclusive use of motorcycles, motorized bicycles and motor driven cycles. Parking meter rates for these spaces shall be one-half the rate established by Section 10.52.010(B). (Ord. 1628 § 38, 2016: Ord. 936 § 1, 1982: prior code § 3213.11)

10.52.120 Violation—Penalty.
Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine for each separate offense as provided in Section 10.64.030. (Prior code §  3213.99)

Chapter 10.56 SPEED ZONES

Sections:
10.56.010    Speed limit designation.
10.56.020    Regulation of speed by traffic signals—Sign posting.

10.56.010 Speed limit designation.
Prima facie speed limits shall be determined by the public works director or their designee(s) pursuant to provisions set forth in the California Vehicle Code. A speed limit established pursuant to this section shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon a street. (Ord. 1628 § 39, 2016: Ord. 1436 § 1, 2003: Ord. 1011 § 1, 1984: prior code § 3215)

10.56.020 Regulation of speed by traffic signals—Sign posting.
The public works director or their designee(s) is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and may erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (Ord. 1628 § 40, 2016: prior code § 3215.1)

Chapter 10.60 OBSTRUCTIONS TO VISIBILITY

Sections:
10.60.010    Scope.
10.60.020    Intersections.
10.60.030    Exceptions.
10.60.040    Violations deemed nuisance—Abatement.

10.60.010 Scope.
No obstruction to cross-visibility shall be deemed to be excepted from the application of this chapter because of its being in existence at the time of the adoption of the provisions set out in this chapter, unless expressly exempted by the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 944 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 3216(d))

10.60.020 Intersections.
At intersections not controlled by a stop sign or traffic signal, no plant, structure, or other solid object over three feet high (above adjacent curb) which would obstruct visibility may be located within the area indicated in Figure 8 as shown in Section 17.16.020(E)(2)(f) of the zoning regulations. At controlled intersections, the public works director or their designee(s) may determine visibility requirements for proper sight distance. (Ord. 1628 § 41, 2016: Ord. 944 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 3216(a))

10.60.030 Exceptions.
The provisions set out in Section 10.60.020 shall not apply to public utility poles; trees trimmed (to the trunk) so that only the trunk obstructs the view; saplings or plant species of open growth habits and not planted in the form of a hedge, which are so planted and trimmed as to leave at all seasons a clear and unobstructed cross-view; and permanent buildings. (Ord. 944 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 3216(b))

10.60.040 Violations deemed nuisance—Abatement.
In addition to the remedy by prosecution for violation of this chapter, any obstruction maintained in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance, and upon failure to abate the same within fourteen days after the posting upon the premises of notice to abate the nuisance, signed by the director of public works or his or her authorized representative may enter upon the premises and remove or eliminate the obstruction. In such event the cost to the city of the abatement of the nuisance shall be a personal obligation against the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance was maintained, recoverable by the city in an action before any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 944 § 1 (part), 1983: prior code § 3216(c))

Chapter 10.64 PARKING REVENUES, FINES AND FORFEITURES

Sections:
10.64.010    Use of moneys collected from parking meters.
10.64.020    Persons violating the provisions of title to be fined for each separate offense.
10.64.030    Parking fines.
10.64.040    Disposition of fine and forfeitures.

10.64.010 Use of moneys collected from parking meters.
All moneys collected from parking meters in this city shall be placed in a special fund, and then distributed for the following purposes:
A. For the purchasing, leasing, installing, repairing, maintaining, operating, removing, regulating and policing of parking meters in this city, and for the payment of any and all expenses relating or incidental thereto;
B. For the purchasing, leasing, acquiring, improving, operating and maintaining of off-street parking facilities in this city;
C. For the installation and maintenance of traffic-control devices and signals;
D. For the painting and marking of streets and curbs required for the direction of traffic and parking of motor vehicles;
E. For the proper regulation, control and inspection of parking and traffic upon the public streets;
F. To be pledged as security for the payment of principal of and interest on off-street parking revenue bonds issued by this city, of any parking district organized within this city. (Prior code § 3217)

10.64.020 Persons violating the provisions of title to be fined for each separate offense.
Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this title shall be punished by a fine for each separate offense as provided in Section 10.64.030. For the purposes of this section: (1) a separate offense occurs when the initial citation is issued for a parking violation; and (2) an additional separate offense occurs, and an additional citation shall be issued, whenever, after the issuance of any citation, the vehicle remains parked for a subsequent period of time equalling or exceeding the parking limitation for the space or zone in which the vehicle is parked. (Prior code § 3217.1)

10.64.030 Parking fines.
The fines for parking violations written under the provisions of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code and the California Vehicle Code shall be established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 1995; Ord. 1193 § 1, 1991; Ord. 1100 § 1, 1987: prior code § 3217.2)

10.64.040 Disposition of fine and forfeitures.
All fines and forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this title, shall be paid into the city treasury and one hundred percent shall be deposited into the parking fund except that the net bail amount received for citations generated by the police department may be allocated to the general fund. For the purposes of this section the net bail shall be determined by the council or by subtracting the total collected bail generated by police services and then subtracting the overhead costs for parking services including: citation processing, program administration and maintenance. All remaining “parking fund” moneys shall be distributed for the purposes described in Section 10.64.010. (Ord. 1532 § 4, 2009: Ord. 1165 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1100 § 2, 1987: prior code § 3217.3)

Chapter 10.68 INOPERATIVE VEHICLES

Sections:
10.68.010    Findings and declarations.
10.68.020    Definitions.
10.68.030    Exceptions.
10.68.040    Applicability of other laws.
10.68.050    Administration and enforcement.
10.68.060    Initiation of proceedings.
10.68.070    Notice of vehicle abatement—Service of notice.
10.68.080    Notice of vehicular abatement—Contents.
10.68.090    Hearing and determination.
10.68.100    Vehicle abatement.
10.68.110    Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles.
10.68.120    Collection of removal and administration costs.

10.68.010 Findings and declarations.
In accordance with the determinations made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, as public nuisances, the council makes the following findings and declarations:
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the public health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of such vehicles, or a part thereof, on private or public property, as defined in Section 10.68.020, and except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as set forth under
Section 38773.5 of the California Government Code. (Prior code § 3218)

10.68.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
A. “Code enforcement officer” means and includes, for the purposes of this chapter only, field services technicians as designated by the chief of police, as well as code enforcement officers regularly employed or designated in that capacity by the city.
B. “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and opened to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes streets.
C. “Owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the vehicle or parts thereof is located as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.
D. “Owner of the vehicle” means the last registered owner and legal owner of record.
E. “Public property” means any property owned by a public agency, but does not include highways.
F. “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, including, but not limited to, autos, trucks, buses, motorcycles, trailers and mobile homes. (Prior code § 3218.1)

10.68.030 Exceptions.
A. This chapter shall not apply to the following as set forth in Section 22661 of the California Vehicle Code:
    1. A vehicle or parts thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property;
    2. The storage of one vehicle or parts thereof which is located behind a solid fence six feet in height and which is not plainly visible from a street, highway or other property;
    3. A vehicle or parts thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property on an approved site in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, vehicle dealer, junk dealer, a towing service, or an auto repair or body shop, when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of an otherwise lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.
B. Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as prohibited in Chapter 8.24. (Prior code § 3218.2)

10.68.040 Applicability of other laws.
This chapter does not constitute the exclusive procedure for removal of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city, but supplements and is in addition to all other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the county, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction, relating thereto. (Prior code § 3218.3)

10.68.050 Administration and enforcement.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the police chief of the city or such other persons as he or she shall designate as enforcing officers. (Prior code § 3218.4)

10.68.060 Initiation of proceedings.
When the enforcing officer has reason to believe or observes that the accumulation and the storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on public or private property constitutes a public nuisance as described in Section 10.68.010, he or she shall immediately investigate the same. In the performance of such investigation the enforcing officer and his or her designees may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof and to obtain information as to the identity and the ownership thereof. The police department and health officer of the city shall assist in such investigation and enforcement as needed. (Prior code § 3218.5)

10.68.070 Notice of vehicle abatement—Service of notice.
If the enforcing officer determines from his or her investigation that a public nuisance exists, he or she shall serve or cause to be served, either by personal service or by registered or certified mail, a copy of a notice of vehicle abatement upon every person concerned, including the owner of the property on which the alleged public nuisance exists, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and the last known registered and legal owner of the subject vehicle if the identification numbers are available to determine ownership. If a notice sent by registered or certified mail is returned unclaimed, a subsequent notice sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the party concerned shall be sufficient and such notice shall be effective upon mailing. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of the proceedings taken under this chapter. (Prior code § 3218.6)

10.68.080 Notice of vehicular abatement—Contents.
The notice of vehicle abatement served pursuant to Section 10.68.070 shall contain the following information:
A. The findings, in brief, that the vehicles constitute a public nuisance;
B. That it is the intention of the enforcing officer to abate the vehicles on the premises, as both are described, fifteen days from service of notice of vehicular abatement, and that the costs of removal may be assessed against the premises;
C. A common description of the premises by address or assessor’s parcel number and a description of the vehicles, including license numbers or identification numbers if these are available on the vehicles;
D. That the owner of the property or any owner of the vehicles may, within ten days of receipt of the notice, file a written request for a hearing before the council, or such person as they may designate to hear the matter, to show any cause why the vehicles should not be abated by the enforcing officer;
E. That the owner of the property on which the vehicles are located may either appear at a hearing or present a sworn statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicles and giving the reasons for the denial, and that such statement shall be deemed a request for a hearing not requiring the presence of the requestor. (Prior code § 3218.7)

10.68.090 Hearing and determination.
A. All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the council, or any person they may designate to hear the matter, who may hear all the relevant evidence pertaining to the alleged public nuisance, including testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof, the circumstances concerning its location on the private or public property, and the costs of removal and disposal.
B. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. The hearing shall commence within twenty days of the filing of the written request, and it may be continued from time to time. Any person affected may be present at such hearing, may be represented by counsel, may present testimony, and may cross-examine witnesses. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing denying responsibility for such denial.
C. After the conclusion of the hearing, the council or hearing officer may:
    1. Impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes of this chapter;
    2. Delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it; or
    3. Find that the vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as -hereinafter provided in Section 10.68.100; and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal and charge the same against the owner or other person in possession of the parcel of land on which the vehicle or parts thereof is located, or against the owner of the vehicles, or against them jointly. Any such order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicles if available at the site.
D. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the city shall not charge the costs of administration or of removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such landowner.
E. If an interested party makes a written presentation to the council, but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Prior code § 3218.8)

10.68.100 Vehicle abatement.
After a finding has been made by the enforcing officer that any vehicle or parts thereof is a public nuisance under this chapter and if no hearing has been requested pursuant to subsections D and E of Section 10.68.080, or if the council after a hearing so orders, the vehicle or parts may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard, or to any suitable site operated by a local agency for processing as scrap or other final disposition consistent with this section. The party removing the vehicle or parts thereof may in so doing enter upon the private or public property on which it is located. Except as provided in the Vehicle Code, after removal a vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operative. (Ord. 973 § 1, 1983: prior code § 3218.9)

10.68.110 Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles.
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificate, certificate of title, and license plates. (Prior code § 3218.10)

10.68.120 Collection of removal and administration costs.
The council may, from time to time, determine and set an amount to be assessed as administrative costs under this chapter. If no hearing is requested and held by the council, the enforcing officer shall determine the cost of removal and charge the same against the owner or other person in possession of the parcel of land on which the vehicle or parts thereof are located or against the owner of the vehicle, or against them jointly. If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land, pursuant to this section or to Section 10.68.090 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 25845 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other county and city taxes. (Prior code § 3218.12)

Chapter 10.72 BICYCLES*

Sections:
10.72.100    Riding on sidewalks prohibited.
*Ord. 1266, adopted June 21, 1994, repealed former §§ 10.72.010 – 10.72.090 and 10.72.110, relative to bicycle 1isenses, secondhand bicycles, altering or destroying bicycle frame numbers, licenses, seals, etc., and impounding bicycles, which derived from Prior code §§ 3220, 3220.1 –3220.8, and 3220.9.

10.72.100 Riding on sidewalks prohibited.
No person shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk. (Ord. 974 § 1, 1983: prior code § 3220.10)

Chapter 10.76 COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES

Sections:
10.76.010    Use of prohibited on streets and sidewalks in downtown area.

10.76.010 Use of prohibited on streets and sidewalks in downtown area.
A. No person upon roller skates, including skateboards, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device shall go (1) upon any roadway in the city, or (2) upon any sidewalk in the downtown area, the outer boundaries of which area are described as follows:
From Santa Rosa Street along Palm Street to Broad Street, Broad to Monterey, Monterey to Nipomo, Nipomo to San Luis Creek, San Luis Creek to a point where Beach Street would intersect, from this intersection point to Beach and Marsh, Marsh to Nipomo, Nipomo to Pacific, Pacific to Santa Rosa, Santa Rosa to Palm.
B. The area shall include both sides of the boundary streets listed in subsection A of this section, and all four corners of the intersections of the boundary streets listed in subsection A of this section. (Prior code § 3220.14)

Chapter 10.80 OVERSIZE AND OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES

Sections:
10.80.010    Purpose of provisions.
10.80.020    Permit—Required.
10.80.030    Permit—Application—Contents.
10.80.040    Permit—Good for one-time move only—Blanket permit issuance.
10.80.050    Permit—Denial—Restrictions—Permit holders responsibilities.
10.80.060    Permit holder’s responsibility for damages to public property.
10.80.070    Liability insurance required.
10.80.080    Notification of police department required prior to move.

10.80.010 Purpose of provisions.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and procedures for permitting the movement of oversize and overweight vehicles and loads on city streets. (Ord. 920 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 7210.0)

10.80.020 Permit—Required.
No vehicle or structure which exceeds the size and/or weight limitations established by the California Vehicle Code shall be allowed on city streets without first obtaining a permit issued by the public works director or their designee(s) and complying with the conditions set forth by the permit. (Ord. 1628 § 42, 2016: Ord. 920 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 7210.1)

10.80.030 Permit—Application—Contents.
Each permit application shall include a full description of the vehicle, and its contents, for which the permit is issued. The description shall indicate the extent of the oversize and/or overweight, the routes to be followed, date and time of day when the move will be made. (Ord. 920 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 7210.2)

10.80.040 Permit—Good for one-time move only—Blanket permit issuance.
The permit issued shall be for a one-time move unless noted otherwise. Blanket permits may be issued for a time period not to exceed one year, but may not be issued for vehicles or loads which cannot be moved at normal traffic speeds. (Ord. 920 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 7210.3)

10.80.050 Permit—Denial—Restrictions—Permit holders responsibilities.
A. The public works director or their designee(s) may deny the issuance of a permit or set special requirements based upon public safety and the limitation of the street system to handle the proposed vehicle or structure.
B. The permit holder is fully responsible to arrange with the appropriate utility companies and with the city for the relocation and replacement of wires, poles, traffic-control devices and other facilities. The permit holder shall not cut or trim trees, attach cables to them or otherwise disturb them. The permit holder shall not puncture or mark the pavement in any way.
C. The permit holder shall not park the vehicle or structure upon a public street unless the permit is so endorsed.
D. Upon completion of a move, and as directed by the public works director or their designee(s) or the police department, the permit holder shall clear the right-of-way of materials left by his or her operation and restore it to the condition existing prior to the move. (Ord. 1628 §§ 43, 44, 2016; Ord. 920 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 7210.4)

10.80.060 Permit holder’s responsibility for damages to public property.
The permit holder shall be responsible for the repair of all damage to public property, including trees, pavement, curb, gutter, sidewalk, and other facilities both above and below ground. The State of California financial responsibility laws shall apply in all cases where motor vehicles are used. (See Section 10.80.070.) (Ord. 1196 § 1, 1991; Ord. 920 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 7210.6)

10.80.070 Liability insurance required.
The permit holder is responsible for personal injury or private property damage which may occur through any act or omission when acting under a permit; and in the event any claim is made against the city or any department, officer, agent or employee thereof, by reason of, or in connection with, any such act or omission, the permit holder shall defend, indemnify and hold each of them harmless from such claim. The permit shall not be effective for any purpose unless and until the permit holder files with the public works director or their designee(s) an insurance certificate and an “additional insured endorsement” to the satisfaction of the city attorney. The insurance certificate supplied shall reflect the endorsement naming the city, its officers, agents and employees, as additional insured, and indicate that the policy will not be canceled or the coverage reduced without ten days’ advance written notice to the city. The amount of coverage shall not be less than that required by the California Vehicle Code for vehicles weighing in excess of seven thousand pounds unladen weight per Section 16600.5 or such other amount considered appropriate for unusually large or heavy loads which pose a substantial risk to public facilities, as determined by the public works director or their designee(s) and city attorney. (Ord. 1628 § 45, 2016: Ord. 1196 § 1, 1991; Ord. 920 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 7210.6)

10.80.080 Notification of police department required prior to move.
The permit holder shall notify the police and fire departments twenty-four hours in advance of moving on the public streets and obtain clearances regarding the need for front and rear escorts, sufficient personnel to handle traffic or utility problems and proper signing. (Ord. 920 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 7210.7)

Chapter 10.84 MINIMUM PENALTY FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS

Sections:
10.84.010    Amount designated.

10.84.010 Amount designated.
The minimum punishment for a violation of any of the provisions of Title 10 of this code entitled “Vehicles and Traffic” is a fine of one dollar. (Prior code § 3220.15)

Title 11 AIR QUALITY*

Chapters:
11.04        Trip Reduction Measures
*Ord. 1284 was nonamendatory of the code; therefore, such provisions have been added as a new Title 11, “Air Quality,” at the editor’s discretion.

Chapter 11.04 TRIP REDUCTION MEASURES

Sections:
11.04.010    Rule 901—Commute Alternatives Rule.

11.04.010 Rule 901—Commute Alternatives Rule.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this rule is to improve ambient air quality by reducing air pollutant emissions that result from employee commute trips, and trips attracted to worksites with one hundred or more employees.
B. Applicability. The rule applies to all public and private employers with one hundred or more employees. The effective dates for determining progress toward achieving average vehicle ridership (AVR) goals are given in Table 1:
+-----------------------------+------------------------------------+
|           Action            | Employers of 100 or More Employees |
+-----------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Conduct baseline AVR survey | 1995                               |
+-----------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Demonstrate 1.25 AVR        | 1997                               |
+-----------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Demonstrate 1.33 AVR        | 1998                               |
+-----------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Demonstrate 1.41 AVR        | 1999                               |
+-----------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Demonstrate 1.50 AVR        | 2000                               |
+-----------------------------+------------------------------------+
C. Definitions. For the purpose of this Rule, the following definitions apply:
    “Air Pollution Control Officer (APCO).” The Air Pollution Control Officer of the San Luis Obispo County Air Pollution Control District (District) or the designee thereof.
    “APCD Hearing Board.” Five-member board appointed by the Air Pollution Control Board of San Luis Obispo County pursuant to Division 26, Part 1, Chapter 8, Article 1, of the California Health and Safety Code with the powers and duties prescribed for Hearing Boards in Chapter 8, Division 26, of the California Health and Safety Code.
    “Applicable Employee Population.” The applicable employee population is all employees who report to a worksite weekdays between six a.m. and ten a.m. and all employees who are telecommuting (i.e. working from home or a telecommuting center) or who have a scheduled day off during the week as part of a compressed work week schedule.
    “Average Vehicle Ridership Calculations.” AVR for worksite(s) shall be calculated by dividing the number of employee days summed over the survey week by the number of vehicle trips summed over the survey week.
    “Attracted Vehicle Trip.” Any vehicle trip, other than an employee vehicle trip, attracted to the site by the nature of that site’s business. These may include: shopping, medical, business meetings, church, etc.
    “Buspool.” A vehicle occupied by sixteen or more people traveling together between their residence and their worksite or other destination. Employees who work for different employers, as well as nonemployed people, are included within this definition.
    “Carpool.” A vehicle occupied by two to six people traveling together between their residence and their worksite or other destination. Employees who work for different employers, as well as nonemployed people, are included within this definition.
    “Commute Alternatives.” Rideshare modes and other trip reduction options for reducing employee commute trips, including, but not limited to: carpools, vanpools, public transit, buspools, commuter shuttle, bicycling, walking, compressed work weeks, telecommuting, or other alternatives as approved by the APCO.
    “Commute Trip.” The trip made by an employee from home to the work site. The commute trip may include stops between home and the worksite.
    “Compressed Work Week.” A regular full-time work schedule that eliminates at least one round trip commute trip (both home-to-work and work-to-home) at least once every two weeks. Examples include, but are not limited to, working three twelve-hour days (3/36) or hour ten-hour days (4/40) within a one-week period; or eight nine-hour days and one eight-hour day (9/80) within a two-week period.
    “Disabled Employee.” An employee with a physical impairment that prevents the employee from traveling to the work site by means other than a single-occupant vehicle, and who has been issued a disabled person placard or plate from the department of motor vehicles.
    “Employee.” Any person employed by a person(s), firm, business, educational institution, nonprofit agency, or corporation, government, or other entity. The term excludes the following as defined elsewhere in this rule: seasonal employees; temporary employees; volunteers; field personnel; and field construction workers.
    “Employee Day.” Each day of the survey week that an employee starts to work during the peak period. Notes: Employees telecommuting or who are off due to a compressed work week schedule are counted towards the total employee days. Employees on vacation, sick leave, jury duty, or other time off, and employees reporting to a different worksite or an off-site work related activity are not counted toward the total employee days.
    “Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC).” An employee, other individual, or entity, appointed by an employer to develop, market, administer, and monitor the Employer Trip Reduction Plan on a full or part time basis.
    “Employer.” Employer means any person(s), firm, business, educational institution, government agency, nonprofit agency or corporation, or other entity that employs persons. Several subsidiaries or units that occupy the same worksite and report to a common governing board or governing entity or that function as one corporate unit are considered to be one employer.
    “Field Agricultural Worker.” An employee who reports for work to a temporary field agricultural site.
    “Field Construction Worker.” An employee who reports directly to work at a construction site.
    “Field Personnel.” Employees who spend twenty percent or less of their work time at the work site and who do not report to the work site during the peak period for pick-up and dispatch of an employer-provided vehicle.
    “Independent Contractor.” An individual who enters into a direct written contract or agreement with an employer to perform certain services. The period of the contract or agreement is at least ninety continuous days, or is open-ended.
    “Multi-site Employer.” Any affected employer who has more than one worksite where at least fifty or more employees report.
    “Multi-tenant Worksite.” Any commercial building, industrial park, shopping center, or mixed use development whether in separate or common ownership, which contains more than one employer as determined by the APCO.
    “Notice to Register.” A notice, sent by the district to all employers that have been identified as potentially subject to this rule. The notice will request information that will allow the district to determine if the employer will be required to comply with this rule.
    “Peak Period.” Six a.m. to ten a.m., Monday through Friday, inclusive.
    “Ridesharing.” A cooperative effort of two or more people traveling together for the purpose of eliminating a vehicle trip. Utilization of carpools, vanpools buspools, taxipools, and public transportation are all forms of ridesharing.
    “Seasonal Employee.” A person who is employed for less than a continuous ninety day period.
    “Telecommuting.” A system of working at home, off site, or at a telecommuting center, for a full workday that eliminates the trip to work or reduces travel distance by fifty per cent or more.
    “Temporary Employee.” Any person employed for less than ninety days, or by an employment service that reports to a worksite other than the employment service worksite under a contractual arrangement with the temporary employer.
    “Transportation Management Association (TMA).” A TMA provides commute alternates program support or management to its members. TMAs generally operate within a defined geographic area (industrial park, multi-tenant office building, central business district, shopping center, etc.). TMAs operate as not-for-profit associations and are cooperatively managed by the members, managed by a director appointed by the association members, or, at a multi-tenant worksite, may be managed by onsite building management. After receiving APCO approval, a TMA may be permitted to represent its members in the development and implementation of a trip reduction plan. Members may be allowed full or partial trip reduction credit for purchasing such services from the TMA/TMO, upon approval of the APCO. A partial list of services a TMA may offer includes:
        1. AVR survey and calculation services.
        2. Trip reduction plan development, implementation, marketing and administration.
        3. Emergency guaranteed ride home service.
        4. Vanpool program.
        5. Carpool matching service.
        6. Incentive program.
        7. Trip reduction plan library.
        8. Child-care or child-care referral services.
        9. Any other services the members may designate.
    “Transportation Management Organization (TMO).” A TMO is a for profit, private enterprise providing all of the services included in the TMA definition above. A TMO would not be confined to a single geographic area but could solicit business throughout the county and could do business with one employer or a group of employers in an area.
    “Trip Reduction Plan (TRP).” A TRP is a document submitted to the APCO for review and approval which details trip reduction options and supporting strategies, the implementation schedule and budget the employer will use to achieve the reduction in single occupant vehicle trips required to meet the AVR goals established by the district.
    “Vanpool.” A vehicle occupied by seven to fifteen people traveling together between their residence and their worksite or destination for the majority of the total trip distance. Employees who work for different employers, as well as nonemployed people are included within this definition as long as they are in the vehicle for the majority of the total trip distance.
    “Vehicle/Employee Ratio (VER).” VER is the number of vehicles used by employees who report to the work site between six a.m. and ten a.m., Monday through Friday, divided by the number of those employees averaged over the survey week, as calculated from data gathered from the AVR survey. VER is the reciprocal of AVR. The district will accept AVR calculated by this method.
    “Vehicle Trip.” A vehicle trip is based on the means of transportation used for the greatest distance of an employee’s home-to work commute trip for employees who start work during the peak period. Each vehicle trip to the worksite shall be calculated as shown in Table 2:
    +-----------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    |                   Trip mode                   |       Number of vehicle trips counted        |
    +-----------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Single-occupant vehicle                       | 1 vehicle trip                               |
    +-----------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Motorcycle, moped,motorized scooter,          | 1 vehicle trip                               |
    | or motor bike                                 |                                              |
    +-----------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Carpool                                       | 1 vehicle trip divided by the number         |
    |                                               | of people in the carpool                     |
    +-----------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Vanpool                                       | 1 vehicle trip divided by the number         |
    |                                               | of people in the vanpool                     |
    +-----------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Public transit                                | 0 vehicle trip                               |
    +-----------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Buspool                                       | 0 vehicle trip                               |
    +-----------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Walking and other nonmotorized transportation | 0 vehicle trip                               |
    | modes                                         |                                              |
    +-----------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Telecommuting                                 | 0 vehicle trip on days employee telecommutes |
    |                                               | for the entire day                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Compressed work schedule                      | 0 vehicle trip on employee’s compressed      |
    |                                               | day(s) off                                   |
    +-----------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV)                   | 0 vehicle trip                               |
    +-----------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
    “Volunteer.” A person who does not receive any wages for work activity at the work site.
    “Worksite.” A structure, building, portion of a building, or grouping of buildings that are in actual physical contact or separated solely by a private or public roadway or other private or public right-of-way, and that are occupied by the same employer.
    “Worksite Employee Threshold.” One hundred employees at a single worksite, on an average daily basis, for a ninety-day period provided at least fifty employees are normally scheduled to report to the worksite on a daily basis during the peak commute period.
D. Administrative Requirements. 
    1. Requirements for all employers of one hundred or more employees. All employers of one hundred or more employees shall comply with the following minimum administrative requirements:
        a. Respond to the Notice to Register which shall be sent or delivered to the employer, provide all information requested, and return that information within twenty business days of receiving the notice.
    All employers of one hundred or more employees with fifty or more employees reporting to the worksite within the peak period must also complete the following requirements:
        b. Appoint an employee to act as employee transportation coordinator (ETC). That employee will and send that employee to district sponsored ETC training.
        c. Conduct an annual average vehicle ridership (AVR) survey in accordance with the schedule in Table 1. (Surveys are to be conducted using the methodologies described in Section G below and the results submitted to the district for review.)
    2. Requirements for employers who achieve AVR targets in Table 1. Employers who achieve the applicable AVR target shown in Table 1 shall be notified by the district that they have no additional requirements, beyond maintenance of their existing program, until the next scheduled AVR survey.
    3. Requirements for employers who fail to achieve AVR targets in Table 1. Employers who fail to meet the applicable AVR targets in Table 1 will be required to develop a trip reduction plan designed to achieve the AVR target for the upcoming year, and submit the plan to the district for review and approval. Trip reduction plans shall be prepared according to the following process:
        a. After the district reviews the AVR survey results, affected employers will receive a Plan Preparation Notice stating the requirement to prepare and submit a trip reduction plan to the district.
        b. Employers shall develop and submit the plan to the district within ninety days of the date of receipt of the Plan Preparation Notice. Plan forms will be provided by the district.
        c. The district will evaluate the plan based on its consistency with employee responses to the AVR survey, financial commitment to implementing appropriate supporting strategies, and staff commitment to marketing the trip plan to employees.
        d. The employer shall implement all trip reduction options and supporting strategies committed to in the approved trip reduction plan.
        e. The employer shall conduct the next scheduled AVR survey as shown in Table 1 and submit the results to the district for review.
E. Voluntary Participation Program. This rule applies to all employers of one hundred or more employees. However, all of the supporting services, training, and materials associated with this rule are applicable and available to employers of fewer than one hundred employees, as well as multi-tenant worksites and other types of development. To encourage voluntary participation in the program by smaller employers, multi-tenant worksites, and other employment situations the district will implement the following:
    1. Develop outreach programs to encourage employers of fewer than one hundred employees, and multi-tenant worksites, to participate in the annual AVR survey, and develop a commute alternatives program.
    2. Provide ETC training, AVR survey processing, consultation on program development and participation in the district’s ETC network will be offered at no charge to all participants.
    3. Encourage participation in the trip trading program described in Section F.
    4. Work cooperatively with TMA’s and the rideshare office to provide a broader base of assistance to employers in developing and implementing an effective program.
F. Trip Trading Market. The district will develop a program which allows trip reduction credits (TRCs) to be earned by businesses that have exceeded the applicable AVR goal. Employers not affected by this rule may participate in the TRC program, provided they comply with all the requirements for affected employers listed below.
    1. Businesses can apply for, and earn, one TRC for each trip reduced beyond those required to achieve the applicable AVR goal. Each TRC will have a life span of one year from the date the APCD issues the TRC Certificate.
    2. Businesses of one hundred or more employees, that purchase TRCs, can use them on a one-for-one basis to lower the number of employee commute trips they would otherwise have to reduce to achieve their applicable AVR goal for a given year.
    3. TRCs issued by the district can be bought and sold on an open market by all participants in the Commute Alternatives Program, but all transactions, as described in Section F.2, must be approved by the district.
        a. TRC Applicant Responsibilities. 
            i. The applicant must conduct a verifiable AVR survey as described in Section C (Definitions) The AVR survey methodology used by the applicant must be verified by the APCD. The number of TRCs earned by the applicant will be determined by the APCD through review of the verified survey results.
            ii. Any employer requesting to bank TRCs earned shall enter into an agreement with the APCD to maintain its Commute Alternative Program for the life of the TRC. If the employer terminates the Commute Alternative Program prior to the expiration date of the earned TRCs, said TRCs shall cease to have value. The employer shall reimburse all purchasers of said TRCs the pro-rated purchase price of the voided TRCs, and the TRCs will be cancelled.
            iii. Employers with less than one hundred employees who voluntarily participate in the Commute Alternatives Program and who earn and sell TRCs, shall comply with all program requirements as they apply to regulated employers.
        b. TRC Purchaser’s Responsibilities. 
            i. Employers who do not meet the applicable AVR goal (as shown in Table 1) may purchase TRCs to offset all or part of the trip reduction strategies they would otherwise have to implement to reach their AVR target. The Buyer’s Commute Alternatives Plan must provide details on the amount of the TRCs purchased, the seller, the life span of the TRCs, and whatever supplemental strategies, if any, are to be implemented by the buyer. The Buyer shall maintain the approved program for the life of the TRCs purchased.
            ii. An employer who has purchased TRCs from a company that discontinues its CAR program prior to the expiration date of the TRCs, shall be notified by the APCD that such TRCs are null and void. Within thirty days of receiving such notice, the buyer shall consult with APCD staff to determine if additional trip reduction options and supporting strategies must be implemented to meet the applicable AVR target. The buyer shall be reimbursed by the seller the pro-rated amount of purchase for voided TRCs.
        c. APCD’s Responsibilities. APCD will be responsible for general oversight of the Trip Trading Market, including determination of credits earned and banked by applicants for TRCs.
            i. The APCD will act as “banker” for the Commute Trip Trading Market, tracking TRCs as they are earned, sold/bought, expended or expired.
            ii. The APCD shall receive and maintain records of all TRC transactions, including issuance of the TRC certificates for each transaction.
            iii. The APCD shall publish a list of each quarter of TRCs bought and sold the previous quarter, and the amount of TRCs still available on the open market.
            iv. APCD will provide TRC applicants and buyers with technical expertise in all phases of the Commute Trip Trading Market.
G. Survey Reporting Requirements. Employers must conduct an annual, verifiable Average Vehicle Ridership Survey to establish whether the performance objectives stated in Table 1 have been achieved. The employee AVR survey must be conducted not more than one hundred twenty days prior to the applicable survey or plan submittal deadline, but must be completed at least sixty days prior to the deadline. To the extent possible, surveying should not be conducted during the period from mid-June to mid-September, during Rideshare Week, or during the period between Thanksgiving and New Years Day.
AVR for worksite(s) shall be calculated by dividing the number of employee days summed over the survey week by the number of vehicle trips summed over the survey week. The AVR calculation requires that a five consecutive weekday average be used. An averaging period shall be selected which does not contain a holiday. The sum of the applicable employee population each weekday in the selected averaging period is divided by the total number of vehicles driven by these employees to the worksite during the same averaging period. Employers with multiple worksites may, after receiving approval from the APCO, opt to calculate AVR as a combined average of the AVR of each worksite. In exercising this option the employer must ensure that the criteria for conducting the verifiable AVR survey is met.
The AVR survey will utilize a survey control sheet which identifies: all employees who report within the survey window; all employees who received a survey form; all employees who returned a survey form; and, an explanation for each survey form not returned. This data will be used to verify employee participation and survey response rate.
In submitting the results of the completed survey to the district within the required time frame, the employer shall identify the sampling method used (Applicable Employee Population or Random Sample) and provide a tally showing the survey response rate, including the number of surveys distributed, the number of surveys completed and returned, and the number of nonrespondents. Both the Applicable Employee Population Survey, and Random Sample Survey methodologies prepared by the APCO, and described in detail in the Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC) Handbook.
H. Recordkeeping. Employers affected by this rule shall maintain and retain records, files and documentation to establish compliance. Retention of such documentation shall occur for not less than three years from the date of initial Notice to Register date, or the adoption date of the most current trip reduction plan. This documentation shall be made available for audit and inspection as described in Section I (Audits).
I. Audits. The district may audit the records of any regulated employer, or business selling and/or buying trips on the Trip Trading Market, to verify employment, AVR, plan implementation or provision of any measure in an approved plan.
J. Delegation to Local Jurisdiction. Rule 901 may be implemented by employers and at multi-tenant worksites through a locally adopted commute alternatives ordinance. Local jurisdictions may be delegated responsibility for implementation of this rule by the APCO if the following criteria are met:
    1. The local jurisdiction submits a plan to the APCO that demonstrates adequate resources to adopt, implement, monitor, and enforce an employer-based commute alternatives ordinance, and the district approves the plan.
    2. The local jurisdiction adopts a commute alternatives ordinance that includes, at a minimum, all provisions contained in this rule.
    3. The local jurisdiction’s commute alternatives ordinance includes provisions to submit annual progress reports to the APCO containing the following information:
        a. List of employers, multi-tenant worksites, and others subject to the local ordinance.
        b. Summary of results of all AVR surveys.
        c. Number of employer plans required and the number of plans approved/disapproved.
        d. Total costs of program and average cost per employee.
        e. Number and type of enforcement actions during the preceding year.
        f. Anticipated program modifications for the coming year.
A local jurisdiction, in lieu of meeting the above requirements, may provide a demonstration that the final year 2000 performance objectives are currently achieved on an aggregate basis for all applicable work sites within its jurisdiction. Such demonstration must utilize methodology approved by the APCO and a commitment and plan to repeat the demonstration once every three years.
Failure of the local jurisdiction to comply with the requirements of this section may result in suspension, or revocation of district delegated authority.
K. Exemptions. Any employer subject to a local ordinance which requires the provision of trip reduction measures by that employer is eligible for exemption from the requirements of this Rule.
    1. The APCO shall determine if the requirements of a local ordinance are at least as effective as this rule in increasing AVR at the employer’s worksite, and shall notify employers in the jurisdictions in which such ordinances have been adopted.
    2. In the event that the local ordinance under which the employer qualified for exemption is amended so that it is no longer as effective as this Rule in increasing AVR, or in the event that the local ordinance under which the employer qualified for the exemption is rescinded, the exemption is void. The APCO shall notify the employer that the exemption is void and the employer must submit a plan to the APCO which meets the requirements of this rule within one hundred twenty calendar days of the date of receipt of the notification of the voided exemption.
L. Alternative Compliance Option. At the option of the employer, the Commute Alternatives Plan may include an alternative emission reduction program that demonstrates that the measures included in such program will achieve emission reductions equal to or greater than those that would have been realized if the performance objectives were achieved, and that these alternative measures are not required by any other federal, state, or local control measure or regulatory requirement. Such an alternative emission reduction program shall include an update or progress monitoring report to be submitted at least every two years.
M. Compliance Criteria. If the employer complies with all provisions of Rule 901, and fully implements all measures of an approved commute alternatives plan, and still fails to meet the AVR targets in Table 1, such failure is not a violation of this Rule. District staff will provide assistance and expertise to affected employers on program development, administration, and monitoring. The focus of district support will be on corrective action and prevention of potential noncompliance situations to help employers remain in compliance with this rule. There will be six separate and distinct criteria for judging compliance with this rule:
    1. Timely and accurate response to the Notice to Register and Notice of Plan Preparation.
    2. Appointment of an employee transportation coordinator or an APCO-approved alternate.
    3. Conducting an annual, verifiable AVR Survey to monitor progress toward the applicable AVR target, and submitting the results to the APCO within the required time frame.
    4. Full implementation of all trip reduction options and strategies described in the approved commute alternatives plan (if applicable).
    5. Making available for audit and/or inspection by the APCO or his or her designee, upon request, evidence or supporting documentation pertaining to all trip reduction options and supporting strategies and activities implemented at a given worksite
    6. Timely reporting of all required information to the APCO.
N. Violation. Failure to comply with any provision of this rule constitutes a violation of this rule, except if the employer complies with all applicable requirements and fails to meet the AVR performance objective, such failure shall not constitute a violation. Employers of fewer than one hundred employees, who participate voluntarily in the Commute Alternatives Program, and who do not intend to sell TRCs on the Trip Trading Market, are exempt from the provisions of this Rule.
O. Penalties. Facilities found to be not in compliance with this rule will be given the opportunity to come into compliance before issuance of a Notice of Violation (NOV) or other enforcement action by the district.
When it is determined that a business is in noncompliance, a letter from the APCO will be sent to the employer describing the deficiency, suggested corrective action to be taken, and recommended measures to prevent further occurrences. The employer will have thirty days from receipt of the letter to respond in writing describing the circumstances of the situation, that the deficiency has been corrected, or to describe any extenuating circumstances preventing correction of the deficiency. If the deficiency remains after the prescribed time period, and if agreement on appropriate action has not been reached, a Notice of Violation may be issued. If an NOV is issued for a deficiency, then the penalty schedule shall apply.
P. Fees. There will be no filing fees for the initial submission and APCD review of Commute Alternative Plans. There will also be no fee for resubmitting a plan that has been revised to reflect District comments on the initial submission. There will be a two hundred dollar filing fee charged for each subsequent resubmittal required if the first revision to the trip reduction plan is disapproved by the district.
Q. Employee Notification. An employer shall facilitate the participation of employees and employee organizations in the development and implementation of Commute Alternatives Programs by providing the following information to its employees at the times specified below:
    1. Information explaining the requirements and applicability of this rule to the employer and its worksite(s) within thirty days of responding to the notice to register.
This information will be provided by the APCO as part of the Notice to Register packet.
    2. The content of the proposed commute options, supporting strategies, and implementation schedule of the Commute Alternatives Plan, if required, at least thirty calendar days prior submitting the Plan to the APCO.
    3. Identification of the Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC) and/or the Employer Program Manager within the organization to whom comments and suggestions can be submitted and questions addressed.
    4. Notification may be provided through employee bulletins, notices posted on bulletin boards, articles in any newsletter generally circulated or provided to employees, or any other reasonable means to assure that employees have adequate opportunity for input in the development of the commute alternatives options and strategies, and are informed about the full range of such options and strategies available at the worksite
R. Collective Bargaining Disclaimer. Nothing contained in this rule shall be construed to abrogate any existing collective bargaining agreement(s) between the employer and employees. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 1995)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:
12.04        Encroachments and Excavations
12.08        Urban Storm Water Quality Management and Discharge Control
12.12        Construction, Reconstruction and Repair of Sidewalks
12.16        Curbs, Gutters and Sidewalk Area
12.20        Park Regulations
12.22        Open Space Regulations
12.23        Creeks, Tributaries and Riparian Corridor Regulations
12.24        Tree Regulations
12.32        Street Name and Address Regulations
12.36        Downtown Parking and Business Improvement Area
12.38        Parking and Driveway Standards
12.40        Miscellaneous Regulations
12.42        Tourism Business Improvement District

Chapter 12.04 ENCROACHMENTS AND EXCAVATIONS

Sections:
12.04.010    Encroachment defined.
12.04.020    Encroachments restricted.
12.04.030    Permit application—Information required.
12.04.031    Emergency work.
12.04.032    Permit fee.
12.04.033    Length of time permit is valid.
12.04.050    Security deposit required—Amount.
12.04.060    Permit—Approval or denial.
12.04.070    Permits from other agencies—Responsibility to obtain.
12.04.080    Safety requirements.
12.04.090    Work to be pursued with diligence.
12.04.100    Defects—Notification to remedy—Remedy by city.
12.04.110    Defects—Cost of remedying to be deducted from deposit—Cost reimbursement when deposit is insufficient.
12.04.120    Deposit—Refund.
12.04.130    Permittee’s liability.
12.04.131    Special design concerns.
12.04.132    Newsracks.
12.04.140    Permit—Incorporation of chapter provisions.

12.04.010 Encroachment defined.
As used in this chapter, “encroachment” includes any structure or object of any kind or character placed either in, under or over any place mentioned in Section 12.04.020. (Ord. 1131 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 7310.1)

12.04.020 Encroachments restricted.
A. It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or encroachment in, under or over any road or other public place, including highway, alley, street, avenue, place, sidewalk, path, walk, park, plaza, boulevard or right-of-way or any other public place in the city whether or not currently improved, except in the manner and mode provided in this chapter. Work conducted by public utility companies within exclusive public utility easements is exempt from permit requirements under the terms of this chapter.
B. For purposes of this chapter, encroachments shall not include activities regulated as parades or special events pursuant to Chapter 5.80. (Ord. 1484 § 10, 2005; Ord. 1345 § 2, 1998: Ord. 1131 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 7310.2)

12.04.030 Permit application—Information required.
Any person desiring to excavate, or to cause, allow or make any encroachment in, under or over any place mentioned in Section 12.04.020, shall file a written application with the public works director, hereinafter referred to as the director. The application shall be in the form prescribed by the director, and shall give the following information:
A. Location of the encroachment;
B. The reason or necessity for encroachment;
C. Estimated time to begin and complete the work or placement of an encroachment;
D. Plans and specifications covering the encroachment as may be required by the director;
E. Estimated cost of repairing damage to the road or other public property caused by the encroachment;
F. Length of time encroachment will be kept in place;
G. Name, address and phone number of the person responsible for maintaining the encroachment during construction and after construction during the lifetime of the encroachment;
H. Other information as may be required by the director. (Ord. 1131 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 7310.3)

12.04.031 Emergency work.
If in the course of events the owner of a previously approved encroachment finds that emergency repairs are necessary to protect the facility, or to protect the investment of the owner and/or to provide continuing service to the public, and the owner of the facility finds that the city office that would issue the encroachment permit is not open, the owner may, after reporting to the police department the nature of any encroachment into the public roadway that may affect vehicle traffic or pedestrians, after notifying the Regional Notification Center (Underground Service Alert), conduct such work as is necessary to cause the needed repairs, provided that the owner of the facility requests a permit for the work conducted on the next day that the city office that issues encroachment permits is open. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, no emergency work may be done if the police department determines that the proposed work would represent an unreasonable threat to the public health, welfare or safety. (Ord. 1131 § 2 (part), 1989)

12.04.032 Permit fee.
A fee for encroachment permits may be established by resolution of the council and shall be paid to the city at the time of application for issuance or renewal of any encroachment permit. Public utility companies operating under franchise agreement with the city may pay monthly for permit fees or provide a deposit in advance for the estimated volume of permit applications subject to an agreement approved by the director. (Ord. 1131 § 2 (part), 1989)

12.04.033 Length of time permit is valid.
Encroachment permits shall be issued for a specific length of time, which shall not exceed a reasonable time necessary to do the work as determined by the director. In the case of permits for encroachments which are visible in the area of the street right-of-way used for passage of the public, the encroachment may be required to be removed upon notice of the director. Encroachments installed under permit which required the maintenance of insurance naming the city as additionally insured shall be removed if the insurance is not maintained. In the absence of any prior agreement to the contrary, no cause shall be necessary to be shown or proven to modify, revise or revoke any encroachment permit or deny an original or renewal request. Utility companies will not be required to have a current permit to conduct any maintenance that does not require any cutting of concrete or asphalt and/or excavation. (Ord. 1131 § 2 (part), 1989)

12.04.050 Security deposit required—Amount.
A deposit may be required prior to the issuance of an encroachment permit involving construction in the street right-of-way. The deposit shall be either cash, cashier’s check, certified check, certificate of deposit, surety bond issued by a company authorized to do business in the state, or other form acceptable to the director. The director shall set the amount of the deposit based on potential damage to public property which may be caused by the project or which will result if the project is not completed. All deposits shall remain in force for a period of up to one year from the date of completion of the work authorized by the permit. Utility companies doing work under franchise are exempt from making a security deposit. (Ord. 1131 § 4 (part), 1989: prior code § 7310.5)

12.04.060 Permit—Approval or denial.
Upon receiving an application to excavate or to encroach at any place mentioned in Section 12.04.020, the city engineer shall either approve, conditionally approve or reject it. If the application is approved, or conditionally approved, the director shall cause the deposit, if any, to be paid into the city treasury and/or such surety bond, if any, to be deposited with the director of finance, and shall issue a written permit authorizing the encroachment. The permit shall include all the conditions required by this code and conditions set by the director. In the event the application is denied, any deposit made or bond submitted in connection therewith shall be forthwith returned to the applicant; provided, that the applicant, if dissatisfied with such rejection or with any condition attached to an approval, may appeal following the procedure set out in Chapter 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 1131 § 4 (part), 1989: prior code § 7310.6)

12.04.070 Permits from other agencies—Responsibility to obtain.
It shall be the duty of any person causing, allowing, making or maintaining any encroachment in any road or other public place in the city, to procure all permits and licenses, pay all charges and fees, and give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work as required by agencies other than the city. No permit to excavate shall be valid until the applicant has complied with state regulations regarding notification of a Regional Notification Center (Underground Service Alert) and the receipt of an inquiry identification number. (Ord. 1131 § 4 (part), 1989: prior code § 7310.7)

12.04.080 Safety requirements.
It shall be the duty of any person making any excavation in any road or other public place in the city to place and maintain lights at each end of the excavation, and at distances as required by the director along the lines thereof, from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day, until the excavation is entirely refilled and repaired to a safe condition to the satisfaction of the director, and such person shall safeguard the work with such barriers, signs and measures as may be necessary and proper in each case to provide for the safety of persons, animals and vehicles using such public roads or other public place; provided further, that such safety measures shall be taken in encroachments permitted under this chapter as shall be prescribed by the director and set out in the permit granted. The permittee shall be responsible to obtain any permits that may be required by the State Department of Safety and Welfare. (Ord. 1131 § 4 (part), 1989: prior code § 7310.8)

12.04.090 Work to be pursued with diligence.
After the work or project is commenced as permitted under this chapter, the same shall be pursued with due diligence from day to day until completed, and so as not to obstruct the road or other place more than is reasonably necessary. (Ord. 1131 § 4 (part), 1989: prior code § 7310.9)

12.04.100 Defects—Notification to remedy—Remedy by city.
If the encroachment is not constructed or maintained in the manner and within the conditions required by the provisions of this chapter and the permit, the director shall notify the permittee in writing, and if the defect is not remedied within the time specified in the notice, the director shall cause the defect to be remedied in the proper manner and shall restore the road or other public place to its original condition; provided, however, if the defect constitutes an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the director shall have authority to immediately remedy the defect or remove the encroachment. (Ord. 1131 § 4 (part), 1989; prior code § 7310.10)

12.04.110 Defects—Cost of remedying to be deducted from deposit—Cost reimbursement when deposit is insufficient.
Whenever it is necessary for the director to remedy any defect in any work permitted under this chapter, the cost of remedying the defect shall be deducted from the permittee’s deposit, and the balance, if any, remaining after the deduction shall be returned to the permittee in accordance with Section 12.04.050; provided, that if the deposit is insufficient to cover the cost of the work, the permittee shall be liable to reimburse the city for the cost to it of remedying the defect in excess of the amount of the deposit, which shall be due and payable upon the permittee being furnished with a written statement of the amount due. (Ord. 1131 § 4 (part), 1989: prior code § 7310.11)

12.04.120 Deposit—Refund.
Upon satisfactory completion of all the terms and conditions of an encroachment permit, the director shall issue a certificate to this effect to the director of finance. Upon receipt of such certificate and after the expiration of the time period established by the permit, the director of finance shall be authorized and directed to return the cash deposit or bond or other security posted by the permittee to the permittee in accordance with Section 12.04.050. Unless required by prior agreement or law, the amount returned will not include any interest. (Ord. 1131 § 4 (part), 1989: prior code § 7310.12)

12.04.130 Permittee’s liability.
Each permittee is solely responsible for any damage or liability occurring by reason of anything done or omitted to be done by the permittee or his or her agent, employee, servant or subcontractor, or in connection with any work, authority or jurisdiction delegated under any permit issued as a result of an application; and each permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, employees or servants from any and all loss and liability, including cost of defense and attorney fees, resulting from any claims made by reason of or in connection with any work done under the authority of or as a result of any permit issued under this chapter. The permittee shall maintain an insurance policy, naming the city as additionally insured and in an amount as established by the city, during the period of the construction or placement of the encroachment and after construction or placement during the life of the permit unless waived as follows. The insurance policy shall state that the carrier shall notify the city thirty days prior to cancelling the policy for any reason. Encroachments installed under franchise agreements shall not be required to provide insurance under the terms of this chapter. Encroachments built to approved city standards shall not require insurance coverage following satisfactory completion of the improvement as determined by the director and acceptance by the city. Insurance for all other encroachments may be waived by the director only with the concurrence, of the city attorney and the city administrative officer. (Ord. 1131 § 4 (part), 1989: prior code § 7310.13)

12.04.131 Special design concerns.
A. Any encroachment which does not meet established city standards for design and construction shall be subject to review by the director and the community development director.
B. Any encroachment which will limit the amount of sidewalk available for pedestrians shall further be reviewed to meet concerns for pedestrian safety and to ensure adequate area for pedestrian passage. In residential areas a minimum of four feet of sidewalk shall be clear for pedestrian passage. In areas with sidewalks subject to high pedestrian activity as determined by the director, the width of the sidewalk which may be blocked by an encroachment shall be as determined by the director.
C. Encroachments shall not be physically in contact with street furniture or street trees.
D. Encroachments shall not restrict pedestrian access to parked vehicles, to buses in bus loading zones, or to access points of abutting property.
E. Encroachments shall not be allowed which in the opinion of the director constitute a hazard to vehicles or pedestrians.
F. All encroachments which provide a public service such as newsracks or vending machines shall have plainly posted on their face the name and phone number of the party responsible for maintenance end operation. (Ord. 1131 § 5 (part), 1989)

12.04.132 Newsracks.
A. The council finds and declares that the uncontrolled placement and maintenance of newsracks in the public right-of-way creates physical danger to the traveling public and the numerous pedestrians that use the public rights of way in the city. The council finds that, in recognition of the unique architectural features and basic heritage of the city, the clutter and congestion of numerous disparate types of newsracks in the public rights-of-way is unsightly and not in keeping with the nature of the city. The council also finds that, since the use of such rights-of-way is historically associated with the sale and distribution of newspapers and publications, access to these areas for such purposes should not be unreasonably or absolutely denied. The council finds that these strong and competing interests require reasonable accommodation which can only be satisfactorily achieved through this section of the code which provides for special accommodation of newsracks.
B. Newsracks are any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the sale or distribution of newspaper, news periodicals or other news publications.
C. An application for a permit for newsracks shall be made within ten business days of the placement of any newsrack in the public right-of-way
D. Application for permits for newsracks shall be made in the same manner as that of other encroachments as described in this chapter.
E. Permit fees, liability insurance, and indemnification requirements shall be the same as that required for encroachments as described in this chapter.
F. Special Location and Operational Concerns for Newsracks. 
    1. Placement of newsracks shall be such that they are parallel to and no more than six inches from the walls of adjacent buildings when present. Newsracks placed adjacent to the curb shall be placed parallel to the curb face and shall be a minimum of six inches and not more than twelve inches from the curb face to the back side of the newsrack. The rack shall face the sidewalk.
    2. Those encroachments which will limit the amount of sidewalk available for pedestrians shall further be reviewed to meet concerns for pedestrian safety and to ensure adequate area for pedestrian passage. In residential areas a minimum of four feet of sidewalk shall be dear for pedestrian passage. In areas with sidewalks subject to high pedestrian activity as determined by the director, the width of the sidewalk which may be blocked by an encroachment shall be as determined by the director.
    3. No newsrack shall be maintained opposite another newsrack.
    4. No newsrack may be attached to public signs, benches, fire hydrants or other facilities in the right-of-way. Newsracks attached to private property may be done so only with written permission of the owner end occupant of the private property.
    5. No newsrack shall be used for commercial advertising, signs or publicity purposes, other than to state the name of the newspaper or periodical being sold.
    6. Newsracks shall be maintained in good operating condition.
    7. The installation of newsracks shall meet the same design concerns as identified for other encroachments in Section 12.04.131.
    8. The number of newsracks at a given location may be limited if, in the opinion of the director, they will unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or access to parked vehicles.
    9. Abandoned or inoperative newsracks must be removed from the right-of-way within thirty days. Any newsracks left over thirty days may be removed and stored for up to thirty days. The cost of removal and storage will be charged the owner in the event he or she chooses to retrieve the abandoned newsrack. Those newsracks left unclaimed will be disposed of as unclaimed property. (Ord. 1131 § 5 (part), 1989)

12.04.140 Permit—Incorporation of chapter provisions.
All terms and conditions of this chapter shall be incorporated by reference and implication into any permit issued hereunder. (Prior code § 7310.14)

Chapter 12.08 URBAN STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL

Sections:
12.08.010    Title.
12.08.020    Purpose and intent.
12.08.030    Definitions.
12.08.040    Applicability.
12.08.050    Responsibility for administration.
12.08.060    Severability.
12.08.070    Regulatory consistency.
12.08.080    Ultimate responsibility of discharger.
12.08.090    Prohibition of illegal discharges.
12.08.100    Exceptions to discharge.
12.08.110    Prohibition of illicit connections.
12.08.120    Waste disposal prohibitions.
12.08.130    Animals.
12.08.140    Compliance with industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit.
12.08.150    Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water and pollutants.
12.08.160    Maintenance.
12.08.170    Watercourse protection.
12.08.180    Connections to public storm drain system.
12.08.190    Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges and remediate.
12.08.200    Requirement to monitor and analyze.
12.08.210    Reporting and remediating discharges—Retention of records.
12.08.220    Authority to inspect, sample, establish sampling devices, and test.
12.08.230    Notice of violation.
12.08.240    Appeal.
12.08.250    Abatement by city.
12.08.260    Urgency abatement.
12.08.270    Charging cost of abatement/liens.
12.08.280    Violations.
12.08.290    Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the Clean Water Act and/or the Porter-Cologne Act.

12.08.010 Title.
This chapter may also be cited as the “storm water quality ordinance” of the city of San Luis Obispo. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.020 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of citizens, and protect and enhance the quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act by reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable, by prohibiting non-storm water discharges to the storm drain system, and improving storm water management. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.030 Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
A. “Administrative technical documents” or “ATD” means the following documents adopted by the city. The most current versions of these documents shall be considered in use for purposes of interpreting this chapter.
    1. Storm drain map;
    2. Waterway management plan;
    3. Waterway management plan appendix;
    4. Waterway management plan drainage design manual;
    5. Waterway management plan stream management and maintenance program;
    6. Waterway management plan stream management and maintenance program Appendix A;
    7. Waterway management plan environmental impact statement/report for public hearing;
    8. Creek and flood protection fee schedule;
    9. City engineering standards;
    10. City engineering standard specifications;
    11. City of San Luis Obispo storm water management plan;
    12. Community design guidelines.
B. “Authorized representative” means that person designated in writing to the director by the property owner to act on behalf of the property owner.
C. “Best management practice” or “BMP” means activities, practices, and procedures to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the storm drain system and waters of the United States. BMPs include but are not limited to treatment facilities to remove pollutants from storm water; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of non-storm water, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants.
D. “City” shall mean the city of San Luis Obispo.
E. “Clean Water Act” means the federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and any subsequent amendments thereto.
F. “Construction activity” means any of the following activities: including but not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, demolition and construction.
G. “Director” means the community development director or public works director of the city, acting either directly or through an authorized designee.
H. “Groundwater” means any naturally occurring subsurface water, including springs.
I. “Hazardous material” means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed, as defined in Section 25501 of the Health and Safety Code.
J. “Illegal discharge” means any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted by this chapter.
K. “Illicit connection” means any of the following:
    1. Any conveyance system, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, sewage, process wastewater, wash water, pool or spa water.
    2. Any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks not currently exempted or permitted, regardless of whether the drain or connection has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency.
    3. Any drain or conveyance connected from any land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented and approved by the city.
    4. Any unpermitted connection of a storm water system to the publicly owned treatment works as defined in this chapter.
L. “Industrial activity” means any activity subject to a NPDES industrial permit as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(14).
M. “Municipal separate storm sewer system” or “MS4” means the public portion of the storm drain system.
N. “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System” or “NPDES” means the general, group, and individual storm water discharge permits which regulate facilities defined in federal NPDES regulations pursuant to the Clean Water Act.
O. “Non-storm water discharge” means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
P. “Pollutant” means anything which causes or contributes to pollution including, but not limited to, paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes, either from domestic or wild animals or birds; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure, including but not limited to dirt, sediment, slurry, and concrete residuals; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Q. “Pollution” means the human-made or human-induced alteration of the quality of waters by waste or pollutants, or the presence of a substance in the environment that, because of its chemical composition or quantity, prevents the functioning of natural processes and produces undesirable environmental and health effects or alters the quality of the water to a degree that unreasonably affects the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses.
R. “Porter-Cologne Act” means the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) as amended.
S. “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
T. “Storm drain system” means any public or private facilities by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to roads, sidewalks, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels and swales, reservoirs, lakes, creeks, waters of the United States and other drainage structures which are within the city and are not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR Section 122.2.
    1. Public facilities are those owned, maintained and operated by the city and other public agencies including the enclosed system of pipelines, catch basins, manholes and junction structures.
    2. Private facilities are those on private property or under the control of persons other than the city or other public agencies.
U. “Storm water” means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
V. “Storm water pollution prevention plan” or “SWPPP” means a plan that identifies sources of pollution and provides direction during construction to the contractor and owner, using BMPs to prevent pollution from occurring.
W. “Waters of the United States” means surface watercourses and water bodies as defined at 40 CFR Section 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry storm water at and during all times and seasons. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.040 Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands within the city. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.050 Responsibility for administration.
The director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.060 Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.070 Regulatory consistency.
This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Clean Water Act and Porter-Cologne Act and acts amended thereto or supplementary thereto, or any applicable implementing regulations. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.080 Ultimate responsibility of discharger.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that a person’s compliance will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the United States. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any of its employees or agents, for any damages that result from any person’s reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.090 Prohibition of illegal discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm drain system any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water, including water runoff as defined in Chapter 13.07.
An illegal discharge is assumed to have occurred if prohibited material is placed, blown, washed, tracked or in any way allowed to accumulate in any part of the MS4 so that it can be conveyed by storm water. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.100 Exceptions to discharge.
No person shall commence, conduct, or continue any illegal discharge to the storm drain system except as follows. Discharges from the following will not be considered a source of pollutants to the storm drain system and to waters of the United States when properly managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present, and therefore they shall not be considered illegal discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the Porter-Cologne Act, Clean Water Act, or this chapter:
A. Uncontaminated groundwater, air conditioning condensation, uncontaminated roof, foundation, footing, or French drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, residential car washing and fire fighting flows.
B. Non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, low-threat discharge permit or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the state of California under the authority of the federal Environmental Protection Agency; provided, that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations; and provided, that written approval has been granted by the city for any discharge to the storm drain system.
C. With written concurrence of the Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board, the city may exempt in writing other non-storm water discharges, which are not a source of pollutants to the storm drain system nor waters of the United States. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.110 Prohibition of illicit connections.
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system or to a POTW is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.120 Waste disposal prohibitions.
A. Waste. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drain system, or water of the United States, any pollutant, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution.
B. Sidewalk Cross Drainage. No person shall place, erect or maintain any rainwater leader drain, pipe, conduit or swale as to convey, carry or discharge any water on or to any sidewalk in the city, but all leaders, drains, pipes, conduits, and swales conveying, carrying or discharging water exempt under this chapter to or beyond the exterior boundary of the lot or premises on which the same is erected, placed or maintained, must be led under the sidewalk to the gutter. Facilities not in compliance with this section shall be considered a public nuisance and abated in accordance with the provisions in Chapter 8.24.
C. Drainage to Public Facilities. No person shall cause water to be deposited to the public street or other public facility which results in an organic growth of any kind in the public facility, particularly that which creates a slick surface. Such growth shall be considered a public nuisance and abated in accordance with the provisions in Chapter 8.24. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.130 Animals.
A. Property Maintenance. Where it is determined by the city or by the Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board that an area used by animals is affecting water quality, the city will require the property owner or authorized representative to implement measures, which may include installation of preclusionary devices, to eliminate the pollution and prevent the migration of waste components to the storm drain system. Installation of devices or measures may require permits from the city or other regulatory agency. Installation, maintenance and permitting are the responsibility of the property owner.
B. Feeding Near Water Bodies. No person shall feed feral animals or deposit or leave any foodstuff of any kind or nature, except in a trash receptacle provided for that purpose, within one hundred feet of a lake or creek.
C. Domesticated Animal Waste. All persons owning, possessing, in control of, or otherwise responsible for an animal, must promptly collect, pick up and remove all fecal matter left by the animal on public or private lands. Animals in agricultural areas are not covered under this subsection if the area complies with subsection A of this section or is covered under separate regulation. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.140 Compliance with industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance, in a form acceptable to the director, shall be provided:
A. Prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan;
B. Upon inspection of the facility;
C. During any enforcement proceeding or action; or
D. For any other reasonable cause. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.150 Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water and pollutants.
A. Authorization to Adopt BMPs. The city recognizes the current requirements of the State Water Resources Control Board for general permits for construction, industrial and municipal activities. In addition to the requirements of these general permits, the city may adopt additional requirements identifying BMPs for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to degradation, pollution, or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States.
B. Authorization to Impose BMP. Where the city or any federal, state of California, or regional agency has adopted BMP requirements for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of non-storm water or pollutants, or degradation to the storm drain system or waters of the United States, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility, shall comply with such requirements within the time limit or under the conditions set forth in the BMP.
C. SWPPP Submittal and Maintenance. Prior to the city’s issuing any permit for activities which may contribute to pollution of the storm drain system, the person seeking the permit must submit a SWPPP. The SWPPP shall include detailed information describing the potential sources of pollution that may be created by the project being permitted and the recommended BMPs that will be applied. The information shall be sufficient to be used to direct a contractor to perform the BMPs and to recognize whether the BMP is achieving the required effect. The director will approve the SWPPP once the director is satisfied that the SWPPP meets the requirements of this chapter. The SWPPP is a “living” document, meaning it must be adjusted during the course of the construction activity to adapt to new or unforeseen conditions and changing work to maintain compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
D. New Development and Redevelopment Design Standards. The city will adopt design standards requiring appropriate BMPs to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of storm water runoff from newly developed and redeveloped property. Such requirements are incorporated, unless specifically waived by the director, in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required in this section.
E. Compliance Assurance Deposit. A person with a project that includes a grading permit or any other permit that is likely to create a source of pollution shall submit a SWPPP compliance assurance construction security deposit in an amount to be fixed by the director to ensure NPDES compliance in accordance with the approved SWPPP. Should a project have inadequate BMPs, resulting in an illegal discharge, and if the SWPPP holder fails immediately to implement or maintain necessary BMPs to comply with this chapter, upon receiving notice from the city, the city or its agent will install the BMPs and deduct payment for this work from the compliance assurance deposit. If that occurs, the compliance assurance deposit must be replenished to the original amount, or to the amount expended by the city for BMP installation, whichever is higher, and the city will issue a stop work order on the project until such occurs. When the project has received final clearance, the director will release the compliance assurance deposit. Compliance with this section does not absolve a person from other penalties and fines as provided for in this chapter.
F. Responsibility to Implement BMPs. Any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering storm water or the storm drain system, shall implement BMPs to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the storm drain system. The owner or operator shall provide and maintain facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes at the owner’s or operator’s expense.
G. Responsibility to Identify and Post. For the purposes of implementing Section 374 of the California Penal Code and the requirements of this chapter, property owners are required to mark and/or post all drainage inlets that have a connection to the creek system, either directly or through a portion of the storm drain system, as follows:
    1. Signs. Property owners of an apartment complex consisting of four or more units shall be responsible for causing a sign to be posted in a conspicuous location as close as possible to each drainage inlet with the following wording in English and Spanish:
    +---------------------------------+
    | DRAINS TO CREEK – DUMP NO WASTE |
    +---------------------------------+
    | SLOMC SEC 12.08.150             |
    +---------------------------------+
    | PENAL CODE SECTION 374          |
    +---------------------------------+
    Sign specifications shall be available from the community development department.
    2. Placard. Property owners shall be responsible for causing a placard, conforming to city engineering standards, to be installed at each drainage inlet.
    3. Maintenance. Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining signs and placards, ensuring they remain legible. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.160 Maintenance.
A. General. Property owners are responsible to maintain their premises in such a way as to comply with this chapter and prevent migration of pollutants into the storm drain system.
B. Construction Storm Water Devices. BMPs installed during construction or as measures for postconstruction storm water shall be maintained as required to ensure proper operation. Failure to maintain construction BMPs will result in a stop work order being issued until the site is in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Postconstruction Storm Water Devices. Property owners of development or redevelopment projects which require installation of postconstruction storm water devices shall submit a maintenance plan or manufacturer’s maintenance guide for those devices as part of the project submittal. The plan or guide provided shall be considered the minimum maintenance required, with additional maintenance performed as needed to comply with this chapter.
All property owners with postconstruction storm water devices on their property shall submit to the director annual inspection/maintenance reports to confirm continued compliance with this chapter. Reports shall be signed and certified by the property owner or the authorized representative.
All property owners with postconstruction storm water devices on their property shall enter into an agreement with the city, to be recorded, documenting the devices, the required maintenance and the responsibility by the property owners for maintenance and reporting. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.170 Watercourse protection.
A. Every person owning, leasing property or otherwise controlling property (“owner”) through which a watercourse originates or passes shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. The owner shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for maintenance, nor perform vegetation management in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The owner shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within that owner’s property, within regulatory frameworks, to a reasonable standard as determined by the director, in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or passing through the property.
B. Every owner of property through which a watercourse originates or passes shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
C. Every owner is responsible to comply with all laws, rules, and regulations of state or federal agencies that may have jurisdiction over wetlands and waterways. Maintenance must be done in a manner that does not adversely impact waterway species. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.180 Connections to public storm drain system.
A. Permit Required. Any person who owns an existing connection or intends to connect directly to a public storm drain system must have a permit issued by the city to do so.
B. Cost of Inspection. Each person owning a connection to a public storm drain system shall pay an annual inspection fee, as set forth in the creek and flood protection fee schedule, to cover the cost of routine inspection, reporting review, and sampling.
C. Compliance Notice. The director shall require by written notice that a person with an illicit connection to the public storm drain system comply with the requirements of this chapter to eliminate or secure city approval for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection had been established or approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or through prior permit. If the person with an illicit connection can demonstrate to the director that an illegal discharge will not occur, the person may request the director’s approval to maintain the connection and shall obtain the required permit.
D. Sampling and Reporting. Any connection to the public storm drain system must include a sampling port to allow the city to verify discharge quality. The person owning the connection to the public storm drain system must submit to the director self-monitoring reports to assess and assure continued compliance with this chapter. Reports shall be signed by the property owner or the authorized representative. Sampling and reporting shall conform to the provisions of the permit.
E. Agreement Concerning Permit. Any person to whom the city has issued a permit under this section shall enter into an agreement with the city, which agreement shall be recorded and shall reflect the provisions of this section.
F. Transfers of Property—New Permit Required. Whenever a person to whom the city has issued a permit under this section transfers the property to which the permit is attached, the transferee has thirty days in which to obtain a new permit in the transferee’s name. If such permit is not obtained, the connection will be deemed illicit. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.190 Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges and remediate.
Whenever the director determines that a discharge of pollutants is occurring, or has occurred, and the discharge has caused, or will cause, pollution of storm water or the storm drain system, or determines an illegal discharge is occurring or has occurred, the director will require by written notice to the property owner and/or their authorized representative (A) remediation of the pollution and restoration of the affected property within a specified time/date, and (B) discontinuance of the discharge and, if necessary, implementation of measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.200 Requirement to monitor and analyze.
The director may require any person engaged in any activity, and/or owning or operating any facility, which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution, illegal discharges, and/or non-storm water discharges to the storm drain system, to undertake, at the person’s expense, a monitoring, analysis, and reporting program, as approved by the director, to determine compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.210 Reporting and remediating discharges—Retention of records.
A. Notification. In the event of a release of a hazardous material, any property owner, authorized person or any other person responsible for property, a facility or an operation, shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911).
In the event of a release of any pollutant such that it enters an enclosed system or waterway, any property owner, authorized person or any other person responsible for a property, a facility or an operation shall notify the director in person, by phone, or by facsimile no later than five p.m. of the same business day or, if on a weekend or holiday, by ten a.m. of the next business day. Notification in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the director within two business days of the in-person or phone notice.
B. Remediation. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any property owner, authorized person, or any other person responsible for property, a facility or an operation, or the person responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants which may result or have resulted in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water or the storm drain system from the property, facility or operation, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the containment, and remediation of such release.
C. Commercial/Industrial Properties. If the reported discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial property, the owner or operator of the property shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years from the date of the occurrence and be available for inspection by the director. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.220 Authority to inspect, sample, establish sampling devices, and test.
Whenever the director determines it is necessary to make an inspection to verify compliance with this chapter, investigate potential violations of this chapter, or to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the director has reasonable cause to believe that there exists a condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the director may enter the premises during normal business hours to inspect, take water samples, perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the inspection, record site activities, and inspect and copy records related to storm water compliance. During any inspection, the director may establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. If the director is refused entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city may seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
If the director has reasonable cause to believe that discharges to the storm drain system are so hazardous, unsafe, or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard public health or safety or the integrity of the storm drain system, the director shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect the property and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.230 Notice of violation.
A. Violation Conditions. Whenever the director finds that a person has violated this chapter, the director may issue to the person a notice of violation and order compliance. Such notice may require without limitation:
    1. Monitoring, providing analyses, and reporting;
    2. Eliminating illicit connections or discharges;
    3. Cease and desist of discharges, practices, or operations;
    4. Abating or remediating storm water pollution or contamination hazards, and restoring the affected property;
    5. Implementing source control or treatment BMPs; and
    6. Paying a fine and administrative and remediation costs.
B. Abatement. If abatement of a condition and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such abatement or restoration must be completed. The notice shall further provide that if there is not compliance with the notice within the established deadline, the city may abate the condition and/or restore the property, and the expenses thereof shall be charged to the property owner and/or the person responsible for the violation. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.240 Appeal.
Except as provided in Section 12.08.260, Urgency abatement, any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal following the procedures in Chapter 1.20. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.250 Abatement by city.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, and ten days have passed, or if an appeal of the notice of violation was filed and ten days have passed from the date of the decision upholding the decision of the director, then the city or its agents may enter upon the property and take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. If the city or its agents is refused entry for this purpose, the city shall seek the assistance of any court of competent jurisdiction to authorize entry. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city or its agents to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.260 Urgency abatement.
A. Immediate Abatement. The director may require immediate abatement of any violation of this chapter that constitutes an immediate and significant threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public.
B. Construction Sites. The director shall give verbal notice and issue a notice of violation to persons owning or controlling construction sites with inadequate erosion and sediment controls that such controls must be put in place immediately, and the city shall not allow any other site work until the controls are in place.
C. Failure to Abate. If a violation as described in subsection A of this section is not immediately abated, the city is authorized to enter the premises and take any and all measures required to abate the violation. Any expenses incurred by the city related to such abatement shall be charged to the property owner. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent the city from seeking other and further relief authorized under this chapter. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.270 Charging cost of abatement/liens.
A. Notice of Cost. If the city has incurred costs to abate a violation, the director shall notify the property owner within thirty days of the cost, including administrative costs.
B. Appeal. Within fifteen days of the director’s notice, the property owner may file with the city clerk a written appeal objecting to the amount of the costs. The city clerk shall set the matter for hearing by the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final.
C. Payment Due Date—Failure to Pay. If no appeal has been filed or if an appeal has been filed and the city council has made a decision on the appeal, any cost due shall be paid in full within ten days. If the costs are not paid in full within ten days, the costs shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property. The information shall be provided to the county auditor so that the auditor may enter the amount of the assessment against the property, as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the tax collector include the amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the property. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.280 Violations.
A. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a code violation and public nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored by the city at the violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be undertaken by the city.
B. Penalties and Fines. A violation of, or failure to comply with, any of the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and may be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12. Violators are also subject to fines provided for in the administrative code provisions of this code, Chapter 1.24, revocation of their business license, and/or for persons seeking to work in the right-of-way, a prohibition from working within the right-of-way for a period of two years.
C. Compensatory Action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the director may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain marking, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

12.08.290 Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the Clean Water Act and/or the Porter-Cologne Act.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of any requirement issued pursuant to this chapter may also be in violation of the Clean Water Act and/or the Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the provisions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this chapter shall also include written notice to the violator of such potential liability. (Ord. 1543 § 2 (part), 2010)

Chapter 12.12 CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS

Sections:
12.12.010    General provisions.
12.12.020    Notice of necessity for—Hearing—Notice to construct sidewalk—Construction by city—Notice of construction cost.
12.12.030    Cost of construction—Collection—Filing notice of lien.
12.12.040    Cost of construction—Alternative method of collection.

12.12.010 General provisions.
A. As used in this chapter, “sidewalk” includes a park or parking strip maintained in the area between the property line and the street line and also includes curbs, gutters, bulkheads, retaining walls or other works for the protection of any sidewalk or of any park or parking strip or any of the above.
B. This chapter constitutes a separate and alternative procedure for performing and collecting the cost of the work specified in herein. The procedures set forth in this chapter are in addition to and the limitations imposed by this chapter do not affect the powers conferred or procedures prescribed by Charter or the general law.
C. For purposes of this chapter “superintendent of streets” means the director of public services. (Prior code § 7350)

12.12.020 Notice of necessity for—Hearing—Notice to construct sidewalk—Construction by city—Notice of construction cost.
A. When the council preliminarily determines by resolution that the public interest, convenience and necessity require the construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks within the city, it shall cause to be published, a notice generally describing the location of the sidewalk or sidewalks to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired and shall specify the day, hour and place when the council will hear and pass upon objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any property owner or other interested persons. The publications shall be by two successive insertions in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. The first publication shall be at least twenty days before the date of hearing.
B. A copy of the notice shall be posted within three hundred feet of each parcel of real property liable to be assessed for the cost of any of the work. The posting shall be completed at least ten days before the date of hearing. No proceeding shall be held invalid for failure to post within three hundred feet of any parcel of the real property if this section has been substantially complied with; provided, that the publication of notice set forth in subsection A of this section and the posting set forth in this subsection may be dispensed with upon written consent of the affected property owners wherein the property owners agree to the day and hour for the hearing.
C. On the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the council shall hear and pass upon the objections or protests of property owners or other interested parties.
D. If the council by no less than 4/5 vote of all the members thereof by resolution finds and determines that the public convenience and necessity require the construction, reconstruction or repair of the sidewalks described in the notice, or any part thereof, the Special Assessment, Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 1931 shall not apply to the proceedings.
E. If the council makes the finding specified in subsection D of this section, it shall order the superintendent of streets to notify the owner or person in possession of the property fronting on the sidewalk to be repaired or reconstructed or fronting on that portion of the street in which no sidewalk has been constructed theretofore, to construct or cause to be constructed, repair or caused to be repaired, or reconstruct or cause to be reconstructed a sidewalk in the front of his or her property.
F. The superintendent of streets shall forthwith give notice to construct, reconstruct or repair by delivering a written notice personally to the owner or person in possession or by mailing a postal card, postage prepaid, to the person in possession or owner at his or her last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the city.
G. The notice shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, how it is to be done and what material shall be used in the construction, reconstruction or repair and shall further specify that if the construction, reconstruction or repair is not commenced within thirty days after notice is given and diligently and without interruption prosecuted to completion, the superintendent of streets shall cause the construction, reconstruction or repair, as the case may be, to be done and the cost of the same shall be a lien on the property. However, upon written request of an affected property owner, the thirty-day period and notice thereof may be waived and the superintendent of streets may with due diligence cause the work to be done and the cost of the same made a lien upon or collected with taxes against the property.
H. If the construction, reconstruction or repair are not commenced and prosecuted to completion with due diligence, as required by the notice, the superintendent of streets shall forthwith cause the construction, reconstruction or repair to be done either with city forces or by contract duly let pursuant to the City Charter.
I. Upon the completion of the construction, reconstruction or repair, the superintendent of streets shall prepare and file with the council a report specifying the work which has been done, the cost thereof, a description of the real property in front of which the work has been done and the assessment against each lot or parcel of land. Any such report may include work done in front of any number of parcels of property, whether contiguous to each other or not.
J. Upon completion of the construction, reconstruction or repair, the superintendent of streets and the city clerk shall cause notice of the cost of the construction, reconstruction or repair to be given in the manner specified in this section for the giving of notice to construct, reconstruct or repair, which notice shall specify the day, hour and place when the legislative body will hear and pass upon a report by the superintendent of streets of the cost thereof, together with any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the cost and any other interested persons.
K. Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the council shall hear and pass upon the report of the superintendent of streets, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed and any other interested persons. Thereupon the council may make such revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just, after which, by motion or resolution, the report as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The council may adjourn the hearing from time to time. The decisions of the council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 7350.1)

12.12.030 Cost of construction—Collection—Filing notice of lien.
A. The cost may be assessed by the council against the parcel of property fronting upon the sidewalk constructed, reconstructed or repaired, and such cost so assessed, if not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, shall constitute a special assessment against such parcel of property, and shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof from the time of recordation of the notice of lien, which lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest thereon is paid, or until it is discharged of record.
B. The finance director may file in the office of the county recorder a certificate substantially in the following form:NOTICE OF LIEN
Pursuant to the authority vested in me by Ordinance No. 1014 of the City of San Luis Obispo, I did on the ___ day of _________, 19___, cause the sidewalk, curb, gutter or perk or parking strip, bulkheads, retaining walls or other works (as the case may be) in the front of the real property hereinafter described, to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired, and the Council of said city did, on the ___ day of _________, 19___, by Resolution No. ____ assess the cost of such repair upon the real property in the sum of _______ dollars ($______), and the same shall be a lien upon the real property until the said sum, with interest at the rate of 10 percent per annum, from the said ___ day of _________, 19___ (insert date of confirmation of assessment), has been paid in full and discharged of record.
The real property hereinbefore mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain piece or parcel of land lying and being in the City of San Luis Obispo, State of California, and particularly described as follows, to wit:
(Description of property)
Dated this ___ day of ____, 19____
________________
Finance Director 
C. From and after the date of recording the notice of lien, all persons shall be deemed to have had notice of the contents thereof. The notice of lien may include claims against one or more separate parcels of property, whether contiguous or not, together with the amount due, respectively, from each such parcel. The Statute of Limitations shall not run against the right of the city to enforce the payment of the lien. If any such lien is not paid, the city may file and maintain an action to foreclose such lien in the same manner and under the same procedure, so far as applicable, as that under which delinquent bonds are foreclosed under Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 1984: prior code § 7350.2)

12.12.040 Cost of construction—Alternative method of collection.
A. As an alternative method of collection of the amount of the lien, the council may, after confirmation of the report of the superintendent of streets, order the notice of lien to be delivered to the director of finance who shall enter the amount of the assessment on the city assessment roll opposite the description of the particular property, and the amount shall be collected together with all other taxes thereon against the property.
B. Thereafter the amount of the lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary city taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary city taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city taxes are hereby made applicable to such special assessment taxes.
C. If the assessment is one thousand dollars or more the council may authorize the assessment to be collected in installments on the tax roll, in which case the notice of lien shall contain an apportionment of the principal amount of the assessment into the number of yearly installments as ordered by the council. Such installments shall bear interest on the unpaid balance at a rate not to exceed ten percent per year. The interest shall begin on the first of the month following the confirmation of the assessment by the council. In the event such installments and accrued interest are not paid when due, then the full balance of such assessments and accrued interest shall become immediately due and payable and shall thereafter be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale as in the case of delinquencies, as provided for ordinary city taxes.
D. The proceedings conducted under this chapter shall be subject to all the curative clauses and powers of reassessment provided in the Improvement Act of 1911 as said Act now exists or as hereafter amended. (Ord. 1014 § 2, 1984: prior code § 7350.3)

Chapter 12.16 CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALK AREA

Sections:
12.16.010    Definitions.
12.16.020    Property owner’s responsibility.
12.16.030    Permit required—Application Contents—General provisions.
12.16.040    Work to be done in accordance with standard specifications—Substandard work—Removal and replacement.
12.16.050    Installation or reimbursement required when—Exception.
12.16.055    Reimbursement.
12.16.060    Appeals.

12.16.010 Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context thereof that a different meaning is intended, the following teens shall have the meaning specified after each word:
    1. “City” means the city of San Luis Obispo, California.
    2. “Curbline” means the top of the vertical face of the curb.
    3. “Driveway” means any approach to or from the street over and upon the curb, gutter or sidewalk area to permit vehicular traffic into the abutting property.
    4. “Director” means the public works director or his or her authorized representative.
    5. “Owner” means any person, firm or corporation, or the agent or representative of any person, firm or corporation, in which is vested the title to any parcel of real property posted under the ordinance codified in this chapter.
    6. “Repair” means and includes the construction, reconstruction, repair, replacement, restoration or improvement of any sidewalk area.
    7. “Sidewalk area” means end includes a park or parking strip maintained in the area between the property line and the curbline and also includes a driveway, curbing, bulkhead, retaining wall, sidewalk or other works for the protection of any sidewalk or walkway or any such park or parking strip located in any public street, way or thoroughfare within the city.
B. Words used in the plural include the singular, and those used in the singular include the plural. (Ord. 1132 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code §§ 7330, 7300.4)

12.16.020 Property owner’s responsibility.
The maintenance, repair and collection of the cost of repair shall be governed by the procedure set forth in Division 7, Part 3, Chapter 22 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. (Prior code § 7330.1)

12.16.030 Permit required—Application Contents—General provisions.
No person, firm or corporation shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, move, improve, grade or demolish any sidewalk area or portion thereof as defined in subsection G of Section 12.16.010, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining an encroachment permit for such work from the director’s office.
A. The process for obtaining an encroachment permit is prescribed by Chapter 12.04.
B. General Provisions of the Permit. 
    1. It is understood and agreed by the permittee that the issuance of the permit shall constitute the acceptance of the provisions of this chapter.
    2. The permit shall be posted on the job site in a conspicuous place and easily accessible.
    3. All work done shall be done in a thorough and workmanlike manner. Any work not so done shall be corrected by the permittee at his or her expense at the request of the director.
    4. The permittee shall be responsible for preserving all stakes unless authorized to remove such stakes by the director.
    5. The permit shall be null and void if the work is not commenced within sixty days from the date of issue or within sixty days of notification that grades are ready, and completed within thirty days thereafter. Permits voided by limitation shall include forfeiture of the permit and inspection fee. Any work performed after such nullification shall be covered by a new permit, and permit and inspection fee.
    6. The permittee shall remove at his or her own expense all obstructions such as trees, stones, debris, roots, etc. that are encountered in prosecution of the work.
    7. The permittee shall safeguard the public at all times during the course of the work by the erection of barricades, lights and bypass walkways subject to directions by the director. Each permittee is solely responsible for damage or liability occurring by reason of anything done or omitted by the permittee or his or her agent, employee, servant or subcontractor, or in connection with any work, authority or jurisdiction delegated under any permit issued as a result of an application; and each permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, employees or servants from any and all loss, including costs of defense and attorney fees, and liability resulting from any claims made by reason of or in connection with any work done under the authority of or as a result of any permit issued under this chapter.
    8. Any underground utilities damaged during the course of the work shall be the responsibility of the permittee.
    9. In case it should be necessary to move the property of any owner of a public utility or franchise, such owner will be notified by the permittee or director to move such property within a specified reasonable time, and the permittee shall not interfere with the property until after the expiration of the time specified. The cost of necessary relocations of existing facilities shall be borne by the permittee of the owner of the facility in accordance with the teens of other franchise agreements, encroachment permits or other pertinent regulations.
    10. The right is reserved to the owners of public utilities and franchises to enter upon the street for the purpose of making repairs or changes of their property that may become necessary by the work. The city shall also have the privilege of entering upon the street for the purpose of maintaining and/or constructing public facilities.
    11. Before placing concrete, the forms are to be inspected and approved. Request for inspection must be made at least four working hours in advance.
    12. The permittee shall remove all surplus material and rubbish from the work and fill to grade with approved material all holes and depressions in adjacent areas.
    13. For further provisions, attention is called to the city standard specifications for concrete driveway, sidewalk and combination curb and gutter. (Ord. 1132 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 7330.2)

12.16.040 Work to be done in accordance with standard specifications—Substandard work—Removal and replacement.
No sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway shall be broken out or constructed except in accordance with the city standard specifications approved by the council on file in the office of the director and with all ordinances of the city. Defective or substandard work is to be removed and replaced to the satisfaction of the director. (Ord. 1132 § 1 (part), 1989: prior code § 7330.3)

12.16.050 Installation or reimbursement required when—Exception.
Whenever any building is constructed on or moved onto any parcel of real property in the city, or whenever existing buildings are altered or expanded in excess of fifty percent of the value of such building as determined by the chief building official, it is required, except as hereinafter provided, that a standard concrete curb, gutter, sidewalk and street pavement as determined by council resolution be installed on all street frontages of such property by the owner of such property or the person in possession of the property prior to granting of occupancy or final approval. The council shall establish by resolution from time to time relevant standards and special requirements for such improvements. In the case of the construction of a garage or other structure, which by its nature requires the construction of a driveway ramp, the street improvements directly related to the construction must be installed unless a waiver is obtained from the director and community development director. It is unlawful for any person to occupy or use such buildings prior to the installation of the required curb, gutter and sidewalks unless a certified check or cash in the amount to be fixed by the director is deposited with the city to guarantee such installation. In the case of structures which are already occupied and which, due to the extent of the construction, require the installation of street improvements, the owner or developer shall post (prior to issuance of the building permit) a bond or other security in a form acceptable to the city attorney in an amount equal to the cost to install the street improvements. The bond may be released when the improvements are accepted by the city and prior to the completion of the building construction. In the event the improvement is not so completed, then the city may use all or any portion of said bond to complete the installation.
Exceptions: The director and the community development director may defer or temporarily waive all or portions of these requirements if they jointly agree that they will cause extreme hardship or serve no useful purpose. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 1989: prior code § 7330.8)

12.16.055 Reimbursement.
The owner or developer who installs improvements which abut property other than that being developed may be reimbursed as provided in Section 16.20.100 of this code. (Ord. 1132 § 3, 1989)

12.16.060 Appeals.
An appeal of a decision of the director shall follow the procedure set out in Chapter 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 1132 § 4, 1989: prior code § 7330.9)

Chapter 12.20 PARK REGULATIONS

Sections:
12.20.010    Title.
12.20.020    Definitions.
12.20.030    Compliance with regulations required.
12.20.040    Rules and regulations applicable in city parks.
12.20.045    Authority to close.
12.20.050    Reservation of park area and structures.
12.20.060    Transfer of permits—Written consent required.
12.20.070    Appeal—Hearing—Council’s determination to be final.
12.20.080    Fees and deposits.
12.20.090    Insurance required—When.
12.20.100    Duty to leave closed or reserved areas.
12.20.110    Enforcement.
12.20.115    Consumption of alcohol unlawful.
12.20.120    Power boats prohibited on Laguna Lake.
12.20.130    Skateboarding, rollerblading, rollerskating in city parks.
12.20.140    Rules and regulations applicable to Santa Rosa Park skateboard park.

12.20.010 Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the Park Ordinance of the city. (Prior code § 4226)

12.20.020 Definitions.
The following words shall have the meaning indicated when used in this chapter:
A. “Amplified sound” means music, sound wave, vibration or speech projected or transmitted by electronic equipment, including amplifiers.
B. “Director” means the director of parks and recreation or other person authorized by him or her, pursuant to law, to act in his or her stead.
C. “Park” means any parkland, playground, beach, or recreational facility, including any parking lots, open space, creek, or any other area or structure accessory thereto maintained and operated by the city of San Luis Obispo.
D. “Permit” or “reservation” means written authorization for exclusive use of parks or buildings, or portions thereof, as provided for and defined by this chapter.
E. “Vehicle” means any device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn, excepting a device moved by human power. (Ord. 1309 § 2, 1996; prior code § 4226.1)

12.20.030 Compliance with regulations required.
It shall be unlawful to enter, be or remain in any park unless there is compliance at all times with all of the regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to such park and with all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. (Ord. 1309 § 3, 1996; prior code § 4226.2)

12.20.040 Rules and regulations applicable in city parks.
The following rules and regulations apply in all parks in the city, unless expressly stated otherwise elsewhere in this chapter.
A. Operations of Vehicles and Bicycles. 
    1. Roads for Public Use. The provisions of the California Vehicle Code are applicable in the city parks upon any way or place of whatever nature which is publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. All violations of the Vehicle Code shall be enforced and prosecuted in accordance with the provisions thereof.
    2. Surfaces Other than Roads for Public Use. No person shall drive or otherwise operate a vehicle in a city park, and no person shall ride a bicycle (as defined in the California Vehicle Code) in a city park, upon surfaces other than those maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel, except upon temporary parking areas as may be designated from time to time by the director, and further excepting vehicles in the service of the city.
B. Solicitation Prohibited. No person shall practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any occupation, business or profession in any city park or building, or sell or offer for sale any merchandise, article or anything whatsoever. This subsection shall not apply to any person acting pursuant to a contract with the city or under an authorization granted by the directors of parks and recreation.
C. Prohibition of Animals in Parks. No person shall cause, permit, or allow any animal owned or possessed by him or her or any animal in his or her custody or control to be present in the park except:
    1. Equine animals being led or ridden under reasonable control upon any bridle paths or trails provided that they are designated and identified for such purposes;
    2. Equine or other animals which are hitched or fastened at a place expressly designated for such purposes;
    3. Dogs or cats when led by a cord or chain not more than six feet long, or when confined within the interior of a vehicle;
    4. Dogs which have been specially trained and are being used by blind or disabled persons to aid and guide them in their movements;
    5. Small pets which are kept on the person of the possessor at all times;
    6. In connection with activities authorized in writing by the director;
    7. Animals in the park for grazing purposes pursuant to an agreement approved by the council. The parks and recreation director may prohibit animals in certain posted areas in city parks in the interest of public health, safety, comfort and welfare.
D. Amplified Sound in City Parks. 
    1. Purpose. The council enacts this legislation for the sole purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety and welfare of its citizenry. While recognizing that certain uses of sound amplifying equipment are protected by the constitutional rights of freedom of speech and assembly, the council nevertheless feels obligated to reasonably regulate the use of sound amplifying equipment in order to protect the correlative constitutional rights of the citizens of this community to privacy and freedom from the public nuisance of loud and unnecessary sound.
    2. Permit Required for Amplifiers. It is unlawful for any person to install, use and operate within a park a loudspeaker or any sound amplifying equipment for the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses and lectures, or of transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons in the park, or in the vicinity thereof, except when installed, used or operated in compliance with one of the following provisions:
        a. By authorized law enforcement, fire department or park and recreational personnel;
        b. Under a reservation or a permit issued by the director, and when operated in accordance with the terms of the reservation or permit.
    3. Power Source for Amplifiers. Amplifiers permitted in parks shall be operated only through a power source provided by the park department.
    4. Regulation of Amplified Volume. If, at any time, the police department determines that the sound produced by an amplifier in the park is unreasonably interfering with other persons using the park or with nearby residents in the comfortable and reasonable enjoyment of their premises, an officer shall request the person in charge of the assembly, or any other person appearing to be involved in the production of the sound, to immediately reduce the level thereof.
    If the sound is not reduced within five minutes to a level satisfactory to the officer, he or she shall immediately disconnect all amplifiers from the power source provided by the park department. If the sound is reduced to a level satisfactory to the officer, and he or she thereafter finds that the sound level appears to have again been increased, he or she shall then disconnect all amplifiers from the power source provided by the park department.
    5. The council shall by resolution adopt standards prescribing staff’s discretion in issuing permits for sound amplifiers, such standards as recommended by the city attorney.
E. Presence in Parks During Certain Hours Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to enter, remain, or stay in any public park between the hours of ten p.m. and five a.m. of the following day without approval from the director. (Ord. 1543 § 5, 2010; Ord. 1309 §§ 4 - 6, 1996; Ord. 1001 § 1, 1983; Ord. 976 § 1, 1983: prior code § 4226.3)

12.20.045 Authority to close.
Any section or part of a park may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise), and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director finds reasonably necessary. (Ord. 1001 § 2, 1983: prior code § 4226.12)

12.20.050 Reservation of park area and structures.
A. Reservation for Park and Recreation Department Activities. The director shall be responsible for scheduling and controlling the use of parks, or portions thereof, for the maximum benefit and participation by interested persons and groups, both public and private. Activities sponsored by the park and recreation department shall be given preference in the use of city parks.
B. Reservations by Permits. The following procedures shall be followed by persons desiring to reserve park areas for gatherings or assemblies.
    1. Applications for permits must be submitted in writing at the office of the city parks and recreation department, not less than five working days nor more than ninety calendar days in advance of the intended use.
    2. The director may impose such reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit as deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, including without limitations, conditions related to: time, place, frequency, duration, consumption of alcoholic beverages, maximum attendance, parking restrictions, use of amplified sound, and placement of permitted apparatus.
    3. The director may also require the applicant to provide additional water and sanitary facilities and refuse receptacles as reasonably believed to be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare in connection with the intended use.
    4. The director may require the applicant to provide a designated number of approved security personnel for the purposes set forth by the chief of police upon such application.
    5. The applicant shall agree to reimburse the city for any unusual cleanup and facility repair expenses incurred as result of the activity authorized by the permit.
C. Reservations by Formal Permits. The following procedures shall be followed by persons desiring to reserve park areas for gatherings or assemblies of fifty or more persons and by persons requested by the director to complete a request for formal permit under the provisions of subsection B of this section.
    1. Applications for formal permits must be submitted in writing upon forms available at the office of the city park and recreation department, not less than five working days nor more than ninety calendar days in advance of the intended use.
    2. The director may impose such reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the formal permit as he or she deems necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, including, without limitation, conditions related to time, place, frequency, duration, consumption of alcoholic beverages, maximum attendance, parking restrictions, and placement of permitted apparatus and equipment.
    3. The director may also require the applicant to provide additional water and sanitary facilities and refuse receptacles as he or she reasonably believes to be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare in connection with the intended use.
    4. The director may require the applicant to provide a designated number of approved security personnel for the purposes set forth by the chief of police upon such application.
    5. The applicant shall agree to reimburse the city for any unusual cleanup and facility repair expenses incurred as result of the activity authorized by the permit. (Ord. 1309 § 7, 1996; prior code § 4226.4)

12.20.060 Transfer of permits—Written consent required.
No permit or reservation for the use of the park, or any portion thereof, shall be transferable without a written consent of the director. (Ord. 1309 § 8, 1996; prior code § 4226.5)

12.20.070 Appeal—Hearing—Council’s determination to be final.
Any person aggrieved by an act or determination of the parks and recreation director or the chief of police in the exercise of the authority herein granted shall have the right to appeal to the council pursuant to the provisions set forth in Chapter 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 1309 § 9, 1996; prior code § 4226.6)

12.20.080 Fees and deposits.
Fees or deposits required in connection with the issuance of a reservation or permit shall be paid at the time of such issuance. The fees or deposits may include, without limitation, such amounts as may be determined by the director or the chief of police to be reasonably necessary as security for repair of damage to park property, for cost of cleanup, and for extra personnel to regulate conduct and traffic. (Prior code § 4226.7)

12.20.090 Insurance required—When.
Any person or group reserving a city park facility or imposing admission charges for activities held within city parks shall provide evidence of current insurance holding the city harmless from any liability for injury to persons or property resulting from the activity. The minimum amount of such insurance shall be determined by the city’s risk manager. (Ord. 1309 § 10, 1996; prior code § 4226.8)

12.20.100 Duty to leave closed or reserved areas.
It shall be the duty of all persons to leave a park area for which a valid reservation or permit has been issued to any other person or group, or which has been closed by the director under Section 12.20.045 of this chapter, whenever directed to do so by the permittee or by authorized police or park personnel. (Ord. 1042 § 2, 1985: prior code § 4226.9)

12.20.110 Enforcement.
A. The police department shall have the primary responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
B. In addition, all personnel in the parks and recreation department and all public works department personnel in the parks and building maintenance divisions shall have the duty to enforce the provisions of Sections 12.20.040 and 12.20.050.
C. Violations under this chapter shall be designated as infractions. (Ord. 1410 § 2, 2002: Ord. 1309 § 11, 1996; prior code § 4226.10)

12.20.115 Consumption of alcohol unlawful.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in any city park or park area except:
    1. During an activity conducted pursuant to an approved park permit as specified in Section 12.20.050;
    2. During an authorized special event; provided, that consumption of alcohol is an approved condition for the special event.
B. Consumption of alcoholic beverages as described above shall be limited to the areas, times and places specified in the park reservation/permit or in the approved conditions for the special event. (Ord. 1309 § 12, 1996; Ord. 1270 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1066 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1042 § 2, 1985)

12.20.120 Power boats prohibited on Laguna Lake.
Any boat containing any source of power other than sails or oars, or more than one electric motor, is prohibited from operating on the lake located in the southwesterly portion of the city, adjacent to Madonna Road, Los Osos Valley Road, and Foothill Boulevard, and known as Laguna Lake, and the maximum speed of boats permitted to operate on the lake shall be five miles per hour. This section shall not apply to any boats authorized by the council for patrol or maintenance purposes. (Ord. 1309 § 13, 1996; prior code § 4281)

12.20.130 Skateboarding, rollerblading, rollerskating in city parks.
A. Use of skateboards, rollerblades, or roller skates on tennis courts, playgrounds, picnic/barbecue areas, entryways, patios to park facilities, and parking lots is prohibited except for activities authorized or operated by the parks and recreation department.
B. No person shall use, operate or strike a skateboard, rollerblades or roller skates against, onto or upon the side of buildings, fences, steps, benches, tables, play equipment, curbs, rails, ramps or similar objects or structures in a city park.
C. No person shall apply any foreign substance, including wax, oil, or other similar material, either as a solid or liquid, onto any curb, stair, railing, ramp, sidewalk, bench or other abutment for the purpose of aiding any stunt, turn or other acrobatic action while riding a skateboard, rollerblades or roller skates. Such application is prohibited from any city park without prior written approval of the parks and recreational director. (Ord. 1309 § 14, 1996)

12.20.140 Rules and regulations applicable to Santa Rosa Park skateboard park.
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to engage in, or for any adult responsible for the supervision of a minor child to permit the minor child to engage in, any activity prohibited under this section.
B. The Santa Rosa Park skateboard park is an unsupervised facility. Riding or otherwise using a skateboard or any other permitted coasting device in the skateboard park, or entering into the skateboard park for the purpose of engaging in such activity, without a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads is prohibited.
C. Coasting devices permitted in the skateboard park are limited to skateboards, inline skates and scooters. All other uses and devices are prohibited.
D. Use of motorized vehicles within the skate park is prohibited.
E. Use or occupation of the skate park before seven a.m. or after dark is prohibited.
F. Use of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products at the skate park is prohibited.
G. Additional ramps, jumps, obstacles or any other equipment may not be brought into the skate park.
H. The use of coasting devices, including skateboards and inline skates, is considered hazardous recreational activities that create a substantial risk of serious injury or death to participants, those assisting participants, and spectators of such activities. All users of the skate park voluntarily assume the risk of serious injury or death in use of the skate park facility. (Ord. 1530 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 12.22 OPEN SPACE REGULATIONS

Sections:
12.22.010    Title.
12.22.020    Purpose of open space lands.
12.22.030    Classification of open space lands.
12.22.040    Definitions.
12.22.050    Rules and regulations applicable in city open space lands.
12.22.060    Enforcement.
12.22.070    Compliance with regulations required.

12.22.010 Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the open space ordinance of the city of San Luis Obispo. (Ord. 1332 § 1 (part), 1998)

12.22.020 Purpose of open space lands.
A. The city of San Luis Obispo has developed a system of open space lands within and surrounding the community which is an important part of the community’s setting, providing a number of opportunities for enjoyment of the natural environment by our citizens. Consistent with the open space element of the city’s general plan, open space lands have been acquired (both in fee and through easements) for specific purposes, such as protection of scenic character, wildlife habitat values, passive recreation and agriculture. The open space element principles state that uses on open space lands owned or managed by the city:
    1. Should preserve the natural amenities of the open space land;
    2. May not include uses which would degrade or significantly impact resource preservation on-site or on an adjacent parcel;
    3. May consist of the following uses provided allowed uses are compatible with the purpose of the open space land:
        a. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, and/or wildlife.
        b. Passive recreation, including open areas, trails, viewing stations, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, fishing, photography, painting, sketching and other similar day recreation use.
        c. Interpretation and scientific study of the natural environment.
        d. Grazing, farming, growing of nursery stock, gardening, and harvesting crops.
        e. Landscape or wildlife restoration and enhancement programs where the natural landscape has been altered or degraded. Such programs may include restrictions on public access.
B. This chapter has been duly established by the city council of the city of San Luis Obispo in keeping with the principles stated above.
C. Lands acquired or otherwise controlled by the city for open space purposes are not considered to be parks (as “parks” are defined in Chapter 12.20 of the Municipal Code) and shall not be construed to be appropriate for, or used for, structured recreation, such as team sports, large gatherings or other intensive uses of the property or site.
D. These regulations shall apply to lands owned in fee or otherwise controlled by the city of San Luis Obispo, both within and outside of the city limits. (Ord. 1332 § 1 (part), 1998)

12.22.030 Classification of open space lands.
The city council shall have the authority to classify open space lands as (1) open space or (2) ecological area. “Open space” shall be utilized primarily for scenic and wildlife habitat purposes and for passive recreation. “Ecological areas” shall be primarily utilized for their wildlife habitat or other ecological values and may be subject to restrictions upon, or prohibition of, public access. One or more contiguous open space lands may also be combined as a natural reserve, reflecting differing types of acquisition that may be involved in assembling such contiguous parcels. (Ord. 1332 § 1 (part), 1998)

12.22.040 Definitions.
The following terms are defined as follows for purposes of this chapter:
A. “Amplified sound” means music, sound wave, vibration or speech projected or transmitted by electronic equipment, including amplifiers.
B. “Director” means the director of parks and recreation or other person authorized by him or her, pursuant to law, to act in his or her stead.
C. “Climbing area” means an area within a city open space land suitable for, and designated for, climbing with the use of ropes, climbing bolts, and other specialized equipment.
D. “Open space lands” means any lands owned by the city designated as either “open space” or “ecological area,” including accessories thereto maintained and operated by the city of San Luis Obispo.
E. “Permit” means written authorization for specific uses of open space lands, or portions thereof, as provided for and defined in this chapter.
F. “Vehicle” means any device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn, excepting a device moved by human power.
G. “Trail” means an improved passage for persons, animals, or vehicles, maintained in a manner to be reasonably safe for such passage for such persons, animals or vehicles, as may be appropriate.
H. “Natural reserve” means an area of one or more open space lands, which may be managed as a unit by the city or in conjunction with other agencies. (Ord. 1332 § 1 (part), 1998; prior code § 4226.1)

12.22.050 Rules and regulations applicable in city open space lands.
The following rules and regulations apply in all open space lands within or under the control of the city of San Luis Obispo, unless expressly stated otherwise elsewhere in this chapter.
A. Resources Protected. All natural and cultural resources (including, but not limited to, all naturally occurring plants and animals, prehistoric and historic artifacts, structures, and remains of structures) within city open space lands are protected, and no person shall collect, gather, or otherwise disturb any natural or cultural resources found therein, except for pruning or removal of materials in conjunction with city-sponsored activities, such as trail construction or maintenance or for collection of specimens for research or educational purposes as permitted in advance by the city.
B. Presence in Open Space Lands Restricted to Certain Hours—No Overnight Usage. Open space lands where public access is permitted shall be open to the public from dawn to dusk. It shall be unlawful to enter or remain within such lands between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise of the following day without approval from the director.
C. Authority to Close. Any section or part of the city’s open space lands may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise), and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director finds reasonably necessary.
D. Operation of Vehicles and Bicycles. 
    1. No person shall drive or otherwise operate a vehicle on city open space lands or upon surfaces other than those maintained for purposes of vehicular travel, except upon temporary parking areas as may be designated from time to time by the director. Vehicles in the service of the city while upon their official duties are exempt. The provisions of the California Vehicle Code are applicable in the city open space lands which is publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. All violations of the Vehicle Code shall be enforced and prosecuted in accordance with the provisions thereof.
    2. Use of bicycles on city open space lands is restricted to areas and trails designated for bicycle use.
E. Solicitation Prohibited. No person shall practice, carry on, conduct, or solicit for any occupation, business, or profession in any city open space land, or sell or offer for sale any merchandise, article, or anything whatsoever. This subsection shall not apply to any person acting pursuant to a contract with the city or under an authorization granted by the director.
F. Restrictions Upon Animals in Open Space Lands. 
    1. No person shall cause, permit, or allow any animal owned or possessed by him or her or any animal in his or her custody or control to be present in open space lands except:
        a. Equine animals being led or ridden under reasonable control upon any bridle paths or trails; provided, that they are designated and identified for such purposes;
        b. Equine or other animals which are hitched or fastened at a place expressly designated for such purpose;
        c. Dogs or cats when led by a cord or chain not more than six feet long;
        d. Dogs which have been specially trained and are being used by blind or disabled persons to aid and guide them in their movements;
        e. Small pets which are kept on the person of the possessor at all times;
        f. In connection with activities authorized in writing by the director;
        g. Animals in the open space for grazing purposes pursuant to an agreement approved by the city council.
    2. The director may prohibit animals in certain posted areas in city open space lands in the interest of public health, safety, comfort, and welfare, or for purposes of habitat protection.
G. Duty to Care for and Control Animals. It shall be the mandatory duty of all persons owning, possessing, in control of, or otherwise responsible for a dog, a cat, or an equine animal in city open space lands to exercise proper care and control of such animal so as not to molest or menace any other person, domestic animal, wildlife, or livestock in or upon city open space lands.
H. Sound Amplifiers Prohibited. 
    1. The council enacts this legislation for the sole purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety, and welfare of its citizenry, and for the proper stewardship of city open space lands. While recognizing that certain uses of sound amplifying equipment are protected by the constitutional rights of freedom of speech and assembly, the council nevertheless feels obligated to reasonably regulate the use of sound amplifying equipment in order to protect the correlative constitutional rights of the citizens of this community to privacy and freedom from the public nuisance of loud and unnecessary sound.
    2. It is unlawful for any person to install, use, and operate within city open space lands a loudspeaker or any sound amplifying equipment for the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, and lectures, or of transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons in city open space lands, except by authorized law enforcement, fire department, or park and recreational personnel for public safety or other informational purposes.
I. Possession or Consumption of Alcohol Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in city open space lands.
J. Non-Electric Power Boats Prohibited on Laguna Lake. Any boat containing any source of power other than sails or oars, or more than one electric motor, is prohibited from operating on the lake located in the southwesterly portion of the city, adjacent to Madonna Road, Los Osos Valley Road, and Foothill Boulevard, known as Laguna Lake. This section shall not apply to any boats authorized by the council for patrol or maintenance purposes.
K. Skating and Use of Skating Equipment Prohibited in City Open Space Lands. Use of skateboards, rollerblades, or rollerskates in city open space lands is prohibited.
L. Litter and Trash. Litter shall be disposed of properly. Disposal of trash or litter within or upon city open space lands is prohibited.
M. Weapons, Paintballs, Fireworks and Fires Prohibited. Possession or discharge of weapons, firearms, paintballs, fireworks, or the building of fires is prohibited on city open space lands.
N. Climbing Only in Designated Areas and Routes—Waiver Required—Installation of New Bolts Prohibited without Authorization—Advisory Committee. 
    1. Rock-climbing is permitted only within specific designated areas on city open space lands. Said areas shall be identified by the director, who may also make reasonable rules concerning such use, including but not limited to requirements for waivers of liability as a condition of permission for such use.
    2. No person shall set or install climbing bolts in any designated climbing area without the written approval of the director.
    3. The director shall appoint a committee of persons interested in climbing to advise him or her on matters affecting designated climbing areas, including but not limited to reviewing requests for new climbing routes, inspections of climbing areas, climbing bolts installed therein, or other matters pertaining to the operation and maintenance of the area.
O. Parasailing Permitted Only in Designated Areas and with Authorization—New Areas Prohibited without Authorization—Advisory Committee. 
    1. Parasailing is permitted only within specific designated areas on city open space lands. Said areas shall be identified by the director, who may also make reasonable rules concerning such use, including but not limited to requirements for waivers of liability, proof of insurance, and membership in the United States Hang Gliding Association as a condition of permission for such use.
    2. Participants in parasailing events must wear appropriate head protection, carry a reserve chute, and must pass an on-site ground skills test.
    3. The director shall appoint a committee of persons interested in climbing to advise him or her on matters affecting parasailing or other matters pertaining to the operation and maintenance of the area.
P. Travel Generally Restricted to Designated Trails—No Trail Construction without Authorization. Travel in city open space lands is generally restricted to trails designated for such travel, and off-trail travel is prohibited in places where it is unsafe to so travel, or where such travel can result in erosion problems or resource damage. Furthermore, construction of new trails is prohibited except where authorized by the director as part of a trail improvement program for a given open space land. However, city open space lands are open to off-trail travel in areas where it is safe to do so and such travel is not damaging to the environment. (Ord. 1332 § 1 (part), 1998)

12.22.060 Enforcement.
The parks and recreation department, through its park rangers, shall have the primary responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Park rangers and city police officers shall have the authority to cite individuals found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. In addition, other city staff involved in the maintenance and operation of city open space lands shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Violations under this chapter shall be designated as infractions. (Ord. 1410 § 3, 2002: Ord. 1332 § 1 (part), 1998)

12.22.070 Compliance with regulations required.
It shall be unlawful to enter or remain in any open space unless there is compliance at all times with all of the regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to such lands and all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 1332 § 1 (part), 1998)

Chapter 12.23 CREEKS, TRIBUTARIES AND RIPARIAN CORRIDOR REGULATIONS

Sections:
12.23.010    Purpose and scope.
12.23.020    Regulated areas.
12.23.030    Prohibited activities and conditions.
12.23.040    Inspection and enforcement.
12.23.050    Appeals.
12.23.060    No liability upon the city.

12.23.010 Purpose and scope.
A. This chapter shall govern all regulated areas, as defined herein, within the jurisdictional limits of the city of San Luis Obispo, whether located on public or private property.
B. The public health, safety, and welfare, as well as the city’s ability to comply with its statutory, regulatory and permitting obligations with respect to the protection of its creeks, tributaries, riparian corridors and associated natural resources, require that the city adopt and enforce comprehensive regulations specifically prohibiting deleterious activities within these areas, whether located on public or private property.
C. The purpose of this chapter is to establish clear and direct requirements for the inspection and maintenance of the areas governed by this chapter and to authorize city enforcement of violations of the provisions of this chapter by individuals engaging in prohibited activity and/or property owners permitting prohibited activities or conditions to occur or be maintained on their properties. (Ord. 1541 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.23.020 Regulated areas.
Regulated areas subject to the requirements and prohibitions of this chapter include the following areas within the city limits:
A. Creeks including San Luis Obispo Creek and its tributaries and any other “Water of the United States,” as defined in 40 CFR 122.2, including all surface watercourses and waterbodies, natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth, or such sections or connections of such waters that have been lined with concrete, covered or channelized in the past, that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry surface water at and during all times and seasons.
B. Riparian areas, which include the area between a stream or other body of water and the adjacent upland identified by soil characteristics and distinctive vegetation and wetlands and those portions of floodplains and valley bottoms that support riparian vegetation (herbaceous plants, shrubs, and trees which are naturally associated with stream side environments, and with roots and branches extending in or over a creek channel).
C. Other portions of city-owned properties adjacent to or including riparian areas as defined in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 1541 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.23.030 Prohibited activities and conditions.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to engage in or maintain, or for any property owner to allow or maintain, any of the following activities or conditions in regulated areas:
A. Collecting, gathering, or disturbance of any natural or cultural resources, except for pruning, removal of materials or any other activities authorized under appropriate permits from state and/or federal agencies or in conjunction with permitted city-sponsored activities.
B. Staying or camping overnight.
C. Entering into or remaining within regulated areas that are open to the public between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise of the following day without approval from the city manager or his or her designee.
D. Entering into or remaining within property to which public access is prohibited or restricted.
E. Driving or otherwise operating a vehicle, except as authorized in conjunction with otherwise permitted activity.
F. Using bicycles in regulated areas not explicitly labeled as areas and/or trails designated for bicycle use.
G. Possessing or consuming alcoholic beverages.
H. Disposing of, depositing, throwing, keeping or accumulating trash, litter, rubbish, rubble, garbage, debris or other solid waste, dirt, green waste or animal waste.
I. Traveling outside of designated paths.
J. Posting any sign on a tree, tree-stake or guard, or fastening any wire, cable or rope to any tree, tree-stake or guard unless otherwise authorized by the city.
K. Urinating or defecating.
L. Making any excavation or unauthorized encroachment.
M. Possessing or discharging of weapons, firearms, paintballs, fireworks, or building fires.
N. Any act in a regulated area constituting a violation of any provision of CESA, ESA, the California Public Resources Code, or any regulation of the California Department of Fish and Game, or of any permit or approval issued by any federal, state or local agency having jurisdiction over the regulated area shall also be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1541 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.23.040 Inspection and enforcement.
A. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the director of parks and recreation has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the city manager or his or her designee may enter such premises during normal business hours to inspect the same, take water samples and/or verify that compliance with this chapter is occurring. In the event that the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction or other state or federal agency staff with jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
B. Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and may be enforced by the filing of a criminal action by the city attorney or the issuance of an administrative citation in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.24 by city staff authorized by the city manager to issue citations. (Ord. 1541 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.23.050 Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an act or determination of the staff in exercising the administrative authority herein granted shall have the right to appeal to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.20. (Ord. 1541 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.23.060 No liability upon the city.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner or occupant of any private property from the duty to keep property in safe condition. (Ord. 1541 § 1 (part), 2010)

Chapter 12.24 TREE REGULATIONS

Sections:
12.24.010    Purpose and intent.
12.24.020    Tree committee.
12.24.030    Definitions.
12.24.040    Street trees—Master lists.
12.24.050    Tree planting plans.
12.24.060    Street tree planting and maintenance standards.
12.24.070    Street tree planting requirements.
12.24.080    Street tree planting procedures.
12.24.090    Tree removal.
12.24.100    Control of trees and shrubs for protection of public safety.
12.24.110    Street tree maintenance.
12.24.120    Tree maintenance by public utilities.
12.24.130    Tree service contractors.
12.24.140    Responsibility for repairing tree damage to curbs, gutters and sidewalks.
12.24.150    Protection of trees.
12.24.160    Heritage trees.
12.24.170    Enforcement.
12.24.180    Appeals.
12.24.190    No liability upon the city.

12.24.010 Purpose and intent.
A. The public interest and welfare require that the city establish, adopt and maintain a comprehensive program for installing, maintaining and preserving trees within the city.
B. This chapter establishes policies, regulations and specifications necessary to govern installation, maintenance, removal and preservation of trees to beautify the city, to purify the air, to provide shade and wind protection, add environmental and economic value and to preserve trees with historic or unusual value.
C. It is the policy of the city to line its streets with trees and to conduct a consistent and effective program for maintaining and preserving these trees. This policy provides for planting trees in all areas of the city and for selecting appropriate species to achieve the city’s goals. It is also the policy of the city to protect and preserve all desirable trees, wherever they are located. It shall be the duty of the director to enforce, implement and carry out this policy and the provisions of this chapter.
D. It is the policy of the city to encourage new tree planting on public and private property and to cultivate a flourishing urban forest with an emphasis on native and drought tolerant species.
E. Trees are essential to the community’s well-being and the care and planting of all trees will be done in a manner consistent with city policies and standards. (Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.020 Tree committee.
A. The tree committee shall act as an advisory body to the director and the city council on all matters related to trees in San Luis Obispo.
B. The tree committee membership shall be governed by tree committee bylaws, as approved by the council. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 2013: Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context, shall have the following meanings:
“City arborist” means the person employed by the city as the city arborist responsible for making recommendations in the care, planting, pruning, trimming and removal of all trees in the city.
“Development” means any subdivision or other action requiring a building permit or any discretionary permit or approval by the city.
“Diameter” means the circumference measured at DSH (diameter shoulder height) or four feet, six inches as per ISA standards.
“Director” means the public works director or his or her designated representative.
“Discretionary development permit” means a permit issued for any project which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation by a public official to approve or disapprove an activity, as distinguished from merely determining whether there has been compliance with applicable laws or regulations.
“Downtown district” means the area between Palm and Pacific and Santa Rosa and Nipomo, and extending south between Higuera and Marsh to where Higuera and Marsh meet, including both sides of each street.
“Establish” means to plant and maintain trees during the first years of their life to ensure their survival.
“Heritage tree” means any tree existing within the city limits, which has been so designated by resolution of the city council. Heritage trees shall be trees with notable historic interest or trees of an unusual species or size.
“ISA” means International Society of Arboriculture.
“Maintain” or “maintenance” means the entire care of trees as well as the preparation of ground and fertilizing, mulching, trimming and watering.
“Major streets” means those streets identified in the city’s current engineering standard, “Street Trees—Major Streets.”
“Master list” means those trees identified in the city’s engineering standard, “Street Trees—Master List.”
“Ministerial development permit” means a construction or development permit required to be issued by the city upon confirmation that the project application meets minimum statutory or code requirements and other adopted, uniform standards, the review of which requires little or no personal judgment by the reviewing public official as to the wisdom or manner of carrying out the project, such as the review and issuance of most building permits. For purposes of this chapter, the discretionary act of issuance of a tree removal permit does not redefine an otherwise ministerial development permit into a discretionary development permit.
“Native” means the following listed trees:
    1. Quercus agrifolia (coast live oak);
    2. Umbellularia californica (California laurel);
    3. Platanus racemosa (California sycamore);
    4. Juglans californica (Southern California black walnut);
    5. Salix lasiolepis (willow);
    6. Populus trichocarpa (black cottonwood);
    7. Heteromeles arbutifolia (California holly toyon);
    8. Acer macrophyllum (big leaf maple);
    9. Acer negundo (box elder);
    10. Quercus lobata (valley or white oak).
“Planting” means new planting and replacement planting.
“Public traffic” means all motorized vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, and personal mobility devices in and along the public right-of-way.
“Public utility” means any company doing business as a public utility under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the state and any duly constituted public agency authorized to provide and providing utility service.
Right-of-Way for Street Trees. See diagram.
[IMAGE: <12.24.030.png>]
“Site plan” means a map or diagram which will include all buildings, driveways, streets, sidewalks, utilities, trees by size and species and any proposed changes, additions or removals.
“Street tree” means a tree accepted by resolution of the city council and growing adjacent to dedicated roadways and within the city’s right-of-way or within a street tree easement accepted by the city.
“Tree” means a woody, perennial plant with one main stem or trunk which develops many branches; most trees are over ten feet tall. This definition shall include any tree planted by or required to be planted by the city which may attain the stated size at maturity. (Ord. 1664 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.040 Street trees—Master lists.
The tree committee, with the assistance of the public works and community development departments, has developed and will maintain a street tree master list and a street tree major streets list which shall be adopted by resolution of the city council and shall be on file in the public works department, engineering standards. These documents shall specify the species of trees suitable and desirable for planting in certain areas in order to establish a diverse urban forest. (Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.050 Tree planting plans.
A. The city arborist designates specific tree planting plans for certain neighborhoods, developments or blocks, which specify the species and locations for trees to be planted in those neighborhoods or blocks. Plans are subject to the approval of the tree committee, the architectural review commission or the city council. The city arborist must approve any deviations from these tree planting plans.
B. Street tree planting for areas without specific tree planting plans must be selected from the street tree master list. (Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.060 Street tree planting and maintenance standards.
The public works and community development departments, with the approval of the tree committee, shall develop and implement policies and standards for street tree planting and maintenance, which shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.070 Street tree planting requirements.
A. Planting street trees may be required as a condition of a use permit, variance or other city entitlement.
B. Planting street trees shall be required as a condition of approval for all subdivisions and related building permits. The policies and standards for street tree planting and maintenance shall be followed in all instances. (Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.080 Street tree planting procedures.
A. After planting, all street trees must be inspected and approved by the city arborist or his or her designee.
B. Required street trees must be planted after completion of each adjacent building and before an occupancy release is issued for the adjacent building.
C. Property owners shall be required to establish and maintain required street trees adjacent to their property, except as provided elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.090 Tree removal.
A. Policy. The city values trees as an important part of the natural, urban and economic environment and efforts shall be made to protect, preserve, and create the conditions that will promote the preservation of trees. When reviewing requests for tree removal permits, the city shall discourage removing healthy trees that present no threat to people or property.
B. Permits for Removal. Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, no person shall cut down, remove or destroy any tree, or cause the cutting down, removal or destruction of any tree, unless that person has obtained a tree removal permit issued by the approving authority.
C. Permit Not Required. Removing a tree in R-1 and R-2 zones does not require a permit if all of the following conditions exist:
    1. The tree is a designated native species and the trunk is less than ten inches in diameter as measured by diameter standard height (DSH, four feet, six inches per International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) standards) (see Section 12.24.030, Definitions; native trees), or when the tree is nonnative and the trunk is less than twenty inches DSH; and
    2. The tree is not located within a creek setback area (see Section 17.70.030); and
    3. The tree is not a designated street tree, and is not located within ten feet of the back of the sidewalk; and
    4. Planting or retention of the tree was not a condition of development; or
    5. The tree is a palm and the trunk is less than twelve inches DSH.
D. Application Requirements for a Tree Removal Permit. 
    1. An application for a tree removal permit on a site where no discretionary or ministerial development permit is requested shall include:
        a. A site plan showing the location, species and size of any tree proposed for removal; and
        b. A photo log that clearly shows the damage a tree is causing or the condition for which removal is requested; and
        c. A diagram or site photograph showing each tree identified to be removed with each tree uniquely identified by number; and
        d. All information to support the reason for removal; and
        e. A replanting plan showing the size, location and species of trees identified to be planted to compensate for proposed removal in compliance with subsection J of this section; and
        f. Any other information deemed necessary by the director of public works or the director of community development to evaluate the proposed removal in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection E of this section.
    2. An application for tree removal on a site where a discretionary or ministerial development permit is requested shall include the following information, in addition to application materials identified in subsection (D)(1) of this section:
        a. An arborist report that identifies and discusses each tree within the development footprint (including, but not limited to, structural development, grading, staging areas, ground cover removal, changes in drainage patterns, and associated off-site improvements) including those trees proposed for removal and those trees that will remain. An arborist report may not be required for tree removal(s) proposed on a single-family residential site for which only a ministerial development permit for construction related to a single-family residence is requested;
        b. A site plan that includes accurate drip line delineation and cross sections of construction work impacting both trees proposed for removal and trees planned to remain;
        c. Any other information deemed necessary by the director of public works or the director of community development to evaluate the proposed removal in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection G of this section.
        d. The tree removal application materials shall be provided at the same time and in addition to the development permit application but may reference the development permit application to provide the information required by this section.
    3. As a condition of authorizing tree removal(s), the approving authority may require the development and implementation of a site-specific tree protection plan that shall be submitted to the city arborist for review and approval prior to issuance of a tree removal permit.
E. Criteria and Process for Non-Construction Related Tree Removal Application Determinations Related to Tree Health or Hazard Mitigation or Property Owner Convenience (Refer to Subsection G of This Section for Criteria for Construction Tree Removal Determinations). 
    1. The city arborist may authorize a tree removal upon receipt of a removal application pursuant to subsection D of this section and issue a tree removal permit upon determination of any of the following circumstances:
        a. The tree is an imminent hazard to life or property, and removing it is the only feasible way to eliminate the hazard (see subsection (I)(2) of this section for director approval of immediate hazard abatement without a formal application or noticing; removals pursuant to this subsection (E)(1)(a) and subsection (I)(2) of this section are not appealable);
        b. The tree is dead or dying or diseased or damaged beyond reclamation;
        c. The tree’s roots are causing severe damage to public or private property, and removing the tree is the only feasible way to eliminate the damage;
        d. The tree is affected by structural defects and/or deficiencies that will limit lifespan;
        e. The tree is densely clustered amongst other trees and the requested tree removal promotes good arboricultural practice;
        f. The tree is obstructing vision, access, or mobility of public traffic (see Section 12.24.030, Definitions; public traffic). Trees requested for removal due to sidewalk infrastructure damage shall have lower preservation priority when the tree species is known to have invasive root structures that increase the likelihood that damage will recur if the tree is not approved for removal and where trees requested for removal are adjacent to sidewalks with a high volume of pedestrian use and/or with large vertical or slope displacements;
        g. The requested tree removal is necessary to alleviate a demonstrated and ongoing maintenance burden for the property owner exceeding routine tree maintenance.
    2. The city arborist will either approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application for tree health or hazard mitigation based on findings regarding the criteria set forth in subsection (E)(1) of this section. The city arborist’s determination under this section is appealable to the tree committee pursuant to Section 12.24.180. The tree committee’s decision also shall be based on findings regarding the criteria set forth in subsection (E)(1) of this section.
    3. Tree removal requests based on property owner convenience shall be subject to tree committee review in accordance with the process set forth in subsection (F)(2) of this section, the relevant additional application requirements set forth in subsection (D)(2) of this section, and the criteria set forth in subsection G of this section.
    4. All other tree removals not specified in this section on any site for which a ministerial development permit is sought shall be subject to tree committee or other discretionary review related to the discretionary development permit requested and approval in accordance with the additional application requirements set forth in subsection (D)(2) of this section, process set forth in subsection F of this section, and criteria set forth in subsection G of this section.
F. Process for Tree Removals Related to Ministerial or Discretionary Property Development Permits (Including Construction for Disabled Access). 
    1. For tree removal requests related to ministerial development permits for the construction of single-family residences or accessory structures on R-1 or R-2 lots, or for improvements necessary to accommodate access for a disabled resident of the property (“minor ministerial development permits”), the city arborist shall review the application, investigate the site, examine the tree or trees in question, review the compensatory planting plan, and either approve, conditionally approve (with additional compensatory planting requirements or tree protection measures), or deny the tree removal request(s), based on the criteria set forth in subsection G of this section, subject to appeal as set forth in Section 12.24.180.
    2. For all tree removal requests related to ministerial development permits, other than as specified in subsection (F)(1) of this section, the tree committee shall review and make a recommendation on the tree removal application to the community development director based on the criteria in subsections G and J of this section. The director shall consider the recommendation of the tree committee, as well as the consistency of the tree removal application with other city development policies and standards applicable to the site, and shall either approve, conditionally approve or deny the tree removal request, subject to appeal as set forth in Section 12.24.180.
    3. For any tree removal request related to any discretionary development permit application subject to director action/director hearing/minor and moderate development review/minor use permit/minor subdivision processes, city arborist shall review the tree removal application and make a recommendation on the tree removal application to the authorized approving authority based on the criteria set forth in subsections G and J of this section. The authorized approving authority shall consider the arborist’s recommendation in addition to the complete development application’s compliance with other applicable city development policies, codes and standards and shall either approve, conditionally approve or deny the tree removal as a part of the final discretionary approval, subject to otherwise applicable appeal processes for the development entitlement.
    4. For any tree removal request related to any discretionary development permit application subject to major development review/tentative tract map/conditional use permit processes, the tree committee shall review and make a recommendation on the tree removal application to the authorized approving authority based on the criteria set forth in subsections G and J of this section. The authorized approving authority shall consider the tree committee’s recommendation in addition to the complete development application’s compliance with other applicable city development policies, codes and standards and shall either approve, conditionally approve or deny the tree removal as a part of the final discretionary approval, subject to otherwise applicable appeal processes for the development entitlement.
    5. During property development or construction, any tree that is requested to be removed that was not identified and approved for removal by the authorized approving authority shall return to the authorized approving authority for approval prior to removal.
    6. For tree removal requests related to a ministerial development permit, under subsection (F)(1) or (F)(2) of this section, where the approving authority for the development permit is the chief building official, the ministerial development permit application shall not be deemed complete and the chief building official shall not issue any construction permit unless any necessary tree removal permit has been approved and the time for appeal has expired.
G. Criteria for Construction Related Tree Removal Recommendation. Recommendations and determinations of the city arborist and the tree committee regarding any tree removal requests pursuant to subsection F of this section shall be based upon the criteria in this section. Tree removal recommendations shall be based on the following criteria:
    1. Size of Tree. The scale of the tree shall be considered, as well as the size of the tree’s canopy. Larger, more visually prominent trees may have a higher preservation priority than smaller, less visually prominent trees;
    2. Location of Tree on Private Property. The location of the tree on private property shall be considered. Trees located in a private rear yard, which are not highly visible from the public right-of-way, may have a lower preservation priority than trees with a high visual impact to the neighborhood;
    3. Species of Tree. Native trees shall have a higher preservation priority than non-native trees;
    4. Forestry Best Practice. The number of healthy trees that a given parcel of land will support shall be considered, and whether removal would enhance the health or survival of remaining trees. Applications that increase biodiversity of native trees and tree age distribution within a given area are preferred;
    5. Public Right-of-Way Obstruction or Displacement. Street trees requested for removal due to obstruction of vision, access, mobility of public traffic or sidewalk infrastructure repair or replacement shall have a lower preservation priority when the tree species is known to have invasive root structure or other characteristics that increase the likelihood that damage is likely to reoccur if not authorized for removal. Trees adjacent to sidewalks with a high volume of pedestrian use with large vertical or slope displacements may have a lower preservation priority;
    6. Compliance with Subsection J of This Section Regarding Compensatory Plantings. The approving authority may consider an application proposal to provide compensatory plantings in excess of required minimums in evaluating this criterion;
    7. Heritage Trees. A tree which has been designated a heritage tree is prohibited from removal unless the city arborist authorizes a tree removal upon finding that a tree removal would be related to tree health or hazard mitigation as outlined in subsection (E)(1) of this section. Heritage trees have the highest preservation priority.
H. Tree Removal by the City. 
    1. Tree removal requests for any city project must follow the same procedures as any property owner.
    2. After receiving approval to remove a tree as part of a capital improvement project, the city shall replace the tree as soon as feasible during the project at a ratio determined by the public works director.
I. Notification of Tree Removal. 
    1. The city shall post a sign notifying the public of the date and description of a proposed tree removal. This sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the property on which the tree removal is requested, visible from a public right-of-way, for a period not less than five days before either staff consideration of a tree removal permit or the approval of a ministerial or discretionary development permit.
    2. The public works director may waive application and notification requirements for a tree removal and immediately permit removal when the director determines that a tree’s condition threatens public health, safety or welfare such that an application and notice are not feasible. The owner of the property on which such a removal is requested shall produce sufficient proof to the director’s satisfaction that a notice and an application are not feasible. Removals authorized under this section are not appealable.
J. Compensatory Tree Planting. Tree removals authorized under subsection E or F of this section shall be compensated by planting a minimum of one new tree for each tree authorized to be removed when planted on the same property (on site) or two new trees for each tree authorized to be removed when planted on a different property or within the public right-of-way (off site).
In approving an application for tree removal, the authorized approving authority shall require compensatory plantings of a size consistent with city engineering standards as set forth in the table below:
+----------------+-------------------------+
| Container Size | Trunk Diameter (inches) |
+----------------+-------------------------+
| 15-gallon      | 0.75" to 1.5"           |
+----------------+-------------------------+
| 24-inch box    | 1.5" to 2.5"            |
+----------------+-------------------------+
| 36-inch box    | 2.5" to 3.5"            |
+----------------+-------------------------+
| 48-inch box    | 3.5" to 4.5"            |
+----------------+-------------------------+
The authorized approving authority may require subsequent compensatory tree plantings in the event that the original replacement plantings fail to establish and/or may require a bond ensuring that replacement trees shall be planted and maintained.
K. Expiration of Appeals. Decisions on tree removal by authorized approving authority shall be subject to appeal according to the appeal provisions of this code, and no removal or related development permit shall be issued until the appeal period has lapsed.
L. City Street and Sidewalk Maintenance Program. 
    1. The city has a program whereby staff evaluates and repairs sidewalks and streets on a predetermined schedule. When the city determines a street tree must be removed to repair the sidewalk, the city will pay all costs to repair sidewalk, curb, and gutter, remove the tree and plant a new tree.
    2. If a property owner wishes to remove a street tree and repair hardscape damage outside of regular city maintenance and replacement schedules they may do so at their own expense, if the removal is approved in compliance with subsection E or F of this section. The property owner shall pay for the necessary hardscape repairs and be required to plant and maintain a new tree as a condition of their approved tree removal, either in the same location or in another more suitable location. (Ord. 1664 § 3 (Exh. A), 2019)

12.24.100 Control of trees and shrubs for protection of public safety.
A. To prevent hazards to the public, property owners shall maintain all trees, shrubs and other plant growth on their property or adjacent to their property and within the public right-of-way and shall at all times ensure that no tree, shrub or other plant for which the property owner bears responsibility is maintained so as to create a dangerous condition of public property. Hazards shall include, but not be limited to, branches hanging over sidewalks and shrubbery growing into the right-of-way which interferes with passage or visibility.
B. The city will notify property owners of known hazards by posting abatement notices according to the Streets and Highways Code, Improvement Act of 1911, Sections 5610 through 5618, or as subsequently amended.
C. Any tree or shrub growing on private property that, in the opinion of the director, endangers public property shall be removed or trimmed by the property owner within fourteen days after receiving notice from the director. If the property owner fails to remove or trim the trees or shrubs, the city will conduct the work and assess the property owner for the cost of the city tree crew or for a contractor to do the work. Any removal and trimming costs shall become a lien on the property if not paid by the property owner after being billed by the city. These costs shall be recorded with the county recorder’s office. The assessment may be collected by court action.
D. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the property owner shall bear responsibility for injuries to and shall be responsible for any liability caused by or resulting from the property owner’s negligent failure to maintain or repair any tree, shrub or plant growth as required by this chapter.
E. In case of emergency caused by a tree in a hazardous condition, the tree may be removed by order of the director.
F. Emergency Tree Services. The city may provide on-call tree services in emergencies. Emergencies include fallen trees and other immediate safety hazards. The director shall determine if an emergency exists. (Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.110 Street tree maintenance.
A. Street trees will be pruned and sprayed based on a predetermined schedule approved by the public works director. Owners may wait for scheduled maintenance or may have their street trees pruned by an International Society of Arboriculture certified arborist at their own expense.
B. The city’s pruning of street trees shall not relieve property owners of their responsibility to prevent hazards as required in Section 12.24.100, and to complete all other interim maintenance.
C. The city will maintain all street trees in the downtown commercial area and on major streets. (Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.120 Tree maintenance by public utilities.
A. A public utility shall obtain a permit, issued by the director and valid for one year from the date of issuance, in order to maintain trees growing adjacent to utility fixtures or apparatus. This permission shall cover trees which encroach upon public streets.
B. When maintaining street trees, a public utility must observe good arboricultural practices, as specified by International Society of Arboriculture Western Chapter pruning standards.
C. When public utility pruning affects ten percent or more of a street tree’s natural canopy, or when there are energized utility lines closer than ten feet from a street tree’s main trunk or trunks, the public utility shall provide complete pruning of the entire tree. (Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.130 Tree service contractors.
A. Any tree service provider doing business in the city of San Luis Obispo must have the appropriate contractor’s license, city business license, and at least one currently certified ISA arborist on its staff overseeing any work done in the city. This arborist must oversee all pruning work and certify that all work meets the city’s pruning specifications.
B. All tree trimming work must conform to Western Chapter of the International Society of Arboriculture pruning standards, OSHA safety regulations and ANSI standards.
C. Any tree work involving staging in the right-of-way requires an encroachment permit. (Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.140 Responsibility for repairing tree damage to curbs, gutters and sidewalks.
A. When roots of a street tree damage city curbs, gutters and sidewalks, including driveway ramps, the city shall be responsible for appropriate corrective measures which are least damaging to the tree. Work will be undertaken in accordance with Section 12.24.090(K).
B. When roots of a tree, other than a street tree, damage city curbs, gutters and sidewalks, including driveway ramps, the property owner shall be responsible for appropriate corrective measures which are least damaging to the tree.
C. When the city installs new sidewalks, curb or driveway approaches the city shall seek alternative options to preserve desirable trees. When trees must be removed it shall be the responsibility of the city to remove any trees. Any trees so removed shall be replaced at the city’s expense with acceptable trees from the master tree list.
D. When a property owner installs or repairs sidewalk, curb or driveway approach, the property owner shall seek alternative options to preserve desirable trees. When trees must be removed, removal shall be at the expense of the property owner. Any trees so removed shall be replaced by the property owner with acceptable trees from the master tree list in a location approved by the city arborist. (Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.150 Protection of trees.
A. No person shall:
    1. Trim, prune or cut any tree unless such work conforms to this chapter and is performed in accordance with all International Society of Arboriculture standards. In no case shall more than one-third of the tree canopy be removed.
    2. Interfere, or cause any other person to interfere, with employees of the city who are engaged in planting, maintaining, treating or removing any tree or removing any material detrimental to the tree.
    3. Willfully injure, disfigure or intentionally destroy by any means any tree, except with permits described elsewhere in this chapter.
    4. Construct concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel sidewalk, or otherwise fill up the ground area near any tree, to shut off air, light or water from the roots, except under written authority from the public works department.
    5. Place building material, equipment or other harmful substance near any tree, which might cause injury to the tree.
    6. Post any sign on any tree, tree-stake or guard, or fasten any guy wire, cable or rope to any tree, tree-stake or guard, except when said activity relates to slack lining (the act of balancing and tight rope style walking on a suspended line) and is conducted in an area designated by city council resolution for slack lining.
    7. Plant any street tree except according to policies, regulations and specifications established pursuant to this chapter or any currently applicable ordinances or code sections.
B. Tree-stakes or guards may be placed around street trees by property owners for the purpose of protecting or training the trees, with approval of the director.
C. It shall be unlawful for a property owner to maintain a tree or shrubbery hazard as described in Section 12.24.100 and identified by city inspection.
D. Any tree required to be planted must be maintained in good health or replaced by the property owner.
E. Any person or contractor deemed responsible for damaging any tree in violation of this chapter shall be liable for penalties to the city according to Section 12.24.170, Enforcement.
F. Slacklining shall be allowed in city parks, but not in city open space areas, as follows:
    1. For the purposes of this section the following are not considered city parks and slacklining is therefore prohibited in them:
        a. Community gardens;
        b. Damon-Garcia Sports Fields;
        c. Historic Jack House and Gardens;
        d. Laguna Lake Golf Course;
        e. Mission Plaza;
        f. All open space areas;
        g. All mini parks.
    2. At all times slacklining shall require the following tree protections:
        a. Protection shall be placed between slackline and tree of sufficient thickness to protect the tree from wear damage (e.g., carpet, cardboard, towels, felt padding, etc.).
        b. Protection shall be at least ten inches wide so the entire anchor (minimum one inch of material) is prevented from contacting the tree.
        c. Protection shall wrap all the way around the tree.
        d. Protection shall not be attached to the “anchor” (i.e., knotted portion), so if the anchor were to move, the bark would not be affected.
        e. All anchors shall be attached in a manner so that the slackline is no more than four feet above the ground when in use.
    3. Slacklines shall not:
        a. Be attached to trees less than twelve inches in diameter at attach point.
        b. Cross walkways, sidewalks, bike paths, streams, or drainage areas.
        c. Interfere or displace any existing activities planned for or occurring in parks.
        d. Be left unattended or remain affixed to any tree overnight.
        e. Be attached to trees adjacent to group activity areas, picnic areas, and or play equipment.
        f. Be attached between anything other than trees.
    4. Slacklining shall be allowed only during daylight hours and lines shall at all times when affixed to any city tree be designated with ribbons or streamers attached thereto for visibility. (Ord. 1596 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.160 Heritage trees.
A. The city recognizes the important role trees have played in the history and development of San Luis Obispo and recognizes that a wide variety of trees can grow in its unique and temperate climate.
B. Any healthy tree within the city limits may be proposed as a heritage tree. The city arborist and tree committee review each proposed heritage tree and, with the owner’s consent, recommend suitable candidates to the city council for official designation as heritage trees.
C. The city shall protect and maintain all designated heritage trees. Heritage trees shall be pruned according to a schedule developed and approved by the public works director. All interim maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.170 Enforcement.
The public works department shall be responsible for enforcement of this chapter.
A. Any person deemed responsible for damaging a tree, failing to plant trees required as a condition of a tree removal or other permit, or removing a tree without a permit as described in this chapter shall be liable for civil penalties to the city.
    1. The civil penalties shall be the value of the tree times two, plus all staff costs related to the illegal tree removal or tree damage. The city arborist will compute the value of the tree using methods established by the International Society of Arboriculture.
    2. The property owner shall also be held responsible for damaging or removing a tree on the owner’s property without a permit as described in this chapter and be liable for additional civil penalties to the city as described in subsection (A)(1) of this section.
    3. If the tree removal or damaged tree is related to any development or subdivision then the civil penalties shall be the value of the tree times four, plus all related staff costs.
    4. In addition to civil penalties the property owner will be required to plant up to three trees under the direction of the city arborist. The size of the tree shall be determined by the city arborist and may be up to a forty-eight-inch box tree.
    5. For damaged trees, in addition to civil penalties, the property owner will be required to obtain the services of an ISA certified arborist to determine the future viability of the tree and, if salvageable, create a maintenance plan to restore the tree.
    6. The city council may adopt, by resolution, alternate civil damage amounts to be assessed against any person deemed responsible for damaging, harming or removing a tree without a permit. (Ord. 1589 § 2, 2013: Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

12.24.180 Appeals.
A. Any person aggrieved by an act or determination of the authorized approving authority exercising the authority herein granted shall have the right to appeal the decision of the authorized approving authority as set forth in this section.
B. Appeals received by the city clerk within ten calendar days from the date of determination or act shall cause the director to withhold tree removal permits and any permits for construction or demolition activity relying on the subject tree removal until the appeal is heard and a decision is reached.
+------------------------------------+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
|      REMOVAL APPLICATION TYPE      |         DECISION MAKER         |          APPEAL BODY           |
+------------------------------------+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Imminent Hazard to Life            | City Arborist                  | No Appeal                      |
| or Property                        |                                |                                |
| Section 12.24.090(E)(1)(a)         |                                |                                |
+------------------------------------+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Tree Health and Hazard Mitigation  | City Arborist                  | Tree Committee                 |
| Section 12.24.090(E)               |                                |                                |
+------------------------------------+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Minor Ministerial Development      | City Arborist                  | Community Development Director |
| Permit (removal for residential    |                                |                                |
| or accessory construction          |                                |                                |
| on an R-1 or R-2 lot)              |                                |                                |
| Section 12.24.090(F)(1)            |                                |                                |
+------------------------------------+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Ministerial Development            | Community Development Director | City Council                   |
| Permits                            |                                |                                |
| Section 12.24.090(F)(2)            |                                |                                |
+------------------------------------+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Discretionary Permits (Director    | Community Development Director | Planning Commission            |
| Action/Director Hearing/Minor      | or Hearing Officer             |                                |
| and Moderate Development           |                                |                                |
| Review/Minor Use Permit/Minor      |                                |                                |
| Subdivision)                       |                                |                                |
| Section 12.24.090(F)(3)            |                                |                                |
+------------------------------------+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Major Development Review/Tentative | Planning Commission            | City Council                   |
| Tract Map/Conditional Use          |                                |                                |
| Permit                             |                                |                                |
| Section 12.24.090(F)(4)            |                                |                                |
+------------------------------------+--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
(Ord. 1664 § 4 (Exh. B), 2019)

12.24.190 No liability upon the city.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner or occupant of any private property from the duty to keep in safe condition any trees and shrubs upon that private property or upon sidewalks and planting areas in front of that property. (Ord. 1544 § 1 (part), 2010)

Chapter 12.32 STREET NAME AND ADDRESS REGULATIONS

Sections:
12.32.010    Purpose.
12.32.020    Definitions.
12.32.030    Area affected.
12.32.040    Documents to be maintained by community development department.
12.32.050    Street name requirement.
12.32.060    Address requirement.
12.32.070    Procedures for assigning and changing addresses.
12.32.080    Address numbering standards.
12.32.090    Display of address numbers.
12.32.100    Procedures for naming and renaming streets.
12.32.110    Street name criteria.
12.32.120    Street name signs.
12.32.130    Administration.
12.32.140    Enforcement.

12.32.010 Purpose.
This chapter provides street name and address regulations for the city. The regulations are adopted to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of those who live and work in the city by:
A. Helping fire, police and ambulance personnel locate more quickly the scene of an emergency;
B. Expediting postal and commercial delivery services;
C. Reducing confusion for people trying to find a business or residence;
D. Implementing the safety element of the general plan by aiding contingency planning. (Ord. 919 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 9950)

12.32.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
A. “Address” means a combination of a number, a street name and, when necessary, a unit number that is assigned to a parcel, structure or unit within a structure, and is unique to it, to indicate its location.
B. “Adjoining” means having a common boundary for at least twenty-five feet.
C. “Alley” means a public vehicle way, named or unnamed, providing secondary access to the rear of property that faces a street.
D. “Building” means any structure used or intended for sheltering or supporting any use or occupancy.
E. Building, principal. “Principal building” means a building that’s large enough or used in such a way that, in the community development department’s judgment, it requires a separate address. Mobile homes are principal buildings.
F. “Division of land” means the division of any real property into two or more parcels.
G. “Driveway” means a vehicle way that provides access, primarily for the occupants, from a street into a lot and that:
    1. Has a ramp for its entrance from the street; or
    2. Is small enough or of such a character that addresses along it would be clearer if they used the name of the street from which the way provides access.
H. “Lot” means a parcel of real property.
I. “Property owner” means the person, firm, corporation or partnership that the latest county tax assessment roll shows as the owner or long-term lessee of a particular lot.
J. “Street” means a right-of-way providing vehicular access to abutting property.
K. Street, city. “City street” means a street that has been accepted by the council for public purposes. A public street.
L. Street, continuous. “Continuous street” means a street along which there are no major changes in general direction, no barriers that block all through traffic, no intersections where the street appears to end, and no radical changes in the street’s character.
M. Street, private. “Private street” means any street that is not owned by the city.
N. “Street segment” means a linear portion of a street, sometimes including the whole street.
O. “Structure” means anything assembled or constructed on the ground, or attached to anything with a foundation on the ground. This includes mobile homes and manufactured housing regardless of their method of attachment. (Ord. 919 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 9963)

12.32.030 Area affected.
The regulations codified in this chapter are effective throughout the city. Areas outside the city limits are governed by the county’s addressing regulations administered by the county planning department. Wherever possible, the county and city addressing regulations will be compatible. (Ord. 919 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 9951)

12.32.040 Documents to be maintained by community development department.
A. The city’s community development department will maintain the following documents:
    1. Street Index. An index of existing and prior names of all city and private streets within the city limits.
    2. Block Numbering Map. A map that shows present and future block numbering within the city’s urban reserve and provides a basis for clear, consistent addressing citywide.
    3. Address Records. Records of all assigned addresses.
B. All documents required by these regulations and other pertinent addressing records must be available for public inspection at the community development department during business hours. (Ord. 919 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 9952)

12.32.050 Street name requirement.
A. All public and private vehicle ways within the city limits, except driveways and alleys, must have a name.
B. Driveways must not be named.
C. Alleys may be named. (Ord. 919 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 9953)

12.32.060 Address requirement.
All parcels, principal buildings, and separate units in a principal building must have an address unless the community development director decides an address is unnecessary. (Ord. 919 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 9954)

12.32.070 Procedures for assigning and changing addresses.
A. Assignment. The community development department must assign both the number and determine which street name to use for all addresses and inform property owners and occupants of them without charge.
B. Change of Address. 
    1. An address must be changed when it is out of sequence, does not conform to the city’s block numbering map, is confusing, or might delay emergency response. If an address is changed, the community development department must notify the owner and tenant in charge of the building in writing at least ten days before the effective date and must post a public notice on the property at least five days before the effective date.
    2. A property owner may apply for an address change for personal reasons by:
        a. Submitting an application for number change;
        b. Paying a set fee to be determined by the council and adjusted annually July 1st of each year by the annual percentage change in the U.S. Consumer Price Index.
    The community development department must decide whether the proposed address meets the requirements of these regulations. If it does not, the application must be denied. If it does, then the application will be approved. (Ord. 1515 § 1, 2008; Ord. 919 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 9955)

12.32.080 Address numbering standards.
A. The city’s block numbering map must be used to assign block numbers.
B. For streets running within five degrees of north-south over more than half their length, numbers on the east side of the street must be even and on the west side must be odd. For other streets, numbers on the northerly side must be even and on the southerly side must be odd.
C. Individual addresses within a block must reflect as accurately as possible the relative position within the block of an undeveloped lot’s center or a building’s main entrance. For example, an undeveloped lot in the middle of a one hundred block or a building with its main entrance at the middle of a one hundred block must be numbered approximately one hundred fifty.
D. Individual exceptions to these address number standards may be made where special circumstances require. Clarity and uniformity are the goal. (Ord. 919 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 9956)

12.32.090 Display of address numbers.
A. Display Requirement. All structures that have a separate address must display their address number. If the location of the number or entrance could cause confusion about which street is involved, the street name must be displayed with the number.
B. New Structures. The owner of a new structure must display the assigned address number before the construction regulations division will approve occupancy of the structure.
C. Change of Address. Within thirty days after receiving written notification of an address change, the owner of an existing structure must display the new number and remove all obsolete numbers.
D. Type, Color, Size of Numbers. Address numbers must be displayed as Arabic numerals and must be a color that contrasts with the background color. All buildings must have numbers that can be read easily from the street. Unusually large numbers may be subject to the city’s sign regulations.
E. Number Location. Address numbers must be displayed on the building near the entrance. Numbers must be easily seen from the street. If the location of a building’s or unit’s main entrance might not be clear, address numbers must be displayed where they clearly indicate the entrance’s location. This might require displaying the number in more than one place. Numbers painted on the curb, while a desirable feature, do not satisfy this requirement.
F. Directories. When irregular layout of a multiple-address development might cause confusion about the location of an address within the project, a directory board with a map must be posted at every driveway entrance and main entrance walkway. Directories must clearly show the location of all addresses that can be reached via that walk or driveway. A drawing of the directory, fully dimensioned and showing the type and size of letters and numerals, must be submitted to the community development department for approval (with no fee). Directories must be easily seen from the street or sidewalk, as appropriate. Driveway directories must be placed so that the car of someone pausing to read them can be out of the street and not block the sidewalk or driveway. Additional interior directories may be required where necessary to locate an address.
G. Mailboxes. If a mailbox is located on the same street as the address it serves, only the number need be displayed on the box. If the mailbox and building are located on separate streets, both the address number and the street name must be on the box. (Ord. 919 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 9957)

12.32.100 Procedures for naming and renaming streets.
A. New Streets. Streets to be created by a land division must be named by the developer and approved by the community development department, during the review and approval of the tentative and final subdivision maps.
B. Initiation. The council, planning commission, community development department, or owner of adjoining property may initiate the renaming of an existing street. A nonrefundable application fee, established by the council, will be charged a property owner initiating the process.
C. Application and Petition. The initiating party must file a completed street name application and street name petition with the community development department.
    1. When a renaming of an existing street is initiated by a property owner, the petition must be signed by owners or tenants representing at least two-thirds of the parcels, dwelling units or businesses located along the affected street segment.
    2. When a renaming of an existing street is initiated by the council, planning commission or community development department, the petition need be signed only by an authorized representative of the initiating party.
D. Public Hearing Procedure for Renaming Existing Streets. 
    1. Scheduling. When it receives a completed application and petition, the community development department must schedule a public hearing before the planning commission.
    2. Notice. At least ten days before the hearing, notice of it must be posted in at least three public places along the affected street segment. All owners of property along the segment must be notified by first-class mail at least ten days before the hearing.
    3. Action. At the public hearing, the planning commission must hear and consider all name proposals and objections. If at the end of the hearing the commission finds that one or more of these names satisfy the requirements of these regulations, it must adopt a name selected from those proposed for the street. The commission may also assess the applicant reasonable costs for changing maps and replacing or installing signs.
    4. Formal Designation. When the commission adopts a street name change, the name must be entered in the commission’s minutes. After that, the street must be known by that name.
E. Appeal. The planning commission’s decision may be appealed to the council by anyone, according to Chapter 1.20.
F. Notification After Change. After a street name change is adopted, the community development department must notify all the appropriate public agencies and the property owners and tenants along the affected street. (Ord. 1515 § 2, 2008)

12.32.110 Street name criteria.
A. Street names must be pleasant sounding and grammatically correct.
B. Street names must be easy to spell, pronounce and read so the public, especially children, can say the name correctly in an emergency.
C. Street names must include an appropriate classification such as “street,” “way,” “lane,” etc., to be determined by the community development department.
D. Streets must not be named after a living person, except they may be named after a family prominent in local history as recognized in the Historic Name Registry even if family members are alive.
E. Streets in the 911 emergency-response area must not have duplicate or similar sounding names.
F. Street names must have fewer than fifteen characters, including letters, punctuation and spaces, but not including the street classification.
G. A continuous street, or one proposed to be continuous, must have the same name throughout its length.
H. Two street segments that don’t form a continuous street, and aren’t proposed to form one, must have different names.
I. Preference shall be given to street names that are associated with significant names recognized in the Historic Name Registry as maintained by the city community development department; the registry will recognize periods of historic significance consistent with the historic context statement and recognize significant names, flora, fauna or events that are unique to the community.
J. Where several street names are to be designated, such as within a new subdivision, the street names should be thematically organized and related to the local area of the subdivision. (Ord. 1600 § 3, 2014: Ord. 919 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 9959)

12.32.120 Street name signs.
A. Responsibility. The city must provide name signs for all streets within its jurisdiction, except as noted in subsections C and D of this section.
B. Criteria. 
    1. Every intersection must have signs naming all the intersecting streets. The number of signs required will be determined by the public works department.
    2. Street name signs must be clearly visible to passing motorists and pedestrians.
    3. Letters and numbers on street signs must contrast with the background color and must be large enough to be easily read from the sidewalk or a vehicle on the street.
    4. Placement must clearly indicate which streets correspond to the names.
    5. The signs must meet the minimum standards of the public works department.
C. Signs for Streets Created by Division of Land. 
    1. The subdivider must provide street name signs for all intersections created by a land division.
    2. The signs must meet the criteria stated in subsection B of this section.
    3. Placement must be determined by the city engineer, public works director or his/her designee.
    4. After acceptance of the streets, the signs must be maintained by the public works department.
D. Signs for Private Streets. 
    1. Property owners may be required to install and maintain permanent street signs on private streets.
    2. If signs are required, property owners may choose the design, size and material, as long as they meet the criteria specified in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 1515 § 3, 2008)

12.32.130 Administration.
A. Authority. The community development department has sole authority to administer and interpret these regulations, subject to appeal to the planning commission.
B. Approval. All street names must be approved by, and address numbers determined by, the community development department.
C. Street Name Signs. Street name signs along publicly maintained streets must be installed and maintained by the public works department, except as noted in Section 12.32.120(C) and (D). (Ord. 1515 § 4, 2008)

12.32.140 Enforcement.
The community development department is responsible for enforcing these regulations. (Ord. 919 § 1 (part), 1982: prior code § 9962)

Chapter 12.36 DOWNTOWN PARKING AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA

Sections:
12.36.010    Establishment.
12.36.020    Boundaries.
12.36.030    Assessment—Imposed.
12.36.040    Assessment—Amount.
12.36.050    Assessment—Use of revenues.
12.36.060    Assessment—Collection.
12.36.070    Findings and determinations.
12.36.080    Council’s authority to enter into annual agreements for revenue expenditures.
12.36.090    Exemptions—Contributions from exempt persons welcome.

12.36.010 Establishment.
There is hereby created and established the downtown parking and business improvement area. (Ord. 1516 § 2 (part), 2008)

12.36.020 Boundaries.
The boundaries of the area are generally shown on Exhibit A map attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and on file in the office of the city clerk, and are more specifically described as follows:
From Santa Rosa Street along Palm Street to Broad Street, Broad to Monterey, Monterey to Nipomo, Nipomo to San Luis Creek, San Luis Creek to a point where Beach Street would intersect, from this intersection point to Beach and Marsh, Marsh to Nipomo, Nipomo to Pacific, Pacific to Santa Rosa, Santa Rosa to Palm.
The area shall include the businesses fronting on both sides of the boundary streets listed in the preceding paragraph, and at all four corners of the intersections of the boundary streets listed in the preceding paragraph, except that it shall not include the northwesterly corner of Monterey and Nipomo Streets. (Ord. 1516 § 2 (part), 2008)

12.36.030 Assessment—Imposed.
Each and every business in the downtown parking and business improvement area shall be subject to, and shall pay an assessment to support the activities of the area, except as otherwise provided in Section 12.36.090. (Ord. 1516 § 2 (part), 2008)

12.36.040 Assessment—Amount.
The amount of assessment to be paid by each business annually shall be one hundred and ten percent of the business tax levied upon the business by the city except that the minimum annual assessment shall be one hundred and fifty dollars. (Ord. 1516 § 2 (part), 2008)

12.36.050 Assessment—Use of revenues.
The only uses for which the assessment revenue from the area shall be expended are:
A. Acquisition, construction or maintenance of parking facilities for the benefit of the area; provided, that the facilities shall not impair the city’s ability to produce revenues for the payment of parking district No. 1 obligations;
B. Decoration of any public place in the area;
C. Promotion of public events which are to take place on or in public places in the area;
D. Furnishing of approved music in any public place in the area;
E. General promotion of retail trade activities in the area. (Ord. 1516 § 2 (part), 2008)

12.36.060 Assessment—Collection.
The collection of assessments imposed in this chapter shall be made at the same time and in the same manner as the city’s business tax. (Ord. 1516 § 2 (part), 2008)

12.36.070 Findings and determinations.
This council finds and determines that parking and other needs are so general in the downtown section of the city, and that the size of the area is so small, that each business in the area will benefit from expenditures of assessment revenues substantially in proportion to the amount of business taxes paid (Streets and Highways Code Section 36062). (Ord. 1516 § 2 (part), 2008)

12.36.080 Council’s authority to enter into annual agreements for revenue expenditures.
The council shall have authority to enter into annual agreements with nonprofit business promotional groups or organizations serving the area, which authorize the groups or organizations to expend area revenues in accordance with city budgetary and accounting procedures. (Ord. 1516 § 2 (part), 2008)

12.36.090 Exemptions—Contributions from exempt persons welcome.
Any business, person or institution in the area that is exempt from the payment of the business tax of the city by reason of the provisions of the United States or California State Constitutions is not to be assessed, but may make a voluntary contribution to the city to be expended only for authorized expenditures of the area. (Ord. 1516 § 2 (part), 2008)

Chapter 12.38 PARKING AND DRIVEWAY STANDARDS

Sections:
12.38.010    General.
12.38.020    Parking lots—Permits.
12.38.030    Parking lots—Plans.
12.38.040    Pavement standards.
12.38.050    Geometrics and design standards.
12.38.060    Slope standards.
12.38.070    Loading zone standards.
12.38.080    Screening standards.
12.38.090    Landscaping standards.
12.38.100    Handicapped parking standards.
12.38.110    Driveway and driveway ramp standards.
12.38.120    Turnaround standards.
12.38.130    Signing standards.
12.38.140    Parking lot maintenance.
12.38.150    Temporary parking lots.
12.38.160    Common-access driveways.

12.38.010 General.
Driveways, driveway ramps, parking stalls and aisles, including pavement, drainage, landscaping, screen fencing and lighting, shall conform to these standards and all requirements of the Municipal Code. All spaces and driveways must be designed to function properly. City inspection is required at appropriate times to ensure that all specifications are met. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (A), 1990)

12.38.020 Parking lots—Permits.
A. If the parking lot is not a part of a larger project, the builder shall obtain a parking lot permit from the community development department prior to constructing a new or modifying an existing parking lot. To obtain a permit, a plan for the project must be submitted to the community development department.
B. Any restriping or improvements, other than for maintenance purposes, to a parking lot also requires approval of a parking lot permit by the community development department. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (B), 1990)

12.38.030 Parking lots—Plans.
Plans for the parking lots shall conform to city standards and shall show design for grading, paving, striping, signing, curbing, lighting, landscaping and trash enclosures. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (C), 1990)

12.38.040 Pavement standards.
A. Parking lots and driveways shall be paved.
B. The minimum thickness of pavement shell be as specified in these standards.
C. Base material shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety-five percent. Compaction test reports shall be submitted to the community development department for verification of proper compaction.
D. All motorcycle spaces within parking lots shall be concrete pads.
E. Porous pavement surface methods approved by the city arborist shall be provided within the dripline of existing trees in or near parking lots.
F. All spaces shall be marked, with handicapped spaces having a special pavement marking in each space.
G. Directional entrances and exits and aisles shall be signed and marked on the pavement. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (D), 1990)

12.38.050 Geometrics and design standards.
A. Turning Radii. The minimum allowable inside vehicle turning radius in parking and driveway areas shall be twenty feet unless fire apparatus access is necessary, in which case the minimum inside radius shall be 30.5 feet and the outside radius shall be forty-six feet or as required by the fire department (turning radii are not necessarily the radii of curbs around islands and other improvements). Additional details are as shown on the standard drawing attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and on file in the office of the city clerk.
B. Spaces Which Back Onto Street. 
    1. Except as noted in subsection C of this section, parking spaces which back directly onto the public street shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from the back of the sidewalk, regardless of the zoning of the property.
    2. Except as noted in subsection C of this section, no portion of any parking space or aisle, except driveways for ingress or egress, shall be permitted in a required street yard setback area.
C. Tandem Parking. Residential uses may have required spaces arranged in tandem subject to the approval of the community development director. Single dwellings where tandem parking is approved may have one unenclosed parking space within the street yard (refer to Section 17.16.020 of this code).
D. Walls/Walkways/Entrances. A parking space facing a wall containing entrances and abutting a walkway to those entrances must be at least four feet clear of such a wall.
E. Wheel Stops. Wheel stops are required if the space is headed into a wall, fence, landscaped area, building or side of another auto. Additional wheel stops may be required by the community development department. Concrete curbing may be substituted for wheel stops to the approval of the community development department.
F. Overhangs/Encroachments. Dimensions shown on the standards attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter must be clear of overhangs or other encroachments which might interfere with vehicular access. Circulation areas shall be provided at the ends of aisles.
G. Maneuvering. Parking lots with more than six spaces shall be designed so that automobiles will exit onto a public street in a forward direction and with no more than two maneuvers. “Maneuver” means and is defined as each motion in either a forward or backward direction. No space may be allowed that requires a vehicle to be maneuvered on the public sidewalk in order to exit. All spaces must be designed to be entered in one maneuver. A turnaround may be required if it is considered unsafe for a vehicle to back into the street by the community development department and/or city engineer.
H. Parking Stall Sizes. All parking stalls shall comply with the parking bay dimension standards for average-sized cars as provided in the engineering standard details. Upon approval of an exception by the community development director or architectural review commission, a limited number of compact parking spaces may be allowed if justified by unusual circumstances such as saving a tree or using otherwise unusable space. Compact stalls, if used, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the engineering standard details. Handicapped spaces shall be designed and constructed in accordance with state and local requirements (refer to the state standards attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter).
I. Motorcycle Spaces. All motorcycle spaces shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the engineering standards for motorcycle spaces.
J. Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided in accordance with city zoning requirements. Bicycle parking may include lockable racks and/or lockers to the approval of the community development department.
K. Truck Access. Commercial and industrial parking lots serving loading zones shall be designed to accommodate access and circulation movement for on-site truck circulation. The community development director or city engineer may require wider driveways and aisles as determined warranted. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (E), 1990)

12.38.060 Slope standards.
Parking spaces shall slope no more than five percent in any direction and no less than one-half percent in the direction of drainage. A maximum of ten percent slope in aisle and turnaround areas may be allowed. Swales of less than one percent slope shall be concrete. Variations of these standards may be allowed by the community development director for hardship situations providing safety and convenience concerns have been met. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (F), 1990)

12.38.070 Loading zone standards.
Off-street loading zones shall be a minimum of twelve feet wide and twenty-five feet long. Loading zones shall be designed so that trucks parking in them will not encroach onto the public right-of-way or into required parking spaces or driveways. Loading spaces designed for large trucks shall have appropriately larger access to allow maneuvering without encroaching into landscape areas. Loading zones or areas may not encroach into fire lanes. Loading zones (spaces) shall be provided in accordance with the city’s zoning regulations (refer to Sections 17.46.020 and 17.48.020). Additional loading zones maybe required by the community development department or fire department. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (G), 1990)

12.38.080 Screening standards.
A. In Large Parking Lots. Any parking lot with more than six parking spaces adjoining a street shall have the street frontage screened with a three-foot (minimum) high wall, fence, hedge consisting of five-gallon or larger plants, or landscaped berm. The area between such screen and the street shall be landscaped.
B. Near Residential Development. A parking lot on a site adjacent to a residential development or next to a residential zone shall be screened by a solid six-foot high wall, fence or an existing mature hedge. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (H), 1990)

12.38.090 Landscaping standards.
A. Planting Area Placement. All parking lots planting areas shall generally be provided after each six parking spaces in any row and at the ends of each row of parking spaces in order to encourage the use of trees in parking areas. Landscape areas shall have a minimum dimension of four feet. Landscape areas shall be defined by concrete curbing designed to minimize damage to pavement caused by irrigation of landscaping. Landscape areas defining ends of rows shall extend to the minimum inside turn radius, shall not conflict with an aisle or backup area, nor be less than four feet in width. Exceptions to this provision may be granted by the community development director or the architectural review commission.
B. Planting Arrangement. In order to prevent large expanses of pavement, parking lots shall have at least five percent of their surface devoted to landscaping, exclusive of setbacks, arranged in an appropriate and effective manner. Additional landscape area may be required by the community development department or the architectural review commission.
C. Maintenance. In all zones, required street yard areas shall be landscaped and perpetually maintained. All landscape planting shall be maintained and dead plants shall be replaced as necessary. Drought-tolerant planting must be used in accordance with the city’s landscape standards for water conservation.
D. Irrigation. Drought-tolerant planting must be used in accordance with the city’s landscape standards for water conservation. Landscape areas shall have a permanent underground irrigation system.
E. Landscape Preservation. Planting areas which may be hit by automobiles or where drainage control is necessary shall be defined by a six-inch curb or berm of reinforced concrete, brick or block. A header-board protected by parking bumpers or other suitable permanent material may be approved by the community development department. Header-boards, walls or berms must also be provided between the back of a city sidewalk and a planting area to prevent soil from washing onto the sidewalk. Porous pavement surface methods approved by the city arborist shall be provided within the dripline of existing trees in or near parking lots. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (I), 1990)

12.38.100 Handicapped parking standards.
All handicapped parking spaces shall be constructed and signed in accordance with state and local laws, shall be located conveniently for use by handicapped persons as approved by the community development department. Site development requirements for handicapped accessibility are attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (J), 1990)

12.38.110 Driveway and driveway ramp standards.
A. Driveway Widths. Driveways shall be the same width as the curb openings, not including the transitions. They must be within the width limitations noted on Engineering Standard No. 2120. Exceptions may be granted in special circumstances by the city engineer or community development director. Unless authorized by the city engineer, property owner, adjacent property owner and the community development director, the driveway ramp and transition must lie entirely in front of the property served. The fire department may require greater driveway widths to allow for proper emergency vehicle access.
B. Number of Driveways Permitted. Only one driveway is allowed per street frontage for residential property unless the frontage exceeds seventy feet, then a maximum of thirty percent of the frontage may be in driveways. The total width of all driveways to commercial or industrial property shall not exceed fifty percent of the frontage of the property. Additional restrictions may be placed on driveways entering arterial streets in order to minimize the disruption to traffic.
C. Abandoned Driveways and Driveway ramps. As a condition of issuance of any driveway permit, all abandoned driveways and driveway ramps on the same property shall be removed, landscaped and the curb, gutter and sidewalk properly restored. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (K), 1990)

12.38.120 Turnaround standards.
A. Deep Driveways. Driveways which are over one hundred feet long shall have an approved turnaround at the end allowing cars to safely exit in a forward direction. In some instances, the community development director may require turnarounds for shorter driveways.
B. Single-Family House Driveways. Single-family residential developments generally do not need to conform with this requirement unless there are extreme grade, fire hazard and/or alignment problems determined by the community development director or fire marshal. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (L), 1990)

12.38.130 Signing standards.
Except for R-1 zoned and R-2 zoned property, entrances and exits that are one-way shall be marked with an approved sign and pavement marking. Handicapped, compact car and loading spaces shall be signed with pavement marking or markings on wheel stops in accordance with state code and local laws. All pavement markings, striping and signs shall be approved by the community development department. Refer to Section 12.38.100. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (M), 1990)

12.38.140 Parking lot maintenance.
It shall be the duty of the property owner to maintain and repair the parking lot and related improvements in accordance with the standards set out in this chapter and any other conditions imposed at the time of approval. If the community development department finds that the lot is in need of maintenance or repair, to ensure public safety and welfare, the city may have the work done thirty days after a written notice to the property owner by the director. Maintenance costs shall be applied as a lien against the property. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (N), 1990)

12.38.150 Temporary parking lots.
Parking lots which will be used for one year or less may be developed in conjunction with a temporary use as provided in the zoning regulations. Such temporary parking lots need not provide landscaping as would otherwise be required, but they shall meet all other design standards (parking space dimensions, aisle widths, and so on). Temporary lots shall have an all-weather, dust-free surface as required by the community development department. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (O), 1990)

12.38.160 Common-access driveways.
A. Where Permitted. Common-access driveways may be permitted in either of the following cases:
    1. On lots of record, existing before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, if the community development director approves an administrative use permit; or
    2. In new subdivisions where a common driveway is proposed as part of subdivision approval.
B. Basic Criteria. A common-access driveway must meet all of the following criteria:
    1. The driveway must not be inappropriately located (for example, too close to a dwelling, play area or sloped bank).
    2. It must be determined that there is no significant potential for conflict between the parties sharing the driveway because of its location, length, grade, usage or other characteristics.
C. For Residential Uses. The following provisions apply to common-access driveways to serve premises zoned or used for residential purposes:
    1. Before granting any permit authorizing construction of a common-access driveway or structures to be served by such driveway, the city shall require an easement or covenant to be filed with the county recorder setting forth driveway usage rights and responsibilities for each parcel served. At minimum, the required easement or covenant shall include the following statements:
        a. All affected property owners will be jointly responsible for the improvement and maintenance of all parts of the common access driveway.
        b. All parking on the commonly used portions of the driveway is prohibited.
        c. Any affected property owner may avail himself of the vehicle-removing authority granted private property owners in Section 22658 of the California Vehicle Code when any vehicle is parked in the common-access driveway so as to interfere with entry or access to a parcel it serves.
        d. Property owners agree to hold the city harmless from all claims of damages or liability arising from any action to tow away vehicles pursuant to subsection (C)(1)(c) of this section.
        e. If the easement or covenant is abandoned or dissolved, each lot previously served by the common-access driveway shall be provided with standard access as required by these regulations.
    2. The driveway shall serve no more than four residential units unless special circumstances warrant the grant of an exception by the community development director.
    3. The director or planning commission may add other requirements or conditions deemed necessary or appropriate.
    4. The community development department shall supply the police department with copies of all easement or covenants.
D. Commercial and Industrial Uses. Before granting any permit authorizing the construction of any common-access driveway to serve premises zoned or used for commercial or industrial purposes, the city may impose the requirements listed in this section for residential uses as well as any additional requirements or conditions it deems necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 1156 § 3 (1) Ex. A (P), 1990)

Chapter 12.40 MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS

Sections:
12.40.010    Repealed.
12.40.020    Repealed.
12.40.030    Barbed-wire fences—Restrictions.
12.40.040    Mailboxes in sidewalk areas prohibited.
12.40.050    Datum plane.

12.40.010 Storm drains—Posting signs warning persons not to litter or dump waste materials.
Repealed by Ord. 1543. (Prior code § 4270)

12.40.020 Repealed.*
Repealed.

12.40.030 Barbed-wire fences—Restrictions.
No person shall erect or maintain upon any premises situated within the city a barbed-wire fence, unless the property is zoned or legally devoted to agricultural use; provided, however, this restriction shall not be deemed to prohibit security-type fences where at least the first six feet above the ground is constructed of other material and the only barbed-wire appears toward the top of the fence. Where a barbed-wire fence is permissible and, subject to the exception previously noted in this section, no new barbed-wire fences shall be erected or maintained within ten feet of the property line along any public street, land or alley adjoining such property, unless a use permit is first obtained from the board of adjustments. (Prior code § 4286)

12.40.040 Mailboxes in sidewalk areas prohibited.
A. In a residential zone, it is unlawful for any person to install or maintain, or to direct, authorize, or permit the installation or maintenance of, a mailbox, a receptacle for newspaper delivery, or any other container to be used for delivery purposes, in, upon or over any portion of the space or area between a street curb and the back edge of an improved sidewalk.
B. Any such container found within the space or area shall be deemed to be an encroachment which may be summarily removed by the city fifteen days after mailing written notice to the occupants of the residence or residences situated nearest thereto, unless the occupants shall then possess a valid city approval.
C. Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the director of public services. (Prior code § 4287)

12.40.050 Datum plane.
A. The city engineer shall establish bench marks throughout the city as he or she deems necessary. The city engineer shall be given authority to revise the datum plane for the bench mark system based on a datum established and supported by the National Geodetic Survey.
B. The bench marks shall be used in determining all elevations, streets, pavements, sidewalks, curbs, sewers, bridges, structures, lot grades and all other work in the city. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1039 § 2, 1985)

Chapter 12.42 TOURISM BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT

Sections:
12.42.010    Title.
12.42.020    Definitions.
12.42.030    Authorized uses.
12.42.040    Boundaries.
12.42.050    Levy of assessment and exemptions.
12.42.060    Annual review of assessment.
12.42.070    Imposition of assessment.
12.42.080    Use of revenue.
12.42.090    Delinquency, penalty, and interest.
12.42.100    Advisory body.
12.42.110    Modification or disestablishment.

12.42.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the city of San Luis Obispo tourism business improvement district law. (Ord. 1517 § 3 (part), 2008)

12.42.020 Definitions.
“City advisory body” shall mean the advisory body appointed by the city council, pursuant to this chapter.
“City council” shall mean the city of San Luis Obispo city council.
“District” shall mean the city of San Luis Obispo tourism business improvement district (or “TBID”) created by this chapter and as delineated in Section 12.42.040.
“Hotel” shall mean any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, or vacation home and pays transient occupancy tax. For purposes of this chapter the definition of “hotel” shall not include RV parks.
“Law” shall mean the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989, California Streets and Highways Code Sections 36500 et seq., as amended.
“Operator” shall mean the person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs its functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
“Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or who is entitled to occupancy, by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. (Ord. 1517 § 3 (part), 2008)

12.42.030 Authorized uses.
The ordinance codified in this chapter is made and enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989 (Sections 36500 et seq., of the California Streets and Highways Code). The purpose of forming the district as a business improvement area under the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989 is to provide revenue to defray the costs of services, activities and programs promoting tourism which will benefit the operators of hotels in the district through the promotion of scenic, recreational, cultural and other attractions in the district as a tourist destination. It is the intent of this chapter to provide a supplemental source of funding for the promotion of tourism in the district and it is not intended to supplant any other existing sources of revenues which may be used by the city of San Luis Obispo for the promotion of tourism. The specific services, activities and programs to be provided by the district are as follows:
A. The general promotion of tourism within the district is to include costs as specified in the business plan to be adopted annually by the city council.
B. The marketing of the district to the travel industry in order to benefit local tourism and the local hotel industry in the district. (Ord. 1517 § 3 (part), 2008)

12.42.040 Boundaries.
The boundaries of the TBID shall be the boundaries of the city of San Luis Obispo. (Ord. 1517 § 3 (part), 2008)

12.42.050 Levy of assessment and exemptions.
The TBID shall include all hotels located within the TBID boundaries. The assessment shall be levied on all hotels, existing and future, within the city of San Luis Obispo based upon two percent of the paid gross rent charged by the operator per night for all transient occupancies. The assessment shall be collected monthly, based on two percent of the gross rent charged by the operator per night in revenues for the previous month. New hotels within the boundaries shall not be exempt from the levy of assessment authorized by Section 36531 of the law. Assessments pursuant to the TBID shall not be included in gross room rental revenue for the purpose of determining the amount of the transient occupancy tax. The value of rooms for extended stays of more than thirty consecutive calendar days shall be exempt from the levy of assessment. (Ord. 1517 § 3 (part), 2008)

12.42.060 Annual review of assessment.
All of the assessments imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be reviewed by the city council annually, based upon the annual report prepared by the advisory body appointed pursuant to this chapter and Sections 36530 and 36533 of the law. After approval of the annual report the city council shall follow the hearing process as outlined in Section 36534 of the law. At the public hearing the city council shall hear and consider all protests. If written protests are received from hotel businesses in the district paying fifty percent or more of the annual assessment, no further proceedings to continue the levy of assessments shall take place. The protests shall be weighted based upon the annual assessment for the prior year by each hotel business. (Ord. 1517 § 3 (part), 2008)

12.42.070 Imposition of assessment.
The city council hereby levies and imposes and orders the collection of an additional assessment to be imposed upon hotels in the district described above, which shall be calculated pursuant to Section 12.42.050. Such levy shall begin on October 1, 2008. (Ord. 1520 § 1, 2008)

12.42.080 Use of revenue.
The improvements and activities to be provided by the TBID will be funded by the levy of the assessments. The revenue from the levy of assessments within the TBID shall not be used to provide improvements or activities outside the TBID or for any purpose other than the purposes specified in the resolution of intention. All funds shall be expended consistent with the purposes of this act. Funds remaining at the end of any TBID term may be used in subsequent years in which TBID assessments are levied as long as they are used consistent with the requirements of this section. The city council shall consider recommendations made by the city advisory body created by Section 12.42.100 as to the use of assessment revenue. (Ord. 1517 § 3 (part), 2008)

12.42.090 Delinquency, penalty, and interest.
Any hotel that fails to remit any assessment imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty in accordance with the policies, regulations, and ordinances of the city of San Luis Obispo. Any and all remedies available to the city of San Luis Obispo for nonpayment of assessments or taxes shall be applicable in the event of nonpayment of an assessment under this chapter. (Ord. 1517 § 3 (part), 2008)

12.42.100 Advisory body.
An advisory body comprised of seven members is hereby created to carry out the functions of an advisory board under Section 36530 of the law. Said advisory body shall be referred to as the tourism business improvement district board or TBID board. The members of the TBID board shall be appointed following the city’s recruitment guidelines for advisory bodies. All applicants and members must be operators of hotels within the district, or employed by the operator of such a hotel. The length of the term for each individual member of the TBID board shall follow the guidelines of all city advisory bodies and is limited to eight subsequent years. Members of the TBID board shall serve in good standing; failure to pay assessments levied under this chapter or to pay transient occupancy taxes to the city constitutes loss of good standing and shall result in removal from the TBID board. Members of the TBID board shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed by the city council at any time. If a member no longer represents the lodging establishment for which he or she was selected to the TBID board, his or her seat will be vacated and a new member will be appointed. The TBID board shall review the implementation of this chapter, the implementation of programs and activities funded through this chapter, and advise the city council on the amount of the district’s assessments and on the services, programs, and activities to be funded by the assessments, and shall perform such other duties as required by the law, including preparing the annual report required by Section 36533 of the law. The annual report shall be submitted to the city council no later than ninety days before the new budget year. The city council shall ensure that the TBID board has timely access to all public information regarding collection, disbursement, and uses of the funds collected under the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 1536 § 2, 2009)

12.42.110 Modification or disestablishment.
The city council, by ordinance, may modify the provisions of this chapter and may disestablish the district or parts of the district, after adopting a resolution of intention to such effect. Such resolution shall describe the proposed change or changes, or indicate that it is proposed to disestablish the area, and shall state the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city council to consider the proposed action. If the operators of hotels which pay fifty percent or more of the assessments in the district file a petition with the clerk of the city of San Luis Obispo to adopt a resolution of intention to modify or disestablish the district, the city council shall adopt such resolution and act upon it as required by law. Signatures on such petition shall be those of a duly authorized representative of the operators of hotels in the district. In the event the resolution proposes to modify any of the provisions of this chapter, including changes in the existing assessments or in the existing boundaries of the district, such proceedings shall terminate if protest is made by the operators of hotels which pay fifty percent or more of the assessments in the district, or in the district as it is proposed to be enlarged.
In the event the resolution proposes disestablishment of the district, the city council shall disestablish the district; unless at such hearing, protest against disestablishment is made by the operators of hotels paying fifty percent or more of the assessments in the district. (Ord. 1517 § 3 (part), 2008)

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES

Chapters:
13.04        Water Service
13.06        Mandatory Plumbing Retrofit Standards
13.07        Water Conservation
13.08        Sewers
13.12        Underground Utilities
13.16        Water and Sewer Service for Private Use Outside City Limits
13.20        Water Efficient Landscape Standards
13.24        Recycled Water Service

Chapter 13.04 WATER SERVICE

Sections:
13.04.010    Definitions.
13.04.020    Statement of policy.
13.04.030    Sole water purveyor.
13.04.040    Limit of city’s responsibility to furnish water outside of the city.
13.04.050    Initiation of water service.
13.04.060    Discontinuation of water service.
13.04.070    Illegal consumption.
13.04.080    Bills—Payment.
13.04.090    Rates for service.
13.04.100    Charges for new water service.
13.04.110    Delinquencies and penalties.
13.04.120    Water service.
13.04.130    Water meters.
13.04.140    Installation of control valves required.
13.04.150    Responsibility for equipment.
13.04.160    Parcel owner’s duty to protect against danger of cross-connections.
13.04.170    Interruption in service.
13.04.180    Main extensions other than subdivisions.
13.04.190    Utilities department ingress and egress rights.
13.04.200    Fire hydrants.
13.04.210    Water service for fire protection.
13.04.220    Private fire protection service connections—Charges—Ownership.
13.04.230    Private fire protection service—Monthly rates.
13.04.240    Privately owned water wells.
13.04.250    Violations deemed misdemeanor.
Prior legislation: prior code §§ 7410.6, 7410.15, 7410.23 and 7410.24.

13.04.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings specified:
A. “Adequate transmission system” means a water transmission system that is capable of supplying simultaneously, at a specific site under consideration, the required fire flow and the maximum daily rate of consumption.
B. “Applicant” means the person or entity who applies for a new water account with the city of San Luis Obispo.
C. “Cross-connection” means any physical connection between the piping system from the city service and that of any other water supply that is not, or cannot, be approved as safe and potable for human consumption, whereby water from the unapproved source may be forced or drawn into the city distribution main.
D. “Curbstop” means the city-owned valve attached to the water meter which can turn water on or off to a parcel.
E. “Customer” means the person or entity under whose name a water account is created and who is ultimately responsible for payment of all charges incurred on the account.
F. “Date of presentation” means the billing date as referenced on the billing statement.
G. “Distribution main” means a water line in a street, alley, or right-of-way used for general distribution of water and from which water service is available to a parcel.
H. “Maximum daily rate of consumption” means the average rate of flow, as estimated by the utilities department from actual city records, which is consumed during a twenty-four-hour period at maximum use.
I. “Parcel” means a tract of land including improvements, to which water service is or will be provided.
J. “Parcel valve” means a valve on the parcel side of the water meter which turns water on or off to a parcel. The valve is the parcel owner’s responsibility to maintain in working order.
K. “Private fire protection service” means water service for sprinkler systems, hydrants, hose reels and other facilities used specifically for fire protection on a parcel.
L. “Private pumping equipment” means any equipment attached to a water service and installed on private property for the purpose of increasing water pressure to that parcel.
M. “Private service line” means the water line that connects the city’s water meter to the point of entry to a parcel’s dwelling(s) and/or irrigation system(s).
N. “Regular water service” means water service rendered for normal domestic, commercial, industrial, and irrigation purposes on a permanent basis and for which the city’s general rates and regulations are applicable.
O. “Reliable water distribution system” means a system of public water mains capable of supplying a sufficient quantity of water to satisfy simultaneously the maximum daily rate of consumption and the required fire flow for a given site.
P. “Required fire flow” means the rate of flow required by the fire chief pursuant to the authority of Appendix B of the California Fire Code and determined in conformance with the latest edition of the Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow as published by the Insurance Services Offices, or any subsequent recognized standard adopted by resolution of the city council.
Q. “Service connection” means the point of connection where the city’s water meter meets the parcel’s private service line.
R. “Services” means the service pipeline and appurtenant facilities such as the curbstop, water meter and meter box, all used to extend water service from the distribution main to the curbline. Where services are divided at the curb or parcel line each such branch service shall be termed a separate service.
S. “Utilities” means the utilities department of the city of San Luis Obispo and its duly authorized representatives. (Ord. 1597 § 1, 2014: Ord. 1428 § 2 (part), 2002: prior code § 7410.1. Formerly 13.04.020)

13.04.020 Statement of policy.
The city will furnish water service in accordance with the regulations contained in this chapter and in accordance with other applicable ordinances to any parcel within the corporate limits and to such areas outside the city limits as city council may designate.
In all such cases water shall be supplied only through water meters installed as set forth in this chapter and in each case the customer shall be charged directly for all water passing through the meter. (Ord. 1597 § 2, 2014: Ord. 1428 § 2 (part), 2002: prior code § 7410. Formerly 13.04.010)

13.04.030 Sole water purveyor.
The city shall be the sole water purveyor within the city limits. (Ord. 1597 § 3, 2014)

13.04.040 Limit of city’s responsibility to furnish water outside of the city.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as a contract on the part of the city to furnish water for any definite period or as a public utility with respect to any water furnished outside the city. (Ord. 1597 § 4, 2014: Ord. 1428 § 2 (part), 2002: prior code § 7410.3)

13.04.050 Initiation of water service.
A. Each applicant initiating water service shall be required to provide information according to the procedures established by the director of finance and information technology and to pay a new account setup fee established by resolution of the city council.
B. All applicants for water service may be required to deposit an amount established from time to time by resolution of the city council prior to initiation or restoration of water service.
C. An application for water service may not be honored unless payment in full has been made for water service previously rendered to the applicant by the city.
D. Applications for water service to parcels for which a service connection has already been installed may be made as set forth in this chapter. Such application will signify the applicant’s willingness and intention to comply with these regulations and to all modifications thereof, and to new regulations or rates duly adopted, and to make payment for water service rendered.
E. If application is made for service to a parcel where no water service connection has been installed, but a distribution main is adjacent to the parcel, the applicant, in addition to making application for service, shall comply with the regulations governing the installation of water services and pay all applicable fees. (Ord. 1597 § 5, 2014: Ord. 1428 § 2 (part), 2002: Ord. 1204 §§ 1, 2, 1992: prior code §§ 7410.2 and 7410.4. Formerly 13.04.030)

13.04.060 Discontinuation of water service.
Each customer discontinuing water service shall be required to provide information according to the procedures established by the director of utilities.
A. Nonpayment of Bills. 
    1. A customer’s water service may be discontinued if a bill is not paid on or before sixty days from the date the bill becomes delinquent.
    2. A customer’s unpaid balance for water service previously rendered by the city may be transferred to that same customer’s current water service and water service may be discontinued if water service furnished at a previous location is not paid on or before sixty days from the date the bill becomes delinquent.
    3. If a customer receives water service at more than one location, and the bill for service at any one location is not paid on or before sixty days from the date the bill becomes delinquent, water services at all locations may be discontinued.
B. Unsafe Apparatus. The utilities department may discontinue service to any parcels where apparatus, appliances, or equipment using water is dangerous, unsafe, causing damage or not in conformity with any laws or ordinances.
C. Service Detrimental to Others. The utilities department may discontinue service to any parcels where the demand may be detrimental or injurious to the service furnished to other customers.
D. Fraud and Abuse. The utilities department shall have the right to refuse or to discontinue water service to any parcels to protect itself against fraud or abuse.
E. Noncompliance. The utilities department may, unless otherwise provided, discontinue water services to a customer for noncompliance with any of these regulations if the customer fails to comply with them within five days after the date of presentation of written notice of the utilities department’s intention to discontinue service. If such noncompliance affects matters of health and safety and/or is causing property damage, and conditions warrant, the utilities department may discontinue water service immediately.
F. Customer’s Request for Service Discontinuance. A customer may have his or her water service discontinued by notifying the utilities department reasonably well in advance of the desired date of discontinuance. He or she will be required to pay all water charges until the date of such discontinuance.
G. Restoration—Reconnection Charges. The utilities department may charge such amount as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council for restoring water service which has been discontinued because of noncompliance with these rules. (Ord. 1677 § 2, 2020: Ord. 1597 § 6, 2014: prior code § 7410.17. Formerly 13.04.180)

13.04.070 Illegal consumption.
When a meter shows consumption of water after service has been officially discontinued, the owner of the parcel served will be held responsible for payment for the water consumption. In addition, the parcel owner will pay the city a new account setup fee for the water illegally consumed after service was previously discontinued. Water shall not be turned on again for a service connection until the illegal consumption has been fully paid for. (Ord. 1597 § 7, 2014)

13.04.080 Bills—Payment.
A. Rendering of Bills. 
    1. Meter Readings. Meters will be read at regular intervals as established by the city council for the preparation of regular bills, and as required for the preparation of opening bills, closing bills and special bills.
    2. Billing Frequency. There will be twelve regular billings per year or as authorized by the city council.
B. Payment of Bills. 
    1. Periodic bills are due and payable on presentation. Payment may be made at the city finance department or to an authorized collector.
    2. Closing bills, if service is to be discontinued, are due and payable on presentation. Collection will be made at the time of presentation.
    3. Water bills shall be payable on the date of presentation and shall become delinquent thirty days from the date of presentation.
    4. When bills are delinquent, the utilities department may demand that the full amount of both delinquent and current bills be paid.
C. Billing of Separate Meters Not Combined. Each meter on a parcel will be considered separately and the readings of two or more meters will not be combined unless specifically provided for in the rate schedule, or unless the utilities department’s operating convenience requires the use of more than one meter. (Ord. 1597 § 8, 2014: prior code § 7410.13. Formerly 13.04.140)

13.04.090 Rates for service.
The water rates to be charged and collected by the utilities department for all billings for regular water service shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1597 § 9, 2014: prior code § 7410.14. Formerly 13.04.150)

13.04.100 Charges for new water service.
A. Charges for new water service shall be established by a resolution duly adopted by the city council and may be revised by resolution at any time. A copy of the current resolution shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk for public inspection.
B. All charges for new water service are payable upon presentation of the first bill.
C. Service and billing for both water and sewer service commence on the date the meter is installed.
D. Applicants for new water service will be charged for the appropriate meter, plumbing/appurtenances and installation.
E. Applicants for new water service will be charged any applicable impact fees according to Chapter 4.20. (Ord. 1597 § 10, 2014: Ord. 1428 § 2 (part), 2002: prior code § 7410.7. Formerly 13.04.080)

13.04.110 Delinquencies and penalties.
For failure to pay for water service by the provisions of this chapter prior to the delinquency date, the director of utilities may add a penalty. The amount of the penalty shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1677 § 3, 2020: Ord. 1597 § 11, 2014)

13.04.120 Water service.
A. Separate parcels will be supplied through individual service connections and private service lines shall not cross parcel boundaries unless authorized by the utilities department.
B. Water services will be installed in the size and at the location desired by the applicant where such requests are reasonable. Service installations will be made only to property abutting on public streets or to such distribution mains as may be constructed in easements or rights-of-way as determined by the utilities department. Services installed in new subdivisions prior to the construction of streets or in advance of street improvements must be accepted by the applicant in the installed location.
C. Service to Multiple Units. Separate houses, buildings, living or business quarters on the same parcel shall be served according to the policies and procedures established by the utilities department. Any exception to the policies and procedures shall be at the discretion of the utilities director.
D. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of charges for all water furnished to combined units, supplied through a single service connection. (Ord. 1597 § 12, 2014: Ord. 1428 § 2 (part), 2002: prior code § 7410.11)

13.04.130 Water meters.
A. All meters installed shall be located only in and upon streets, easements or rights-of-way that have been formally dedicated and accepted for public use, and shall be owned by the city.
B. Changes in Size of Water Meter. 
    1. The cost to change the size of a meter on existing services will be at the parcel owner’s or customer’s expense.
    2. A request for a change in size of meter will require approval of the utilities director. Upon approval, the parcel owner or customer will be responsible for obtaining all necessary permits (plumbing, encroachment, etc.) and payment of any applicable expenses and fees.
    3. Parcels with flow rates having an average rate that exceeds the meter manufacturer’s maximum rated operating flow or other reliable benchmark as determined by the utilities department shall be required to upsize the meter at parcel owner or customer’s expense, including payment of any applicable expenses and fees.
C. Change in Location of Meters. Meters moved for the convenience of the parcel owner or customer shall be approved by the utilities department and will be relocated at the parcel owner or customer’s expense.
D. Meter Errors. 
    1. Meter Test. 
        a. On parcel owner or customer request:
            i. A parcel owner or customer may, giving not less than one week’s notice, request the utilities department to test the meter serving his or her parcel.
            ii. To cover the reasonable cost of a meter test, the utilities department will require the parcel owner or customer to deposit such amount as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council.
            iii. This deposit will be returned if the meter is found to register more than two percent fast. The parcel owner or customer will be notified not less than five days in advance of the time and place of the test.
            iv. A written report giving the results of the test will be shown to the parcel owner or customer within ten days after completion of the test.
    2. Adjustment of Bills for Meter Error. When, upon test, a meter is found to be registering more than two percent fast under conditions of normal operations, the utilities department will refund to the customer the full amount of the overcharge, based on corrected meter readings for the period, not exceeding one year that the meter was in use.
    3. Nonregistering Meters. The utilities department may bill the customer for water consumed while the meter was not registering. The bill will be computed upon an estimate of consumption based either upon the customer’s prior use during the same season of the year or upon a reasonable comparison with the use of other customers receiving the same class of service during the same period and under similar circumstances and conditions.
    4. Retirement or Removal of Meter. The cost of retiring or removing a meter service for the convenience of the parcel owner will be at the parcel owner’s expense. (Ord. 1597 § 13, 2014: prior code §§ 7410.12 and 7410.16. Formerly 13.04.170)

13.04.140 Installation of control valves required.
A. The parcel owner shall install a suitable valve, as close to the meter location as practicable, the operation of which will control the entire water supply from the meter.
B. The operation by the parcel owner or customer of the curbstop in the meter box is not permitted. (Ord. 1597 § 14, 2014: prior code § 7410.19. Formerly 13.04.200)

13.04.150 Responsibility for equipment.
A. Parcel Equipment. The parcel owner or customer shall, at his or her own risk and expense, furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition all equipment that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water, and the city shall not be responsible for any loss or damage caused by the improper installation of such water equipment, or the negligence, want of proper care or wrongful act of the parcel owner or customer or of any of his or her tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or permittees in installing, maintaining, using, operating or interfering with such equipment. The city shall not be responsible for damage to property caused by spigots, faucets, valves and other equipment that are open when water is turned on at the meter, either when the water is turned on originally, or when turned on after a temporary shutdown.
B. City Property. The parcel owner or customer shall be liable for any damage to a meter, curbstop, water meter box or other equipment or property owned by the city which is caused by an act of the parcel owner or customer or his or her tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or permittees, including the breaking or destruction of locks by the parcel owner or customer or others on or near a meter. The city shall be reimbursed by the parcel owner or customer for any damage promptly on presentation of a bill.
C. Private Pumping Equipment. The utilities department must approve the installation and operation of all private pumping equipment before city water service will be provided. Any pumping facility that does not incorporate an automatic shutoff control that will positively prevent motor burnout during periods of low or negative pressure will not be approved.
This section shall not be construed to excuse the obtaining of appropriate city council, and other, approvals necessary to permit (1) city water service, and (2) installation and operation of private pumping equipment.
D. Parcel owner or customer is responsible for maintaining plumbing connection on the parcel side of the meter. Parcel owner or customer equipment must be able to withstand meter change-outs and shutoffs. Parcel owner or customer shall repair their equipment if determined necessary by the city.
E. Parcel owner or customer is responsible for maintaining acceptable access to the water meter as determined by the city. At a minimum a two-foot clearance must be provided around meter.
F. No additions can be made in the meter box other than primary city water service.
G. Ground Wire Attachments. All individuals or business organizations are forbidden to attach any ground wire or wires to any plumbing which is or may be connected to a service connection or main belonging to the city; the utilities department will hold the parcel owner or customer liable for any damage to its property occasioned by such ground wire attachments.
H. The utilities department does not assume liability for inspecting apparatus on the parcel owner or customer’s property. The utilities department does reserve the right of inspection, however, if there is reason to believe that unsafe apparatus is in use. (Ord. 1597 § 15, 2014: prior code § 7410.18. Formerly 13.04.190)

13.04.160 Parcel owner’s duty to protect against danger of cross-connections.
The parcel owner must comply with state, county and federal laws governing the separation of dual water systems or installation of backflow protection devices to protect the public water supply from the danger of cross-connections. (Ord. 1597 § 16, 2014: prior code § 7410.20. Formerly 13.04.210)

13.04.170 Interruption in service.
A. The city shall not be liable for damage or claims which may result from an interruption in service. Temporary shutdowns may be made by the utilities department to make improvements and repairs. Whenever possible and as time permits, all customers affected will be notified prior to making such shutdowns.
B. Master metered properties such as mobile home parks and large apartment complexes must notify the utilities department and police department a minimum of twenty-four hours prior to any planned interruptions in water service for repairs, maintenance or other reason. (Ord. 1597 § 17, 2014: prior code § 7410.21. Formerly 13.04.220)

13.04.180 Main extensions other than subdivisions.
A. Water mains may be extended by developers or other interested parties that would benefit by their extension, at their cost, provided the improvements are designed to current city standards and policies and are approved by both the public works and utilities directors.
B. The owner or developer who installs improvements which abut property other than that being developed or in a greater size or capacity than that required for the development of the property under consideration may be reimbursed as provided in Section 16.20.110.
C. Where an extension of the distribution main is necessary or a substantial investment is required to furnish service, the applicant will be informed by the utilities department as to whether or not the service can be extended under these regulations as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1597 § 18, 2014: Ord. 1501 § 4, 2007. Formerly 13.04.100)

13.04.190 Utilities department ingress and egress rights.
Representatives from the utilities department shall have the right of ingress to a parcel for any purpose reasonably connected with the furnishing of water service. (Ord. 1597 § 19, 2014: prior code § 7410.22. Formerly 13.04.230)

13.04.200 Fire hydrants.
A. Use of and Damage to Fire Hydrants. No person, other than those designated and authorized by the proper authority, or by the utilities department, shall open any fire hydrant, attempt to draw water from it or in any manner damage or tamper with it. Any violation of this regulation will be prosecuted according to law.
B. Moving of Fire Hydrants. When a fire hydrant has been installed in the location specified by the proper authority, the utilities department has fulfilled its obligation. If a property owner or other party desires a change in the size, type or location of the hydrant, he or she shall bear all costs of such changes, without refund. Any change in the location of a fire hydrant must be approved by the proper authority. (Ord. 1597 § 20, 2014: prior code § 7410.25. Formerly 13.04.260)

13.04.210 Water service for fire protection.
A. Fire. 
    1. For all projects for which the installation of one or more city standard fire hydrants are required by the fire chief pursuant to the authority of California Fire Code Section 507.5.1, such hydrant or hydrants shall be incorporated into a reliable water distribution system which is directly connected to an adequate transmission system.
    2. Each city standard fire hydrant required shall be operative and accepted by the utilities department prior to the commencement of combustible construction on the project.
    3. Upon acceptance by the city of any city standard fire hydrant constructed by the city or by city administered contract awarded in compliance with applicable bidding requirements, the utilities department shall determine the total extent of the properties benefited by the hydrant installation and shall assign to each parcel or portion of parcel benefited a share of the total cost of the hydrant installation. Such assigned shares shall be approved by the city council.
    4. The extent of the properties benefited shall be determined in accordance with the recommendations of the latest edition of the Fire Protection Handbook, published by the National Fire Protection Association, or any subsequent recognized standard adopted by resolution of the city council.
    5. As a condition to the issuance of a building permit for construction upon a parcel or portion of a parcel to which has been assigned a share of the cost of a city standard fire hydrant, the permittee shall reimburse to the city, or to the party originally funding the hydrant construction, the total assigned share. Such reimbursement obligation shall exist for a period of fifteen years after city acceptance of the fire hydrant.
B. Water Main Improvements for Fire Protection. 
    1. Upon acceptance by the city of water mains installed to provide a reliable water distribution system in accordance with subsection (A)(1) of this section, and if such mains have been constructed by the city or city-administered contract awarded in compliance with applicable bidding requirements, the utilities department shall determine the total extent of the properties benefited for fire protection by the water main installation and shall assign to each parcel or portion of parcel benefited, a share of the total cost of the installation. Such assigned shares shall be approved by the city council.
    2. The extent of the properties benefited shall be determined in accordance with the recommendations of the latest edition of the Fire Protection Handbook, published by the National Fire Protection Association, or any subsequent recognized standard adopted by resolution of the city council.
    3. As a condition of the issuance of a building permit for construction upon a parcel or portion of a parcel to which has been assigned a share of the water main cost, the permittee shall reimburse to the city, or to the party originally funding the water main construction, the total assigned share. Such reimbursement obligation shall exist for a period of fifteen years after city acceptance of the water main. (Ord. 1597 § 21, 2014: prior code § 7410.26. Formerly 13.04.270)

13.04.220 Private fire protection service connections—Charges—Ownership.
A. Purpose. A private fire protection service connection in three- to ten-inch size will be furnished only if adequate provision is made to prevent the use of water from such services for purposes other than fire extinguishing.
B. Quantitative Charges. 
    1. Water for Fires. No charge will be made for water used to extinguish accidental fires.
    2. Water for Fire Storage Tanks. Occasionally water may be obtained from a private fire service for filling a tank connected with the fire service, but only if written permission is secured from the utilities department in advance and an approved means of measurement is available. The rates for general use will be applied.
C. Violation of Agreement. If water is used from a fire service in violation of the agreement or of these regulations, the utilities department may, at its option, discontinue and remove the service.
D. Ownership of the Fire Service. All appurtenant equipment from the shut-off valve closest to the water main, including connections, pumps, tanks, chlorinators installed at any point in the line to the parcel’s water outlets shall be the sole responsibility of the parcel owner, both as to the original installation and as to the maintenance and upkeep. Such installations must be approved by the utilities department.
E. Pressure and Supply. The utilities department assumes no responsibility for loss or damage because of lack of water or pressure and agrees only to furnish such quantities and pressures as are available in its general water distribution system. (Ord. 1597 § 22, 2014: prior code § 7410.27. Formerly 13.04.280)

13.04.230 Private fire protection service—Monthly rates.
The monthly rates for private fire protection service shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1597 § 23, 2014: prior code § 7410.28. Formerly 13.04.290)

13.04.240 Privately owned water wells.
Appropriate use of privately owned wells is allowed on individual parcels. The use of the water from a well shall only be utilized on the parcel on which it is situated. (Ord. 1597 § 24, 2014)

13.04.250 Violations deemed misdemeanor.
Other than authorized water distribution staff, any person who operates or attempts to open or close any water system valve shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall also be held liable for any damage that may result. (Ord. 1597 § 25, 2014: Ord. 1484 § 11, 2005: prior code § 7410.29. Formerly 13.04.300)

Chapter 13.06 MANDATORY PLUMBING RETROFIT STANDARDS

Sections:
13.06.010    Definitions.
13.06.020    Retrofit upon change of use.
13.06.030    Retrofit upon expansion of use.
13.06.040    Retrofit upon sale.
13.06.050    Verification.
13.06.060    Notice of correction.
13.06.070    Exemptions.
13.06.080    Appeals.
13.06.090    Penalties–Infraction.
13.06.100    Civil nuisance.
13.06.110    Remedies cumulative.

13.06.010 Definitions.
A. “Change of ownership” means a transfer of a present interest in real property. Every transfer of property shall qualify as a “change of ownership,” except transfer of title from one spouse to another, whether the transfer is voluntary, involuntary, by operation of law, by grant, gift, devise, inheritance, trust, contract of sale, addition or deletion of an owner, property settlement, or any other means. “Change of ownership” effected other than by a contract of sale shall be deemed to occur at the time of actual transfer of title. A “change of ownership” resulting from a contract of sale or similar instrument shall be so regarded only if escrow is opened or a contract of sale is executed, whichever occurs last, on or after the effective date of this chapter.
B. “Change of use” means change of the occupancy classification as defined in the Uniform Building Code.
C. “Existing residential building” means any structure built and intended primarily for the shelter or housing of any person.
D. “Low-water-use plumbing fixtures” means any toilet using a maximum of one and six-tenths (1.6) gallons per flush and shower heads designed to emit a maximum of two and one-half (2.5) gallons per minute (gpm) of water.
E. “Retrofit” means the replacement of a conventional plumbing fixture with low-water-using plumbing fixtures.
F. “Water conservation certificate” means a certificate acknowledging that installation of water-conserving plumbing fixtures has been completed. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1992)

13.06.020 Retrofit upon change of use.
All existing residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional structures at the time of change of use shall be retrofitted, if not already so equipped, with low-water-use plumbing fixtures. These fixtures shall be installed and maintained and shall not be replaced with fixtures which allow greater water use. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1992)

13.06.030 Retrofit upon expansion of use.
A. All residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial reconstruction, remodels or additions that add or change bathroom plumbing fixtures shall include low-water-use plumbing fixture standards for the entire facility, including retrofitting of existing plumbing fixtures, as defined in Section 13.06.010.
B. No release for occupancy shall be issued without documentation confirming compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1992)

13.06.040 Retrofit upon sale.
A. Before the close of escrow for any change of ownership, defined by this chapter, of real property within the city, the selling owner(s) or an authorized agent shall certify compliance with the retrofit requirements of this chapter by obtaining a water conservation certificate in accordance with Section 13.06.050. No property transfer shall be recorded until verification has been received by the city and a water conservation certificate has been issued to the seller.
B. Pursuant to the authority vested to the City of San Luis Obispo under Civil Code Section 1102.6a, the city hereby requires disclosure of the retrofit requirements of this chapter, in transaction, transfer, or change in ownership subject to the provisions of this chapter.
C. No liability shall arise nor any action be brought or maintained against any agent of any party to a transfer of title, including any person or entity acting in the capacity of an escrow, for any error, inaccuracy, or omission relating to compliance with this section. However, this section does not apply to a licensee, as defined in Section 10011 of the State Business and Professions Code, where the licensee participates in the making of the certification required to be made pursuant to this section with actual knowledge of the falsity of the certification. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1992)

13.06.050 Verification.
A. Upon retrofitting with water-conserving plumbing fixtures, the seller, prior to the change of ownership, shall obtain from the utilities department a “water conservation certificate,” in accordance with administrative procedures established by the department, verifying that water-conserving plumbing fixtures have been installed. The seller shall allow an inspection of property by city staff.
B. “Water conservation certificates” shall also be available to those who voluntarily install water-conserving plumbing fixtures or have installed water-conserving plumbing fixtures prior to the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1992)

13.06.060 Notice of correction.
Whenever the utilities director determines that there is a property where low-water-use plumbing fixtures have not been installed as required by this chapter or where such fixtures have been removed since initial installation and replaced with other than low-water-use fixtures, the utilities director may serve a notice of correction on the owner(s) of the property on which the violation is situated and any other person responsible for the violation. The owner of record shall have ninety days to take corrective action. Failure to take corrective action within ninety days shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1992)

13.06.070 Exemptions.
The utilities director may exempt facilities from the provisions of this chapter, and impose reasonable conditions in lieu of full compliance herewith, if the director determines that there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. The director may exempt facilities from the provisions of this chapter when low-water-using fixtures are not available to match a historic architectural style. The director shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any exemption or acceptance of alternatives. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1992)

13.06.080 Appeals.
A. Content of Appeals. An appeal may be made to an appeals board, consisting of representatives from community development department, finance department, and utilities department, by any person aggrieved by a decision of the utilities director pursuant to this chapter. The appellant must specifically state in the notice of appeal:
    1. The name and address of the appellant and the appellant’s interest in the decision.
    2. The nature of the decision appealed from and/or the conditions appealed from.
    3. A clear, complete, but brief statement of the reasons why, in the opinion of the appellant, the decision or the conditions imposed were unjustified or inappropriate.
    4. The specific facts of the matter in sufficient detail to notify the city. The appeal shall not be stated in generalities.
B. Acceptance of Appeal. An appeal shall not be accepted by the board unless it is complete. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1992)

13.06.090 Penalties–Infraction.
It is unlawful to fail to comply with the retrofit requirements of this chapter or to alter or replace low-water-use plumbing fixtures required by this chapter with fixtures other than low-water-use plumbing fixtures. Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute an infraction. Each day any violation of this chapter continues shall be considered a new and separate offense. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1992)

13.06.100 Civil nuisance.
A. Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, maintained, sold, or the use of which is changed, contrary to the provisions of this chapter, and/or any use of any land, building, or premises, established, conducted, operated, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter, shall be, and same is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, subject to abatement pursuant to Chapter 8.24. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1992)

13.06.110 Remedies cumulative.
The decision of the city to pursue either a civil or criminal or abatement action against a person violating any provision of this chapter shall not preclude further relief by use of any other remedy provided herein, or by common law, statute, or ordinance. (Ord. 1224 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 13.07 WATER CONSERVATION

Sections:
13.07.010    Substandard water fixtures prohibited.
13.07.020    Water runoff prohibited.
13.07.030    Council water conservation powers.
13.07.040    Utilities manager powers.
13.07.050    Violations.
13.07.060    Definitions.
13.07.070    Water use reduction.
13.07.080    Excess water use surcharge.
13.07.090    Additional authority.
13.07.100    Hearing for exceptions.
13.07.110    Reservation of rights.

13.07.010 Substandard water fixtures prohibited.
No person shall cause or allow any water received by such person from the city water system to be wasted due to substandard, leaky or faulty water fixtures or water-using or distributing devices. (Ord. 1089 § 1 (part), 1987)

13.07.020 Water runoff prohibited.
A. No person shall cause any water delivered by the city water system to flow away from property owned, occupied or controlled by such person in any gutter, ditch or in any other manner over the surface of the ground, so as to constitute water waste runoff.
B. “Water waste runoff” means water flowing away from property and which is caused by excessive application(s) of water beyond reasonable or practical flow rates, water volumes or duration of application. (Ord. 1089 § 1 (part), 1987)

13.07.030 Council water conservation powers.
A. When deemed necessary in the judgment of the city council to conserve water during critical water periods, the city council may by resolution declare an emergency condition and do any or all of the following which in its judgment is deemed advisable after publication of notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation distributed in the city or after reasonable notice thereof is otherwise given by the city to users:
    1. Limit irrigation within the city water service area to specified hours, or prohibit irrigation entirely within the service area or any portion or portions thereof;
    2. Limit all customers inside the city water service area to specified maximum usages of water for each category of users;
    3. Implement other water conservation measures as deemed appropriate.
B. In order to comply with any mandatory actions required by the State Water Board or any other agency having jurisdiction over the waters of the state, the city council may by resolution limit outdoor irrigation of ornamental landscapes or turf with potable water to three or two days a week in accordance with the following schedules:
+--------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Even numbered addresses: | Sundays, Tuesdays and Thursdays |
+--------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Odd numbered addresses:  | Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays |
+--------------------------+---------------------------------+
+--------------------------+-----------------------+
| Even numbered addresses: | Tuesdays and Fridays  |
+--------------------------+-----------------------+
| Odd numbered addresses:  | Mondays and Thursdays |
+--------------------------+-----------------------+
C. In order to comply with any mandatory actions required by the State Water Board or any other agency having jurisdiction over the waters of the state, the city council may by resolution limit outdoor irrigation of ornamental landscapes or turf with potable water between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m.
Nothing in this subsection C shall limit the use of nonpotable water (i.e., recycled or gray water systems) for outdoor irrigation of ornamental landscape or turf.
D. The following public facilities may be allowed to be renovated on an annual as needed basis: Emerson Field, Meadow Park Field, Mission Plaza Turf, Santa Rosa Center Field, Santa Rosa Softball Field, Sinsheimer Stadium, Stockton Field, and Throop Field. Annual renovation shall include an initial germination period during which daily watering at these eight facilities is allowed for a period of up to six weeks. Following renovation, these eight facilities will be allowed to be watered up to three days a week in order to sustain them. (Ord. 1631 § 2, 2016; Ord. 1619 § 2, 2015: Ord. 1607 § 3, 2014: Ord. 1116 § 2 (part), 1988)

13.07.040 Utilities manager powers.
If the city council adopts a resolution declaring a critical water period or any emergency in the water system as set out in Section 13.07.030, the utilities manager is authorized and directed to take any appropriate action which in his or her judgment will best conserve water during the duration of the emergency; such action may include but is not limited to the following:
A. Specify the days and/or hours during which water users may irrigate;
B. Notify owner or owners of property in writing of leaks in the water line on their private property and require repair of such leaks within three days after such notification. Upon failure to comply, the water department shall turn off the water on the property until the leak is repaired. Service will be restored after the property owner corrects the leak. Reconnection fees will be charged as set forth in Section 4.20.080 (Restoration-reconnection charge) of this code. (Ord. 1116 § 2 (part), 1988)

13.07.050 Violations.
A violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction and may be punishable by this code and/or result in discontinuance of water service as provided in Sections 13.04.180 (Discontinuance of service) and 4.20.080 (Restoration-reconnection charge). (Ord. 1116 § 2 (part), 1988)

13.07.060 Definitions.
The following words or phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined within individual sections of this chapter:
A. “Base period” means that period of time over which the base water use is computed. (Ord. 1168 § 2 (part), 1990: Ord. 1143 § 2 (part), 1989)

13.07.070 Water use reduction.
No customer of the city shall make, cause, use or permit the use of potable water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter.
A. Mandatory Water Conservation. The city will establish by resolution a mandatory water conservation program.
B. Residential Lifeline Allowance. No customer shall be surcharged or otherwise be penalized for failure to reduce water consumption below a lifeline rate as established by the city.
C. Prohibited Water Uses. In addition to any other requirements of this code, all consumers are deemed to have under their control at all times any and all water distribution lines and facilities serving the property benefited by the water service and to know the manner and extent of their water use and any runoff. The following specific uses of water are prohibited and constitute a violation of this code:
    1. Use of water from fire hydrants shall not be used for any purpose other than to fight fires or for other activities where such use is immediately necessary to maintain the health, safety and welfare of the residents of San Luis Obispo.
    2. Restaurants may not serve water to their customers except on specific request.
    3. Potable city water shall not be used for major construction activities, such as grading and dust control, and shall not be used to wash down sidewalks, driveways, or parking areas except to alleviate immediate fire or sanitation hazards.
    4. New landscaping may be restricted or prohibited during mandatory water conservation. The council shall adopt by resolution procedures to implement this section. (Ord. 1395 § 1, 2001: Ord. 1168 § 2 (part), 1990: Ord. 1143 § 2 (part), 1989)

13.07.080 Excess water use surcharge.
To encourage compliance with mandatory water conservation, there shall be a surcharge added to the water bill if a customer exceeds the established allocation amount. The city will establish by resolution the surcharge method and amount. (Ord. 1168 § 2 (part), 1990: Ord. 1143 § 2 (part), 1989)

13.07.090 Additional authority.
The city has the authority to install a flow restrictor or terminate water service to any customer who is in violation of this code, including the failure to meet water conservation reduction requirements. Prior to the termination of a water service, the city will provide a due process hearing before the water conservation adjustment board. The criteria to install a flow restrictor or terminate water service will be established by resolution. (Ord. 1168 § 2 (part), 1990: Ord. 1143 § 2 (part), 1989)

13.07.100 Hearing for exceptions.
The water conservation adjustment board, consisting of the directors of the city’s finance, utilities and community development departments or their designees, may grant exceptions for uses of water otherwise prohibited by Section 13.07.070. Rules and procedures for filing and hearing requests for exemptions shall be adopted by resolution of the council. Appeals may be taken from decisions of the board in the manner set forth in said resolution. (Ord. 1168 § 2 (part), 1990: Ord. 1143 § 2 (part), 1989)

13.07.110 Reservation of rights.
The rights of the city under this chapter shall be cumulative to any other right of the city to discontinue service. All moneys collected by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in the water fund as reimbursement for the city’s costs and expenses of administering and enforcing this chapter. (Ord. 1168 § 2 (part), 1990: Ord. 1143 § 2 (part), 1989)

Chapter 13.08 SEWERS

Sections:
Article I.  General Provisions
    13.08.010    Purpose and policy.
    13.08.020    Definitions and abbreviations.
Article II. General Sewer Use Requirements
    13.08.030    Stormwater and unpolluted drainage.
    13.08.040    Prohibited discharges.
    13.08.050    Federal categorical pretreatment standards—Applicability.
    13.08.060    Right of revision.
    13.08.070    Dilution.
Article III. Pretreatment of Wastewater
    13.08.080    Pretreatment facilities.
    13.08.090    Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
    13.08.100    Accidental discharge—Slug discharge control plan.
    13.08.110    Prohibition of hauled wastewater.
Article IV. Compliance Monitoring
    13.08.120    Control manhole.
    13.08.130    Measurements and tests.
    13.08.140    Powers and authority of inspectors.
Article V.  Individual Wastewater Discharge Permits
    13.08.150    Permit—Required—Term—Transfer—Revocation—Completion of an industrial user’s survey required.
Article VI. Reporting Requirements
    13.08.160    Reporting requirements for permittees.
    13.08.170    Baseline monitoring reports.
    13.08.180    Compliance schedule.
    13.08.190    Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
    13.08.200    Periodic compliance reports.
    13.08.210    Reports of changed conditions.
    13.08.220    Reports from unpermitted users.
    13.08.230    Notice of violation—Repeat sampling and reporting.
    13.08.240    Accidental discharge and slug control plan.
    13.08.250    Analytical requirements.
    13.08.260    Sample collection.
    13.08.270    Representative wastewater samples.
    13.08.280    Date of receipt of reports.
    13.08.290    Recordkeeping.
    13.08.300    Certification statements.
Article VII. Confidential Information
    13.08.310    Confidentiality—Public disclosure.
Article VIII. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
    13.08.320    Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance.
Article IX. Sewer Connection
    13.08.330    Fee required prior to permit issuance for newly annexed territory.
    13.08.340    Computation of fee.
    13.08.350    Exemption of outstanding bonds from fee determination.
    13.08.360    Main extensions to customers other than subdivisions—Terms and conditions.
    13.08.370    Use of existing sewer.
    13.08.380    Design standards—Conformance with required.
    13.08.390    Drainage below curb and below main sewer level.
    13.08.395    Private sewer laterals.
    13.08.396    Wastewater flow offset.
Article X.  Charges and Fees
    13.08.400    Determination—User classification.
    13.08.410    Use of revenues.
Article XI. Rules and Regulations Governing the Disposal of Septic Tank Cleanings
    13.08.420    Unlawful to dump on land.
    13.08.430    Unlawful to dump into city collection system except as provided in this chapter.
    13.08.440    Dumping regulations.
    13.08.450    Dumping permit and fees.
Article XII. Administration and Enforcement Remedies
    13.08.460    Unlawful discharges.
    13.08.470    Authority of director.
    13.08.480    Appeals.
    13.08.490    Use of provisions.
    13.08.500    Injunctive relief.
    13.08.510    Assessment of cost.
    13.08.520    Falsifying information.
    13.08.530    Termination of service.
Article XIII. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
    13.08.540    Upset.
    13.08.550    Prohibited discharge standards.
    13.08.560    Bypass.
Article XIV. Miscellaneous Provisions
    13.08.570    Severability.

Article I. General Provisions

13.08.010 Purpose and policy.
A. This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the city of San Luis Obispo.
B. This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to industrial users (IUs), provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities, and requires significant industrial user (SIU) reporting.
C. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the POTW and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403).
D. The objectives of these provisions are:
    1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will interfere with the operation of the POTW, including interference with the use or disposal of municipal sludge;
    2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the system inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
    3. To improve opportunities to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system;
    4. To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
    5. To enable the city to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject.
E. Conflict with State Law. Any provision in this chapter that conflicts with the provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, Streets and Highways Code, Government Code, or any other California Code shall be automatically superseded by the provisions in said Code until such time as this chapter can be revised.
F. These provisions provide for the regulation of indirect contributors to the POTW through the issuance of permits to industrial users, pretreatment and reporting requirements for permittees, monitoring and enforcement of noncompliance.
G. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated by the director to a duly authorized city of San Luis Obispo employee. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.020 Definitions and abbreviations.
A. The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the designated meanings:
    1. BOD—Biochemical oxygen demand.
    2. BMP—Best management practice.
    3. BMR—Baseline monitoring report.
    4. CFR—Code of Federal Regulations.
    5. CIU—Categorical industrial user.
    6. COD—Chemical oxygen demand.
    7. EPA—U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
    8. gpd—gallons per day.
    9. IU—Industrial user.
    10. mg/L—milligrams per liter.
    11. NPDES—National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
    12. POTW—Publicly owned treatment works.
    13. RCRA—Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
    14. SIU—Significant industrial user.
    15. SNC—Significant noncompliance.
    16. TSS—Total suspended solids.
    17. USC—United States Code.
The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings:
B. “Act” or “the Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (33 USC § 1251, et seq.) and any amendments thereto including the Clean Water Act of 1977, as well as any regulations, guidelines, limitations and standards promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act.
C. “Approval authority” means State Water Resources Control Board.
D. “Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user” means any of the following:
    1. If the user is a corporation:
        a. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
        b. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including the explicit or implicit duty to make major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; has the ability to ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for wastewater discharge permit requirements, and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
    2. If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.
    3. If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the governmental facility, or their designee.
    4. The individuals described in subsections (D)(1) through (3) of this section may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for either the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or the overall environmental matters of the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.
E. “Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at twenty degrees centigrade and expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L).
F. “Best management practices” (or “BMPs”) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in this article and 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or sewage disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
G. “Categorical industrial user” means an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
H. “Categorical pretreatment standard” or “categorical standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC § 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Part 405s-471.
I. “City” means the city of San Luis Obispo.
J. “Class I industrial user” means any industrial user that has materials and/or wastes on site that if discharged to the sewer may impact the POTW in a negative manner. These materials and wastes include, but are not limited to, any and all prohibited discharges described in Section 13.08.040.
K. “Class II industrial user” means any industrial user that may discharge conventional pollutants to the POTW which may cause interference or pass-through. These wastes include but are not limited to laundry discharges, nonhazardous solids and oil and grease of animal or vegetable origin.
L. “Control authority” means the city of San Luis Obispo.
M. “Conventional pollutants” means pollutants which are usually found in domestic and/or commercial wastes such as suspended solids, biological oxygen demand, pathogenic organisms, and oil and grease of animal or vegetable origin.
N. “Daily maximum” means the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day.
O. “Daily maximum limit” means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
P. “Director” means the utilities director of the city of San Luis Obispo or his or her duly authorized representative. Any notice required to be given to the director shall be delivered to the director at 879 Morro Street, San Luis Obispo, or as otherwise directed.
Q. “Domestic wastewater” means water bearing only those wastes derived from the ordinary living processes and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal to, and treatment in, the POTW.
R. “Environmental Protection Agency” or “EPA” means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, the regional administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
S. “Existing source” means any source of discharge that is not a “new source.”
T. “Grab sample” means a sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen minutes.
U. “Grease” means all fat, grease, oil, wax or other trichlorotrifluoroethane-soluble matter of animal, vegetable, petroleum or mineral origin.
V. “Indirect discharge” or “discharge” means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source.
W. “Industrial user” or “user” means a source of indirect discharge.
X. “Industrial user’s survey” means a questionnaire (and related process) used by the city to identify and categorize industrial users and the characteristics of their wastewater discharge.
Y. “Infectious waste” means any waste material or article which harbors or may reasonably be considered to harbor any type of microorganism, helminth or virus which causes or significantly contributes to increased morbidity or mortality in human beings.
Z. “Instantaneous limit” means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
AA. “Interference” means a discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal which is a cause of or significantly contributes to either a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or to the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, and the Toxic Substances Control Act.
BB. “Lateral” or “sewer lateral” means that part of the piping of a drainage system that extends from a public or private building, structure or facility and conveys wastewater to the point at which it enters the public sewer, private sewer, private sewer disposal system, or other point of disposal. This may extend beyond the boundaries of the property being served.
CC. “Local limit” means the specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
DD. “Medical waste” means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, or dialysis wastes.
EE. “Monthly average” means the sum of all “daily discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the number of “daily discharges” measured during that month.
FF. “Monthly average limit” means the highest allowable average of “daily discharges” over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all “daily discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the number of “daily discharges” measured during that month.
GG. “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, lake or other body of surface water or ground water.
HH. “New source” means:
    1. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided, that:
        a. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
        b. The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
        c. The production of wastewater-generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
    2. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (HH)(1)(b) or (c) of this section but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
    3. Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has:
        a. Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program;
            i. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
            ii. Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities or equipment; or
        b. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
II. Noncontact Cooling Water. Water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, immediate product, or finished product.
JJ. “Pass-through” means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
KK. “Person” means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, group, governmental agency or educational institution.
LL. “pH” means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
MM. “Pollutant” means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, or certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
NN. “Pretreatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
OO. “Pretreatment requirements” means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
PP. “Pretreatment standards” or “standards” shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
QQ. “Prohibited discharge standards” or “prohibited discharges” means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in Section 13.08.040.
RR. “Publicly owned treatment works (POTW)” means the city-owned treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
SS. “Septic tank waste” means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, or septic tanks.
TT. “Sewage” means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
UU. “Significant industrial user (SIU)” means any industrial discharger subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards or any industrial discharger that:
    1. Discharges ten thousand gallons per day or more of process wastewater;
    2. Contributes five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic capacity of the treatment plant;
    3. Discharges either continuously or intermittently to the POTW, process wastewaters containing priority pollutants as determined through analytical procedures or reasonable technical judgment; or
    4. Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the director, to adversely affect the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
VV. “Significant noncompliance” means any one of the following:
    1. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, as defined here as those in which sixty-six percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii);
    2. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
    3. Any violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the city determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
    4. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority as stated in this chapter to halt or prevent such a discharge;
    5. Failure to meet, within ninety days after schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
    6. Failure to provide, within forty-five days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
    7. Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
    8. Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
WW. “Slug load” or “slug discharge” means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section 13.08.040. A slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
XX. “Stormdrain” means a sewer which is designed to carry storm and surface waters and drainage rather than sewage or industrial wastes.
YY. “Stormwater” or “storm water” means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
ZZ. “Total suspended solids” or “suspended solids” means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.
AAA. “Toxic” or “poisonous” means any solid, liquid or gas in such quantity that, alone or in combination with other waste substances, may create a hazard for humans, animals or the local environment, interfere with sewage treatment processes, cause a public nuisance, or cause any hazardous condition to occur in the sewerage system.
BBB. “Wastewater” means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
CCC. “Wastewater treatment plant (WWTP)” or “treatment plant” means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

Article II. General Sewer Use Requirements

13.08.030 Stormwater and unpolluted drainage.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged rain, stormwater, surface water, ground water, seepage, roof runoff, street or yard drainage, subsurface drainage, ponds or lawn sprays or uncontaminated water or water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which exceed maximum concentration limitations, as stated in Section 13.08.040, to the publicly owned treatment works.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge any wastewater, including domestic sewage, and industrial wastewater, petroleum products, or otherwise polluted water, derived from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, or institutions, to any stormdrain or natural outlet. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.040 Prohibited discharges.
A. General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Specific Prohibitions. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any sewers:
    1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-six degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant, resulting in interference, but in no case higher than one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (forty degrees Celsius) at introduction into the wastewater treatment plant.
    2. Any waters or wastes containing oil and grease such that the discharge results in a stoppage, plugging, breakage, significant obstruction to flow or any other damage to or increased maintenance of sewers or sewerage facilities. No person shall discharge oil and grease which results in pass-through and/or interference.
    3. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW and/or cause acute worker health and safety problems to its personnel or to the operation of the system.
    4. Any waters or wastes that have a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (sixty degrees Celsius), using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene or xylene.
    5. Any solid or viscous substance, including but not limited to unground garbage, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, polishing compounds, resin beads, metal, glass, straw, rags, spent grains or hops, wood, plastic, mud, shavings or manure which may cause obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the POTW.
    6. Any waters or wastes having pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the POTW.
    7. Any water added to a wastewater discharge for the sole purpose of dilution as a means to achieve compliance with any pretreatment standard or local discharge limit.
    8. Any waters or wastes including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) at a flow rate and/or concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference or pass-through.
    9. Any average daily flow greater than two percent of the WWTP average daily sewage flow.
    10. Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
    11. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director.
    12. Any waters or wastes containing any radioactive materials or wastes of such half-life or concentration that they do not comply with regulations issued by appropriate authorities (Sections 30285 and 30287 of the California Code of Regulations).
    13. Any infectious wastes.
    14. Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director in an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit.
    15. Any waters or wastes containing color which is not removed in the ordinary WWTP treatment process.
    16. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair.
    17. Any stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the director.
C. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
D. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
E. Local Limits. 
    1. The director is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c).
    2. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass-through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following:
    +---------------------------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
    |        CONSTITUENT        | UNIFORM LIMIT | CONTRIBUTORY LIMIT | CONTRIBUTORY LIMIT |
    |                           | (mg/L) (daily |  A (mg/L) (daily   |  B (mg/L) (daily   |
    |                           |   average)    |      average)      |      average)      |
    +---------------------------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
    | Ammonia                   | 32            | 50                 |                    |
    +---------------------------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
    | Biochemical Oxygen Demand | 226           | 400                | 250                |
    | (BOD)                     |               |                    |                    |
    +---------------------------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
    | Chloride                  | 1523          |                    |                    |
    +---------------------------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
    | Sodium                    | 1200          |                    |                    |
    +---------------------------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
    | Total Dissolved Solids    | 2215          |                    |                    |
    | (TDS)                     |               |                    |                    |
    +---------------------------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
    | Total Suspended Solids    | 2346          |                    |                    |
    | (TSS)                     |               |                    |                    |
    +---------------------------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
    | Copper                    | 0.14          | 0.20               |                    |
    +---------------------------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
    | Zinc                      | 0.17          | 1.00               | 0.50               |
    +---------------------------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
    3. Unless otherwise stated in individual discharge permit, the uniform limits shall apply to all dischargers. Application for contributory Limit A or B may be made to the director. The director’s decision shall be the city’s final decision.
    4. The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The director may impose mass limitations in addition to the concentration based limitations above.
F. Limitations on wastewater strength in this chapter may be supplemented with more stringent limitations if:
    1. The director determines that the limitations listed in this chapter may not be sufficient to protect the operation of the city’s treatment works; or
    2. The director determines that the limitations listed in this chapter may not be sufficient to enable the city’s treatment works to comply with water quality standards or effluent limitations specified in the city’s NPDES permit.
G. When the director determines that a user is contributing any of the substances mentioned in subsection A of this section in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the director may:
    1. Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW;
    2. Develop effluent limitations for the user to correct;
    3. Place limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
    4. Require pretreatment of discharge prior to discharge to POTW; or
    5. Take any other action necessary to eliminate the interference.
H. Where an industrial user utilizes all or a portion of their domestic water supply from a source other than city of San Luis Obispo potable water, the city may require additional laboratory testing of any potential constituents of concern which may be discharged to the POTW. This testing will be performed by a state of California certified laboratory, at a frequency and length of time determined by the city, at solely the industrial user’s expense.
I. The director may develop best management practices (BMPs), in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of this chapter.
J. The contents of swimming pools and/or spas (including filter backwash from swimming pools and/or spas) shall only be discharged into the sanitary sewer in the manner specified herein.
    1. The water is discharged by pumping and shall not exceed the capacity of the sewer lateral and/or public main.
    2. Each swimming pool discharging to a sewer system shall be equipped with an indirect waste connection to preclude any possibility of a backflow of sewage into the swimming pool or piping system. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.050 Federal categorical pretreatment standards—Applicability.
Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.060 Right of revision.
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.070 Dilution.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

Article III. Pretreatment of Wastewater

13.08.080 Pretreatment facilities.
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in Section 13.08.040 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. All pretreatment facilities must comply with all other applicable laws. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.090 Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be installed for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, flammable wastes, sand or other harmful constituents; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.
B. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. Those interceptors found to be inadequately sized or insufficiently removing fats, oils, and grease, for any reason, will be required to be repaired or replaced, at owner’s expense. Failure to properly maintain interceptors in continuously efficient operation may be considered sufficient cause for disconnection of premises from the POTW or punitive actions as provided for in this chapter.
C. Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors must be serviced on a routine basis, determined by usage patterns, and have the wastes properly disposed of in accordance to all applicable rules and regulations.
D. Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors must have all related maintenance documented. All interceptor cleaning and service records for the previous three years must be kept on site and made immediately available during inspection. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.100 Accidental discharge—Slug discharge control plan.
The director shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
A. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
B. Description of stored chemicals;
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by Section 13.08.240; and
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of contaminant structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.110 Prohibition of hauled wastewater.
Any trucked or hauled waste is prohibited from discharge into the POTW, except at specific points designated by the director. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

Article IV. Compliance Monitoring

13.08.120 Control manhole.
When required by the director, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and flow measurement of the discharge. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.130 Measurements and tests.
A. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes shall be determined by the testing procedures specified in 40 CFR Part 136. When required by the director, the industrial user shall provide safe and secure access to the proper sampling point for the determination of compliance with federal categorical standards and/or local discharge limits. This may require the installation of a control manhole as described in Section 13.08.120. All testing shall be performed by an approved laboratory and conducted at the expense of the discharger.
B. When requested by the director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty days of the request. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.140 Powers and authority of inspectors.
A. Inspection of Premises. The director or other duly authorized employees or representatives of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be readily permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, record examination and copying, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter at all reasonable times. If the director, health officer, or other duly authorized employee or representative of the city or the health department has reasonable cause to believe that wastewater discharge conditions on or emanating from a facility are so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard public health or safety or the integrity of the POTW, they shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect the property and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection.
B. The director shall have the right to set up on the user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations. The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. Unreasonable delays in allowing access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
C. Cost of Inspection. Each discharger shall pay a reasonable inspection fee sufficient to cover the costs of the inspection. Such costs may be incorporated in the industrial user wastewater discharge permit fee.
D. Rights of City Entry. The director or other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the POTW. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

Article V. Individual Wastewater Discharge Permits

13.08.150 Permit—Required—Term—Transfer—Revocation—Completion of an industrial user’s survey required.
A. Permit Application. 
    1. Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file an industrial wastewater discharge permit application with the city within thirty days of receiving a notice to apply. Proposed new IUs shall apply ninety days prior to actual connection to the municipal sewer.
    2. In support of its application, the applicant must submit the information requested in the application form issued by the city.
    3. The director will evaluate the data furnished by the IU and may require additional information. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the IU for revision. After evaluation and acceptance of the information furnished, the director may issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit subject to the terms and conditions provided herein.
    4. All industrial wastewater discharge permit applications, IU reports, and certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of the IU and contain the certification statement set forth in Section 13.08.300.
    5. If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has assumed responsibility either for the overall operation of the facility or for the overall environmental matters of the company, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the director prior to, or together with, any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
    6. A denial of a permit application may be appealed pursuant to the procedures in Section 13.08.480.
B. Permit Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. The conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced by the director in accordance with this chapter, and applicable state and federal regulations. Permit requirements may include but not be limited to the following:
    1. A statement that indicates the industrial wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date, and effective date;
    2. A statement that the industrial wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable;
    3. Effluent limits, which may include numerical limits or best management practices based on applicable pretreatment standards;
    4. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants or best management practices to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;
    5. Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the director to be necessary;
    6. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
    7. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
    8. Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
    9. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
    10. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
    11. A statement that compliance with the industrial wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the industrial wastewater discharge permit;
    12. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this chapter and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations; and
    13. A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
C. Permit Modification. 
    1. The director may modify any industrial wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including but not limited to, the following reasons:
        a. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
        b. To address significant alterations or additions to the IU’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the industrial wastewater discharge permit issuance;
        c. To add information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city’s POTW, personnel, or the receiving waters;
        d. In light of a violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial wastewater discharge permit;
        e. In light of misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the industrial wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
        f. To correct typographical or other errors in the industrial wastewater discharge permit.
    2. An IU shall be informed of any proposed changes in its permit at least thirty calendar days prior to the effective date of the change.
D. Duration of Permits. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period of less than one year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the director during the life of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in this chapter are modified and changed. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his or her permit at least thirty days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
E. Transfer of a Permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. An industrial wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation; provided, that if in the opinion of the director, the sale or transfer of an operation does not result in a change in use, the permit may be reassigned.
F. Revocation of Permit. Any user who violates any of the conditions of this chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, or any of the following conditions, is subject to permit revocation:
    1. Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the IU’s operations, systems, or wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
    2. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the industrial wastewater discharge permit application;
    3. Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
    4. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
    5. Refusing to allow the director timely access to facility premises and records;
    6. Failure to meet effluent limitations;
    7. Failure to pay fines;
    8. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility;
    9. Failure to meet compliance schedules; or
    10. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or of any terms of the industrial wastewater discharge permit or of this chapter.
G. Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All industrial wastewater discharge permits issued to an IU are void upon the issuance of a new industrial wastewater discharge permit to that IU. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

Article VI. Reporting Requirements

13.08.160 Reporting requirements for permittees.
A. Any discharger of nondomestic wastewater may be required to submit to the director a report indicating the nature, concentration and daily flows of all limiting pollutants. The report shall also state whether the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are being consistently met.
B. After meeting the requirements set forth in subsection A of this section, the user shall submit self-monitoring reports, as required by the director, to assess and assure continued compliance with pretreatment standards and requirements, including, but not limited to, the reports required in 40 CFR 403.12. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, done in accordance with the procedures approved by the POTW.
C. Reports, such as those identified in subsections A and B of this section but not limited to, shall be signed and certified by an authorized representative of the discharging facility.
D. All industrial users shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years any records and/or reports of monitoring activities or results and shall make such records/reports available for inspection and copying by the POTW. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user.
E. Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste. 
    1. Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under this article. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self monitoring requirements of this article.
    2. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection A of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
    3. In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety days of the effective date of such regulations.
    4. In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
    5. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.170 Baseline monitoring reports.
A. Within either one hundred eighty days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to, or scheduled to discharge to, the POTW shall submit to the director a report containing the information listed in subsection C of this section.
B. At least ninety days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report containing the information listed in subsection C of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
C. IUs described above shall submit the information set forth below:
    1. Identifying Information. The IU shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners.
    2. Permits. The IU shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
    3. Description of Operations. The IU shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by such IU. This description shall include a schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
    4. Flow Measurement. The IU shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following:
        a. Regulated process streams; and
        b. Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e). The city may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations.
    5. Measurement of Pollutants. 
        a. The IU shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; and
        b. The IU shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations.
        c. A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, twenty-four-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The city may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any IU that demonstrates that flow-proportional sampling is infeasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples where the IU demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
        d. The IU shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this section.
        e. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment facility exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the IU shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the city.
        f. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the director determines that the 40 CFR Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the city or other parties, and approved by the director.
        g. The city may allow the submission of a baseline report that utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures.
        h. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date, and place of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
    6. Compliance Certification. The IU shall submit a statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the IU (as defined in Section 13.08.160 and certified to by a qualified professional) indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the IU to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
    7. Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the IU shall submit the shortest schedule by which the IU will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O and M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule shall meet the requirements set forth in Section 13.08.180.
    8. All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with this section and be signed by an authorized representative as defined in Section 13.08.160. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.180 Compliance schedule.
A. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the IU to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);
B. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
C. The IU shall submit a progress report to the director no later than fourteen days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance, including in such progress report, at a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate, the steps taken by the IU to return to the established schedule; and
D. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between submissions of such progress reports to the director. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.190 Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
Within ninety days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the information described in 40 CFR 403.12(d). (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.200 Periodic compliance reports.
A. All SIUs must, at a frequency determined by the director, submit no less than twice per year, in June and December or on other dates specified, reports indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge that are limited by pretreatment standards, and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the SIU must submit documentation required by the director or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the SIU. The director may modify the months during which the above reports are to be submitted.
B. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13.08.160. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.210 Reports of changed conditions.
A. All IUs must promptly notify the director in advance of any substantial changes to the IU’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater.
B. SIUs are required to notify the director immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.220 Reports from unpermitted users.
All users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit shall provide reports to the director as the director may require. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.230 Notice of violation—Repeat sampling and reporting.
If sampling performed by an IU indicates a violation, the IU must notify the director within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the violation. The IU shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within thirty days of becoming aware of the violation. Where the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the IU, the city must perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the IU of the violation and requires the IU to perform the repeat analysis. Resampling is not required if:
A. The city performs sampling for the IU at a frequency of at least once per month, or
B. The city performs sampling for the IU between the time the initial sampling was conducted and the time the IU or the city receives the results of this sampling. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.240 Accidental discharge and slug control plan.
A. Each IU shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. Facilities shall be provided to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials and shall be maintained at the IU’s expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted by the IU when requested, to the city for the city’s review, and shall be approved by the director before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the IU from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter or of any other applicable rule, regulation, order or ordinance of a governmental authority.
B. Any direct or indirect connection to the IU’s plumbing or drainage system that allows the discharge of wastes to the public sewer system in violation of this chapter, shall be eliminated. Where such action is impractical or unreasonable, as determined by the city, the IU shall appropriately label such entry points to warn against discharge of such wastes.
C. A notice shall be permanently posted on the IU’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who could cause such a discharge to occur, of the emergency notification procedure. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.250 Analytical requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the director or other parties approved by the EPA. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.260 Sample collection.
A. Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analyses performed during the period covered by the report and be representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
B. Except as indicated in subsections C and D below, the IU must collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the director. Where time proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the director, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
C. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
D. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring reports and ninety-day compliance reports pursuant to Sections 13.08.170 and 13.08.510 (40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)), a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the director may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by Section 13.08.200 (40 CFR 403.12(e) and (h)), the IU is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
E. If an IU subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures set forth in Section 13.08.270, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
F. All required sampling shall be done at the IU’s expense. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.270 Representative wastewater samples.
All wastewater samples must be representative of the IU’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an IU to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the IU to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.280 Date of receipt of reports.
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, postage prepaid, from a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.290 Recordkeeping.
Any IUs subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the IU independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices established under Section 13.08.040. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, time of sampling, the name(s) of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years or during the pendency of any litigation. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.300 Certification statements.
A. Certification of Permit Applications and User Reports. The following certification statement is required to be signed and submitted by IUs submitting baseline monitoring reports pursuant to Section 13.08.170, SIUs submitting reports in compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines pursuant to Section 13.08.190, IUs submitting periodic compliance reports required by Section 13.08.200. The following certification statement must be signed by an authorized representative as defined in Section 13.08.020, Definitions:I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
(Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

Article VII. Confidential Information

13.08.310 Confidentiality—Public disclosure.
A. Process and product information collected during inspection of premises may be kept confidential at the request of the business owner or his or her representative, insofar as such confidentiality is allowed pursuant to applicable law. All records compiled pursuant to the pretreatment program shall be accessible at time of inspection. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the director’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302, shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the public without restriction.
B. Notification of significant violators and significant noncompliance shall be published at least once every twelve months in the major local newspaper. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

Article VIII. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance

13.08.320 Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance.
A. The director shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the IUs which, at any time during the previous twelve months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all SIUs (or any other IU that violates subsection (A)(3), (4) or (8) of this section) and shall mean:
    1. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1);
    2. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
    3. Any violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the city determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
    4. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority as stated in this chapter to halt or prevent such a discharge;
    5. Failure to meet, within ninety days after schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
    6. Failure to provide, within thirty days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
    7. Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
    8. Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

Article IX. Sewer Connection

13.08.330 Fee required prior to permit issuance for newly annexed territory.
Before a permit shall be issued for a sewer connection in any area now outside the city limits which shall hereafter be annexed to the city, the owner or applicant shall pay to the city for such privilege a sum of money to be the property’s share of the cost of the existing sewerage facilities of the city to be used by the property. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.340 Computation of fee.
The sum shall be the equivalent of the cost to similar properties then within the city which have paid for the facilities so to be used. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.350 Exemption of outstanding bonds from fee determination.
The sum shall not include any amounts from which bonds of the city are then outstanding and to which the property shall become subject upon annexation. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.360 Main extensions to customers other than subdivisions—Terms and conditions.
A. Sewer mains may be extended by developers or other interested parties that would benefit by their extension, at their cost, providing the improvements are designed to current city standards and policy and are approved by the director of public works and director of utilities.
B. The owner or developer who installs improvements which abut property other than that being developed, or in a greater size or capacity than that required for the development of the property under consideration, may be reimbursed as provided in Section 16.20.110. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.370 Use of existing sewer.
A. Payment of Costs Prior to Sewer Connection Permit Issuance. Before a permit shall be issued for a sewer connection in any areas within the city, which property shall use any existing city sewerage facilities which were constructed by a developer under a reimbursement agreement for which such property shall not have made full payment of its share of the cost thereof, the owner or applicant shall pay to the city a sum of money for such privilege in the same manner as provided in this chapter.
B. Installation of Water Meters on Private Wells Serving Commercial Properties for Determining Sewer Service Charges. All commercial properties where private well water is used and discharged to the existing sewer system shall install a water meter on the well in order to determine the appropriate sewer charges. Installation of the water meter shall be in accordance with the standards established by the city engineer. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.380 Design standards—Conformance with required.
All sewers whether built on public streets or in public easements shall be designed by a registered engineer and shall conform to the uniform design standards adopted by the city. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.390 Drainage below curb and below main sewer level.
A. Drainage Piping Serving Fixtures. Drainage piping serving fixtures, the flood level rims of which are located below the elevation of the curb or property line, at the point where the building sewer crosses under the curb or property line, and above the crown level of the main sewer, shall drain by gravity into the main sewer, and shall be protected from backflow of sewage by installing an approved type backwater valve, and each such backwater valve shall be installed only in that branch or section of the drainage system which receives the discharge from fixtures located below the elevation of the curb or property line. If the drainage piping is lower than the next upstream manhole, the property owner may be required to install a backwater valve.
B. Director Empowered to Stop Overflow. If the property owner fails to install and maintain a backwater trap or backwater valve in good working condition, when required under this section, the director may order and require the plumbing fixture to be disconnected and removed and the outlet plugged or capped. In the event that the property owner fails to disconnect and plug or cap the sewer connection within ten days after written notice by the director, then the director shall arrange for such disconnection and capping, the cost of which may be collected by court action or may be declared to be a lien by action of the council after public hearing and notice of the property owner and shall be added to and collected as part of the tax roll.
C. Alternate Right to Terminate Water Service. As an alternate to the procedure set forth in subsection B of this section, if the property owner fails to install and maintain a backwater trap valve in good working condition when requested under this chapter, the director may order and require termination of water service to the parcel and all structures connected to the sewer outlet subject to overflow. The water service shall not be reinstated until the maintenance or installation of the backwater trap or backwater valve has been approved by the director.
D. Maintenance of House Sewer Connections. Maintenance of house sewer connections shall comply with Section 13.08.395(B). (Ord. 1665 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.395 Private sewer laterals.
A. Purpose. Inflow and infiltration (I/I) is a serious problem for the city in that during wet weather events, a significant amount of water is introduced into the city’s wastewater collection system from breaches in the public and private sewer pipeline system. Studies have shown that private sewer laterals are a significant source of I/I for the city. The city has determined that it is in the interest of the public’s health, safety, and welfare to address I/I contributed by private sewer laterals and, as such, it is a city priority to require the inspection of private sewer laterals.
B. Ownership, Maintenance, and Repair. 
    1. The entire lateral, from the building connection up to and including the “wye” connection or other tie-in to the city-owned sewer main, shall fall within the owner’s responsibility for installation, maintenance, repair, and replacement.
    2. Each property owner shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of their private sewer lateral in compliance with this section in a safe and sanitary condition, including:
        a. Private sewer laterals shall be free of displaced joints, breaks, offsets, structural defects, damage, open joints, missing portions of pipe, root intrusion, cracks, leaks, sediment deposits or any other similar conditions, defects or obstructions likely to cause or contribute to blockage of the private sewer lateral or the public sewer.
        b. Private sewer laterals shall be equipped with cleanouts.
        c. Private sewer laterals shall not be constructed, either in whole or in part, of “Orangeburg pipe.”
        d. As described in Section 13.08.030(A), it is unlawful for any individual to connect the following to a private sewer lateral: storm drains, roof drains, yard drains, surface or subsurface drainage, groundwater, or other non-sewage pipes or drains.
    3. If a property owner fails to maintain the abovementioned wastewater facilities in a safe and sanitary condition, the director may order and require termination of water service to the parcel and all structures connected to the sewer outlet subject to these conditions. The water service shall not be reinstated until the maintenance or installation of appropriate wastewater disposal facilities has been approved by the director.
C. Inspection of Existing Private Sewer Laterals. 
    1. Except as set forth in subsection (C)(2) of this section, after January 1, 2020, all private sewer laterals connected to the city’s sewer system shall be inspected per subsection F of this section at the property owner’s sole expense, when any of the following events occur:
        a. Whenever the city has issued a notice of violation following a sanitary sewer overflow event from a property’s private sewer lateral.
        b. Upon submittal of a building permit for the addition of a bedroom, bathroom, or kitchen in a residential structure or the addition of nonresidential space or an additional plumbing fixture unit in nonresidential structures.
        c. A change of the use of the structure from: (i) residential to nonresidential use; (ii) to a nonresidential use that will result in a higher flow than the previous nonresidential use; or (iii) to a nonresidential use where the structure served has been vacant or unoccupied for more than three years.
        d. Increase in size of the domestic water meter serving the property or adding a new domestic water meter.
        e. Whenever property located in the city and containing one or more structures which are served by a private sewer lateral or laterals is subdivided. The inspection shall occur prior to recordation of the final map.
        f. Within thirty days of notification by the city that “smoke testing” or closed-circuit television (CCTV) sewer main inspection indicates the presence of inflow or infiltration from private property that impacts the operation of the public wastewater collection system.
        g. Upon any change in ownership of real property within the city, which shall be implemented as follows:
            i. “Change in ownership” shall have the meaning set forth in Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 60 and 61. A change in ownership shall not include those transactions as set forth in Revenue and Taxation Code Section 62.
            ii. Before close of escrow for any change in ownership of real property within the city, the seller(s) of such property shall disclose to the buyer(s) the results of the private sewer lateral inspection as set forth in subsection F of this section.
        h. For events identified in subsections (C)(1)(a) through (C)(1)(f) of this section, repair or replacement shall be made pursuant to subsection G of this section.
    2. Exceptions. An inspection required pursuant to subsection (C)(1) of this section shall not be required in the following circumstances:
        a. New Construction or Prior Replacement of Lateral. If the owner(s) (or the owner’s predecessor-in-interest) has originally installed or has replaced the private sewer lateral within the twenty years prior to the date the inspection would otherwise be required.
        b. Prior Inspection of a Lateral. If the owner(s) (or the owner’s predecessor-in-interest) has completed an inspection of the sewer lateral in accordance with the inspection requirements of subsection F of this section within the past five years.
        c. The private sewer lateral is located within a common interest development which is regulated under subsection D of this section and serves more than two separate units or properties within the common interest development.
    The owner shall bear the burden of proving that the inspection requirements of subsection (C)(1) of this section do not apply. The owner shall provide proof of any prior replacement, inspection or repair of a private sewer lateral in the form of a validly issued permit or other documentation that ensures such prior replacement, repair or inspection of a private sewer lateral occurred pursuant to the exceptions above. The form and content of the document or proof must be deemed sufficient by the city’s utilities director.
D. Private Sewer Laterals within Common Interest Developments. 
    1. For purposes of this section, the term “common interest development” shall include any community apartment project, condominium project, planned development, or stock cooperative.
    2. Private sewer laterals located within a common interest development shall be inspected pursuant to the requirements of subsection F of this section as follows:
        a. By January 1, 2030, and once every twenty years thereafter.
        b. Whenever the city has issued a notice of violation following a sanitary sewer overflow event from a common interest development’s private sewer lateral.
        c. Increase in size of the water meter serving the common interest development.
    3. Exceptions. An inspection required pursuant to subsection (D)(1) of this section shall not be required in the following circumstances:
        a. Prior Replacement of Lateral. If the private sewer lateral serving the common interest development in its entirety was installed or replaced within the twenty years prior to the date the inspection would otherwise be required.
        b. Prior Inspection or Repair of a Lateral. If the private sewer lateral serving the common interest development in its entirety was inspected in accordance with the inspection requirements of subsection F of this section within the five years prior to the date the inspection would otherwise be required.
E. Inspection of Shared Private Sewer Laterals. Each property owner served by a shared private sewer lateral shall be responsible for compliance with subsection B of this section and shall be subject to the inspection requirements identified in subsection C of this section. For purposes of this subsection E, a “shared private sewer lateral” shall mean laterals serving more than one property that are not part of a common interest development.
F. Inspection Requirements. 
    1. Property owners must submit documentation of the sewer lateral inspection to the city prior to the close of escrow. Testing may be accomplished by either a water ex-filtration test, an air test, or closed-circuit video recording observation. Installation of cleanouts and removal of existing P-traps may be necessary to accomplish the video inspection. If a closed-circuit video recording observation is selected as the method of inspection, then the video shall meet the following requirements:
        a. Shall be in digital format.
        b. Shall be in color (black and white or otherwise unclear video will not be accepted).
        c. Shall show the address of the lateral.
        d. Shall show the date the video was taken.
        e. Shall inspect the entire lateral from the house connection to the city-owned sewer main.
        f. Shall have a running foot or time marker clearly visible on the screen.
        g. Where joints are present, shall briefly stop the camera at each to clearly indicate their integrity.
        h. Shall have the telephone number for the point of contact for the company providing the inspection.
        i. A map shall be provided with the video inspection to clearly show the lateral location including the cleanout or access point at the house connection used to insert the camera into the lateral and the wye connection to the city-owned sewer main.
    2. The lateral inspection and lateral inspection report shall be prepared and signed by a licensed plumber or contractor with a current state license who shall declare that the report is true and correct. At a minimum, the inspection report shall include the information in Exhibit A:
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    |                           EXHIBIT A: PRIVATE SEWER LATERAL INSPECTION REPORT                            |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Property Address (or Addresses):__________________________________________________________________      |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Inspection Date:_______________________________     | Inspection Method:______________________________  |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Company Name/Point of Contact:__________________________________________________________________        |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Phone Number/Email Address:____________________________________________________________________         |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Lateral Length (in feet):_________________________  | Lateral Material:________________________________ |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Installation date (if known):______________________ | Lateral Age:___________________________________   |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Describe deficiencies (if any):____________________________________________________________________     |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Plumber/Contractor Signature:____________________________________________________________________       |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    | License # of Plumber/Contractor:__________________________________________________________________      |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Property Owner Signature:_______________________________________________________________________        |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Property Owner interest in participating in city Wastewater Flow      | YES            | NO             |
    | Offset Program: *                                                     |                |                |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    | * If Property Owner indicates “Yes”, city would include address on eligibility                          |
    | list for Wastewater Flow Offset Mitigation requirement.                                                 |
    +-----------------------------------------------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
    3. A licensed plumber or contractor who prepares a false lateral inspection report shall be subject to punishment under Article XII of this chapter in addition to any other legal remedies or punishment provided by law.
    4. Verification. The city reserves the right to verify the sewer lateral inspection results prior to being accepted.
G. Sewer Lateral Repair or Replacement Requirements. Upon receipt of the private sewer lateral inspection report pursuant to this chapter, within seven business days, the city shall review the private sewer lateral inspection and lateral inspection report to verify the plumber/contractor findings and provide the owner with a determination on whether the lateral meets the criteria described in subsection B of this section. If the private sewer lateral is not in compliance with subsection B of this section, then it shall be repaired or replaced to conform to such standards.
H. Punishment for Violation of this Chapter. Failure to comply with the requirements of this article shall be punishable pursuant to the remedies identified in Article XII of this chapter. No building permits or other discretionary approvals shall be issued for a property with a private sewer lateral that is determined to be not in compliance with subsection B of this section until the private sewer lateral is brought into compliance with city standards.
I. Rebate Programs. The city may establish by resolution one or more programs to assist owners with the replacement of private sewer laterals.
J. Fees. The city council may from time to time establish, by resolution, fees for issuing permits, reviewing inspection reports and other activities of the city performed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1665 § 3 (part), 2019)

13.08.396 Wastewater flow offset.
A. Purpose. The city experiences surcharging in the wastewater collection system and sanitary sewer overflows during wet weather events due to inflow and infiltration. The purpose of these regulations is to establish a methodology whereby new or intensified development in capacity constrained areas as established by the city council could offset new wastewater flow to mitigate capacity constraints in the existing wastewater collection system to accommodate the project’s additional demand. Without a reduction in inflow and infiltration in these areas, the city will not be able to serve new or intensified development until a significant number of private sewer laterals are replaced or public sewer mains are upsized.
B. Application. The provisions of this article shall apply to new or intensified development in capacity constrained areas of the wastewater collection system as established by the city council.
C. Calculating the Wastewater Flow Offset. An applicant shall calculate a development’s wastewater flow offset (Exhibit B) using the domestic sewage generation factors and peaking factor identified in the uniform design criteria, found in the city’s adopted engineering standards.
D. Wastewater Flow Offset through Private Lateral Replacement. The city determined that replacement of a private sewer lateral serving an existing single-family residence (one equivalent dwelling unit) would create a wastewater flow offset of three hundred ninety gallons per day. This is equal to the wastewater generation rate of a single-family residence (one hundred fifty gpd), at a peaking factor of 2.6.
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|                 EXHIBIT B: Wastewater Flow Offset Calculation Worksheet                  |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
| Residential Development:     |                                                           |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Studio Units:              | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Multi-Family Units:        | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Single-Family Units:       | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
| Residential Wastewater Flow: |                                                           |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Studio Units:              | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Multi-Family Units:        | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Single-Family Units:       | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               | RESIDENTIAL FLOW TOTAL (gallons per day): | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
| Non-Residential Development: |                                                           |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Commercial Square Footage: | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Industrial Square Footage: | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Manufacturing Square       | ____________________________ |
|               |              | Footage:                   |                              |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Business Park Square       | ____________________________ |
|               |              | Footage:                   |                              |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Hotel/Motel Rooms:         | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
| Non-Residential Wastewater   |                                                           |
| Flow:                        |                                                           |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Commercial:                | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Industrial:                | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Manufacturing:             | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Business Park:             | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               |              | Hotel/Motel:               | ____________________________ |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               | NON-RESIDENTIAL FLOW TOTAL (gallons per   | ____________________________ |
|               | day):                                     |                              |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
| (Proposed Residential Flow + Proposed Non-Residential Flow) x Peaking Factor             |
| =                                                                                        |
| Total Wastewater Flow Offset                                                             |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
|               | TOTAL WASTEWATER FLOW OFFSET (gallons per | ____________________________ |
|               | day):                                     |                              |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
| * Replacement of a private sewer lateral serving an existing single-family               |
| residence (one equivalent dwelling unit) would offset 390 gallons per day                |
| of additional wastewater flow).                                                          |
+---------------+--------------+----------------------------+------------------------------+
(Ord. 1665 § 3 (part), 2019)

Article X. Charges and Fees

13.08.400 Determination—User classification.
A. A schedule of charges and fees shall be adopted by the city by resolution and may be amended from time to time which will enable the city to comply with the revenue requirements of the State Clean Water Grant Program. Charges and fees shall be determined in a manner consistent with regulations of the grant program.
B. All users shall be classified by assigning each one to a user classification (significant industrial user, Class I user or Class II user) category according to the principal activity conducted on the user’s premises and appropriate nonindustrial classifications as determined by the city. The purpose of such classification is to facilitate the regulation of wastewater discharges based on wastewater constituents and characteristics to provide an effective means of source control, and to establish a system of user charges and industrial user wastewater discharge permit fees which will ensure an equitable recovery of the city’s cost for operation of the pretreatment program.
C. The charges for each wastewater constituent and characteristic shall be established by the city and set forth in the city’s schedule of charges and fees, which may include, but shall not be limited to:
    1. User classification charges.
    2. Fees for monitoring and inspections.
    3. Charges and fees based on wastewater constituents and characteristics to include industrial cost recovery provisions of the Federal Act (i.e., PL 92-500).
    4. In case a residence or place of business becomes vacant, the minimum sewer charge shall be collected until the city is requested to shut off the water.
    5. All charges for such sewage service shall be paid at the same time as water charges are paid to the city and shall be billed upon the same water bill sent to the user; and both amounts must be paid or the city may, in addition to other remedies, shut off the water service.
    6. Any person failing to pay the sewer service charge when due, and if the water service has been disconnected, shall pay the water restoration-reconnection charge provided for in Section 13.04.060.
D. When user classification charges are established, they shall be based upon a minimum basic charge for each premises, computed on the basis of wastewater from a domestic premises. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.410 Use of revenues.
Revenue derived by the city under the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be used for the operation, acquisition, construction, reconstruction and maintenance of the sanitary sewer system and shall be applied to the retirement of any bonded indebtedness which was incurred to improve the sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

Article XI. Rules and Regulations Governing the Disposal of Septic Tank Cleanings

13.08.420 Unlawful to dump on land.
It is unlawful for any person to dump or discharge raw or chemically treated sewage from any source onto the surface of any lands within the city, except such lands as the city utilizes in connection with the operation of its wastewater treatment plant. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.430 Unlawful to dump into city collection system except as provided in this chapter.
It is unlawful for any person to dump or discharge into the city sewer collection system septic tank cleanings or any raw or chemically treated sewage from septic tanks or any industrial or unidentified liquid waste or any hazardous waste except as provided in this article. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.440 Dumping regulations.
Raw or chemically treated sewage from chemical toilets may be discharged or dumped into the city sewer collection system only at the places designated by the director. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.450 Dumping permit and fees.
Each person dumping or discharging raw or chemically treated sewage into the facilities of the city shall pay the appropriate fees established in accordance with the criteria set forth in Section 13.08.400. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

Article XII. Administration and Enforcement Remedies

13.08.460 Unlawful discharges.
A. Notification of Discharge. 
    1. Users shall notify the director immediately upon discharging wastes in violation of this chapter to enable countermeasures to be taken by the city to minimize damage to the community sewer, treatment facility, treatment process, treatment personnel and the receiving waters.
    2. This notification shall be followed within fifteen days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence.
    3. Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sewer system, treatment plant, or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the city by any public entity on account thereof.
B. Notices to Employees. In order that employees of users be informed of city requirements, users shall make available to their employees copies of this chapter, together with such other wastewater information and notices which may be furnished by the city from time to time directed toward more effective water pollution control. A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board advising employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in violation of this chapter.
C. Preventive Measures. Any direct or indirect connection or entry point for persistent or deleterious wastes to the user’s plumbing or drainage system should be eliminated. Where such action is impractical or unreasonable, the user shall appropriately label such entry points to warn against discharge of such wastes in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.470 Authority of director.
A. Notice of Violation. When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or wastewater requirement of the city, state or federal government, or is found to have improperly used or maintained sewers, the director may serve that user a written notice of violation. Within thirty days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
B. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without issuing a notice of violation; however, such notice of violation shall be issued as soon as possible.
C. Consent Orders. The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar agreements with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such agreement shall include specific actions to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within the time period specified in the agreement. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 13.08.500 and 13.08.510 and shall be judicially enforceable.
D. Compliance Orders. When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, water service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
E. Cease and Desist Orders. When the director finds that a violation of this chapter has occurred, or appears imminent, and the violation appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, or the environment, or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW or cause pass-through, the director may, after informal notice to the violator, issue an order to cease and desist and direct those persons not complying with this chapter to:
    1. Comply forthwith; or
    2. Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the director; or
    3. Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a threatened violation.
F. When the director finds that a discharge of wastewater has taken place, in violation of prohibitions or limitations prescribed in this chapter, or wastewater source control requirements, effluent limitations or pretreatment standards, or the provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, the director may require the user to submit to the appropriate POTW representative a report containing methods to eliminate illegal discharges, a time schedule for the commencement and completion of any equipment installation or maintenance necessary to comply with discharge limitations and methods of assurance of continued compliance. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.480 Appeals.
A. Any user, permit applicant, or permit holder affected by any decision, action or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the director, interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter or in any permit issued herein, may file with the city clerk a written appeal within ten days of such decision, action or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the appeal.
B. The written appeal shall be heard by the council within thirty days from the date of filing. The council shall make a final ruling on the appeal within ten days of the close of the meeting. Pending final determination on the appeal by the council, the decision appealed from shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.490 Use of provisions.
The actions and remedies available to the director in the sections set forth in this article may be utilized separately or in combination by the director as it deems appropriate. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.500 Injunctive relief.
The director is authorized to seek injunctive relief to halt the noncompliance by any industrial user with any pretreatment standard or requirement under this chapter, or permit issued hereunder. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.510 Assessment of cost.
Any person who discharges or causes to be discharged any water or wastewater in violation of this chapter and such discharge, either singly or by interaction with other discharges, results in damage to or is otherwise detrimental to or adversely affects the POTW, storm drain system or waters of the state shall be liable to the city for expenses necessary to correct that damage, detriment or adverse effect. The expenses may include, but are not limited to, costs for labor, material, inspection and overhead. Any expenses resulting from the investigation of unlawful discharges shall be collected from the responsible party. In addition, any monetary penalties imposed against the city shall also be costs for which the violator is liable to the city. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.520 Falsifying information.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, record, report, plan or other document filed with the director, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.530 Termination of service.
The director may revoke any wastewater discharge permit, or terminate or cause to be terminated wastewater and/or water service to any premises if a violation of any provision of this chapter is found to exist or if a discharge of wastewater causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance as defined in this chapter. This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules or regulations, authorizing termination of services for delinquency in payment. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

Article XIII. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations

13.08.540 Upset.
A. For the purposes of this section, “upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection C of this section are met.
C. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
    1. An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
    2. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
    3. The user has submitted the following information to the director within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days):
        a. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
        b. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
        c. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
F. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.550 Prohibited discharge standards.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in Section 13.08.040(A) or the specific prohibitions in Sections 13.08.040(B) through (J) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:
A. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or
B. No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

13.08.560 Bypass.
A. For the purposes of this section:
    1. Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user’s treatment facility.
    2. Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections C and D of this section.
C. Bypass Notifications. 
    1. If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
    2. A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case by case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four hours.
D. Bypass. 
    1. Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
        a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
        b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
        c. The user submitted notices as required under subsection C of this section.
    2. The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (D)(1) of this section. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

Article XIV. Miscellaneous Provisions

13.08.570 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of these chapters. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter, and each and every section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase not declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to whether any portion of this chapter would be subsequently declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1598 § 1 (part), 2014)

Chapter 13.12 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES

Sections:
13.12.010    Definitions.
13.12.020    Underground service area—Defined—Electric or communication service to buildings within the area.
13.12.030    Underground utility districts—Hearing—Declaration.
13.12.040    Underground utility districts—Order to remove poles, overhead wires and associated structures.
13.12.050    Underground utility districts—Unlawful to maintain poles and overhead wires—Violation deemed misdemeanor.
13.12.060    Exception by special permission.
13.12.070    Non applicability of chapter provisions.
13.12.080    Notification to affected property owners and utility companies.
13.12.090    Utility companies to supply city with list of subscribers.
13.12.100    Necessity for facility changes—Notification of property owners and utility subscribers.
13.12.110    Utility companies to supply city with updated list of subscribers after installation of underground conduit.
13.12.120    Necessity for facility changes—Notification of property owners and utility subscribers on updated list.
13.12.130    Utility companies responsibility to provide service up to sidewalk areas and property lines—Rules and regulations for underground construction to be followed.
13.12.140    Property owners responsibility—Failure to carry out—Completion of work by city—Assessment of costs against property.
13.12.150    City’s obligation to remove its poles and equipment.
13.12.160    Extension of time to complete requirements due to unforeseeable circumstances.
13.12.170    Project coordinator—Designated—Responsibilities.
13.12.180    Undergrounding work to be done by city pursuant to Section 13.12.140—Cost quotations required.

13.12.010 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:
A. “Affected property owner” means a property owner who owns property within or adjacent to an underground district, or otherwise affected by the underground project.
B. “City” means the city of San Luis Obispo, a municipal corporation of the state of California.
C. “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California.
D. “Council” means the city council of the city.
E. “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees.
F. “Poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located aboveground, upon, along, across or over the streets, alleys and ways of the city, and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service.
G. “Underground utility district” or “district” means an area in the city within which poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited by an ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.12.030.
H. “Utility” means and includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Prior code § 8400)

13.12.020 Underground service area—Defined—Electric or communication service to buildings within the area.
A. The words “underground service area” means that area within the limits of the city, identified by the following use zone designations, further defined in Division I of Title 17:
C-C, C-H, C-T, C-R, P-O, P-F and M.
B. All new or remodeled buildings in the underground service area requiring electric or communication service shall have such service supplied from a service lateral placed underground from the main electric or communication service facilities within the building to the sidewalk area. Where the utility’s distribution system is underground, the service lateral shall terminate at a location in the sidewalk area designated by the utility. Where the utility’s distribution system is overhead, the service lateral shall terminate as a pole riser on a pole designated by the utility. All conduits, conductors and associated equipment necessary to receive utility service by means of the underground service lateral shall be provided by the person owning, operating, leasing or renting the building, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the supplying utility on file with the Commission and to the lawful requirements of state laws and city ordinances.
C. The supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it for an underground connection or a pole-riser service, as the case may be, under and subject to the provisions of its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission.
D. For purposes of this section, a building shall be deemed to be remodeled if within any twelve-month period, additions, alterations or repairs are made thereto, the cost of which exceeds fifty percent of the current replacement cost of the building. In determining the cost of such additions, alterations or repairs, there shall be excluded the cost of any work required by this chapter.
E. Single-family residential buildings are exempt from the provisions of this section. (Prior code § 8400.1)

13.12.030 Underground utility districts—Hearing—Declaration.
The council may, from time to time, call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health or safety requires the removal of poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures from any particular area or areas within the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners and utilities by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least thirty days prior to the date thereof. If, after any such public hearing, the council finds that the public necessity, health or safety requires such removal and such underground installation within any such area, the council shall by ordinance declare such an area an underground utility district. Such ordinance shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such poles and overhead wires and other associated overhead structures must be removed and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. The council shall allow a reasonable time for such removal, having due regard for the availability of necessary labor, materials and equipment for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Prior code § 8400.2)

13.12.040 Underground utility districts—Order to remove poles, overhead wires and associated structures.
The council does hereby order the removal of all poles and overhead wires and associated structures from the public streets, alleys or ways within the hereinafter described underground utility districts and further fixes dates on which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service and dates on which all facilities are to be removed from public property as follows:
    1. Beginning at a point which is the intersection of the centerline of Chorro and Higuera Streets; thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Chorro Street to the easterly extension of the most northerly line of Monterey Street; thence in a westerly direction along said line to the northerly extension of the most westerly line of Broad Street; thence in a southerly direction along said line to its intersection with the centerline of Higuera Street; thence in a northeasterly direction along said line to the point of beginning.
    Property owners are to be ready to receive service by: March 1, 1972.
    Date facilities are to be removed from public property: December 31, 1972.
    2. Beginning at a point which is the intersection of-the centerlines of Higuera and Morro Streets; thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Morro Street to its intersection with the most northerly line of Mill Street; thence in a northeasterly direction along said line to its intersection with the most easterly line of Osos Street; thence in a southerly direction along said line to its intersection with the centerline of Higuera Street; thence in a westerly direction along said line to the point of beginning.
    Property owners are to be ready to receive service by: March 1, 1972.
    Date facilities are to be removed from public property: December 31, 1972.
    3. Beginning at a point which is the intersection of the centerlines of Higuera and Chorro Streets; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Higuera Street to its intersection with the most easterly line of Osos Street; thence in a southwesterly direction along said line to its intersection with the most southerly line of Marsh Street; thence in a westerly direction along said line to its intersection with the centerline of Chorro Street; thence in a northerly direction along said line to the point of beginning.
    Property owners are to be ready to receive service by: March 1, 1972.
    Date facilities are to be removed from public property: December 31, 1972.
    4. Beginning at a point which is the intersection of the centerlines of Higuera and Chorro Streets; thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Chorro Street to the easterly extension of the most northerly line of Monterey Street; thence in a westerly direction along said line to its intersection with the most westerly line of Chorro Street; thence in a northerly direction along said line to its intersection with the most northerly line of Mill Street; thence in a northeasterly direction along said line to its intersection with the centerline of Morro Street; thence in a southwesterly direction along said line to its intersection with the centerline of Higuera Street; thence in a westerly direction along said line to the point of beginning.
    Property owners are to be ready to receive service by: June 1, 1972.
    Date facilities are to be removed from public property: December 31, 1972.
    5. Beginning at a point which is the intersection of the centerlines of Higuera and Chorro Streets; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Higuera Street to its intersection with the most westerly line of Broad Street; thence in a southwesterly direction along said line to its intersection with the most southerly line of Marsh Street; thence in an easterly direction along said line to its intersection with the centerline of Chorro Street; thence in a north westerly direction along said line to the point of beginning.
    Property owners are to be ready to receive service by: September 1, 1972.
    Date facilities are to be removed from public property: December 31, 1972.
    6. Beginning at a point which is the intersection of the most northerly line of Palm Street and the most westerly line of Chorro Street; thence in a westerly direction along the northerly line of Palm Street to its intersection with the most westerly line of Broad Street; thence in a southerly direction along said line to its intersection with the most northerly line of Monterey Street; thence in an easterly direction along said line to its intersection with the most westerly line of Chorro Street; thence in a northerly direction along said line to the point of beginning.
    Property owners are to be ready to receive service by: September 1, 1972.
    Date facilities are to be removed from public property: December 31, 1972.
    7. Beginning at the intersection of the southerly line of Marsh Street and the easterly line of Osos Street; thence in a northwesterly direction along the easterly line of Osos Street to the northerly line of Mill Street; thence in a northeasterly direction along the northerly line of Mill Street to the easterly line of Santa Rosa Street; thence in a southeasterly direction along the easterly line of Santa Rosa Street to the intersection of the northerly line of Monterey Street; thence in a northeasterly direction along the northerly line of Monterey Street a distance of one hundred fifty feet, thence in a southeasterly direction across Monterey Street; thence continuing southeasterly on a line that is one hundred forty feet distance and parallel to the easterly line of Santa Rosa Street, across Higuera Street to the southerly line of Higuera Street; thence southwesterly along Higuera Street to the intersection of the southerly line of Higuera Street and the easterly line of Santa Rosa Street: thence southeasterly along the easterly line of Santa Rosa Street to a point forty feet past the southerly line of Marsh Street; thence in a southwesterly direction across Santa Rosa Street to the westerly line of Santa Rosa Street; thence northwesterly along the westerly line of Santa Rosa Street to the intersection of the westerly line of Santa Rosa Street and the southerly-line of Marsh Street; thence southwesterly along the southerly line of Marsh Street to the point of beginning.
    Property owners are to be ready to receive service by: September 1, 1974.
    Date facilities are to be removed from public property: December 31, 1974.
    8. Beginning at the intersection of the westerly line of Santa Rosa Street and the northerly line of Mill Street; thence in a northwesterly direction along the westerly line of Santa Rosa Street to the intersection of the northerly line of Montalban Street; thence in a northeasterly direction across Santa Rosa Street to the intersection of the easterly line of Santa Rosa Street with the northerly line of Montalban Street; thence in a southeasterly direction along the easterly line of Santa Rosa Street to the intersection of the northerly line of Mill Street; thence in a southwesterly direction across Santa Rosa Street to the point of beginning.
    Property owners are to be ready to receive service by: March 1, 1979.
    Date facilities are to be removed from public property: September 1, 1979.
    9. Beginning at the most northerly corner of Block 6, Murray and Church Addition to the city of San Luis Obispo, thence following the northeasterly boundary of said block southeasterly thirty feet to the true point of beginning; thence northwesterly along the northeasterly boundaries of Blocks 6, 7, and 8 of Murray and Church Addition, to a point on the northwesterly side of Monterey Street; thence along the northwesterly side of Monterey Street, to a point across Nipomo Street on the northeasterly boundary of Block 61, McDougall Tract; thence southeasterly along the southwesterly side of Nipomo Street a distance of one hundred sixty feet ±; thence in a southwesterly direction, on a line parallel to Higuera Street, a distance of seven hundred fifty feet ± to the intersection of San Luis Obispo creek. Said parallel line to be two hundred feet northwesterly of Higuera Street. Thence following the centerline of said creek to the northerly side of Cal Trans bridge, at the Marsh/Higuera Streets on/off ramp; thence southeasterly across the on/off ramp accessway to a point on the westerly side of Higuera Street. Said point being thirty feet southerly of the southwesterly prolongation of the southerly side of Marsh Street. Thence on a straight line across Higuera Street in a northeasterly direction to the true point of beginning. Said straight line to be thirty feet southeast of and parallel to the southeasterly side of Marsh Street.
    Property owners are to be ready to receive service by: December 1, 1984.
    Date facilities are to be removed from public property: August 1, 1984.
    10. Seventy-five feet northerly and ninety-five feet southerly measured at right angles to the line beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Higuera Street and Madonna Road thence southwesterly along the centerline of Madonna Road to its intersection with the centerline of Zozobra and continuing southwesterly along the centerline of Madonna Road a distance of three hundred ninety feet.
    Property owners shall be ready to receive service by October 1, 1986.
    Facilities shall be removed from public property by December 1, 1986.
    11. Beginning at the northeasterly corner of Lot 1, Block 147 of the Harford Addition to the City of San Luis Obispo, as recorded in Book A, at Page 123 of Maps recorded in the office of the San Luis Obispo County recorder; said point lying on the westerly line of Higuera Street right-of-way per said map and being the true point of beginning; thence easterly along the prolongation of the northerly line of said Lot 1 to a distance of 30.3 feet more or less, to a point on the centerline of said Higuera Street right-of-way; thence southerly along the centerline of Higuera Street a distance of 172.3 feet more or less to a point; said point being twenty-five feet northerly of the easterly prolongation of the northerly line of Lot 3 of said Harford Addition; thence easterly at right angles to the centerline of Higuera Street a distance of fifty-feet to a point; thence southerly along a line parallel with, and distant twenty-five feet easterly from the easterly line of Higuera Street to a point that is seven hundred fifty feet southerly of the intersection of the southerly line of South Street and the easterly line of Higuera Street per said Harford Addition; thence westerly at right angles to the last described parallel line to a point that is forty-five feet westerly of the westerly line of Higuera Street; thence northerly parallel with and distant forty-five feet westerly from the westerly line of Higuera Street and its prolongation to a point on the northerly line of Lot 1, Block 147; thence easterly along said northerly line of Lot 1 a distance of 45.6 feet, more or less, to the true point of beginning.
    Property owners shall be ready to receive phone service by December 1, 1987 and electric and CATV facilities by June 1, 1988.
    Phone facilities shall be removed from public property by April 1, 1988 and electric and CATV facilities by August 1, 1988.
    12. Beginning at the southerly corner of Lot 9 in Block 3 of the Buena Vista Addition to the City of San Luis Obispo as recorded in Book A, Page 47 of Maps recorded in the office of the San Luis Obispo County Recorder, said point also being the intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of Osos Street (now called Jennifer Street) and the northerly right-of-way line of George Street, thence, northerly along said easterly right-of-way line a distance of approximately 55.5 feet to a point which intersects the easterly boundary of the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way, said point being the true point of beginning, thence, continuing northerly along said easterly right-of-way line of Osos Street approximately 304.5 feet, thence, westerly at right angles to said easterly line of Osos Street to a point on the westerly right-of-way line of said street, thence, southerly a distance of approximately 360 feet along said westerly line to a point, thence, easterly at right angles from said westerly line a distance of 54 feet, thence, northerly along a line six feet from and parallel to the northerly right-of-way line of Osos Street a distance of approximately 51.4 feet to a point which intersects the prolongation of the easterly boundary of the Southern Pacific Railroad right-of-way, thence, northerly along said prolongation a distance of approximately 7.3 feet to the true point of beginning.
    Facilities shall be removed from Underground District by June 30, 1996.
    13. Beginning at the southeast corner of Lot 4, Block 81 of the Town of San Luis Obispo, as shown on the map filed for record in Book A of Maps at page 178 in the office of the San Luis Obispo County Recorder, said point also lying on the northwesterly right of way line of Montalban Street;
    THENCE, northwesterly along the-northeasterly line of said Lot 4 and Lot 1 of said Block 81, to the southeasterly right-of-way line of Oak Street;
    THENCE, along the southeasterly right-of-way line of Oak St. a distance of 8.93 ft., more or less, to a point on the southerly line of Lot 1, Block 2 of Tract No. 34 as shown on a map file in Map Book 5 at page 55, in the office of the aforesaid County Recorder;
    THENCE, along the southerly boundary of said Tract No. 34, through all of its various courses, to a point distant 10 ft. westerly of the southeasterly corner of said Tract No. 34;
    THENCE, northerly along a line parallel with and distant 10 ft. from the easterly boundary of said Tract No. 34, to the northwesterly boundary of said Tract No. 34;
    THENCE, southwesterly along the northwesterly boundary of said Tract No. 34 to the northwest corner of said Tract No. 34, said point also being the northeast corner of Parcel B of that certain map filed in Book 29 of Parcel Maps at page 7 in the office of the aforesaid County Recorder;
    THENCE westerly along the northerly line of said Parcel B, to the northwesterly corner of said Parcel B;
    THENCE, northerly along the easterly line of Parcel A of said Parcel Map filed in Book 29 of Parcel maps at Page 7, and its northerly prolongation, to the southerly right-of-way line of Murray Street;
    THENCE, westerly along said southerly right-of-way line to a point distant fifty (50) feet easterly from, and at right angles to, the present easterly right-of-way line of Santa Rosa Street (State Hwy. 1);
    THENCE, northwesterly along a line parallel with the said easterly right-of-way line of Santa Rosa Street, to the common line between Sections 22 and 27, Township 30 south, Range 12 E, M.D.M.;
    THENCE, northwesterly to a point distant 50 ft. northeasterly of, and radial to, the PRC at the NE corner of Foothill Blvd. and Santa Rosa St., as shown on Book 8 of Records of Surveys at page 60 in the office of the aforesaid County Recorder;
    THENCE, northwesterly along a curve having a radius of 2090 ft., concentric with that certain curve having a radius of 2040 ft. shown on said Record of Survey (being the northeasterly right-of-way line of Santa Rosa St.) to a point on a radial line which intersects the centerline of Santa Rosa St., 300 ft. northwesterly from the intersection of Santa Rosa St. and Boysen Ave., measured along the centerline of Santa Rosa St.;
    THENCE, southwesterly along said radial line to a point distant 50 ft. southwesterly of the southwesterly right-of-way line of Santa Rosa St.;
    THENCE, southeasterly along a line concentric with the southwesterly right-of-way line of Santa Rosa St. (and its prolongation) and having a radius of 1910 ft. to a point distant 90 ft. northerly from the current centerline of Foothill Blvd.;
    THENCE, westerly along a line parallel with the aforesaid centerline of Foothill Blvd., to the northeasterly right-of-way line of Chorro Street;
    THENCE, northwesterly along said Chorro Street right-of-way line a distance of 145 ft.;
    THENCE, at right angles to said Chorro Street right-of-way 60 ft. to the southwesterly right-of-way line of Chorro Street;
    THENCE, southeasterly along said right-of-way line to a point distant 90 ft. northerly of the present right-of-way line of Foothill Boulevard;
    THENCE, westerly along a line parallel with and distant 90 ft. northerly of said centerline, to the present easterly right-of-way line of Ferrini Road;
    THENCE, southerly along said easterly right-of-way line of Ferrini Road and its prolongation, to a point distant 90 ft. southerly from the present centerline of Foothill Boulevard;
    THENCE, easterly along a line 90 ft. southerly from, and parallel with the aforesaid centerline of Foothill Blvd., to a point on the westerly line of that certain property shown on a map filed in Book 6 at Page 81 of Records of Surveys in the office of the aforementioned County Recorder;
    THENCE, southerly along the said westerly line to the southwest corner of said property;
    THENCE, easterly along the southerly property line of said property to a point on a curve, concave to the southwest, with a radius of 195 ft., said curve being concentric with, and 50 ft. distant southwesterly (radially) from, the southwesterly right-of-way line of Santa Rosa St., having a radius of 1965 ft.;
    THENCE, southeasterly along said curve to the tangent point of the said southwesterly right-of-way line curve;
    THENCE, continuing southeasterly, parallel with the said southwesterly right-of-way line to the northerly line of Tract 110, as shown on map recorded in Book 5 of Maps at page 108;
    THENCE, easterly to the said westerly right-of-way line of Santa Rosa St.;
    THENCE, southeasterly along the said southwesterly right-of-way line, along its various courses, to the centerline of Stenner Creek;
    THENCE, southwesterly along the centerline of Stenner Creek to its intersection with the northerly prolongation of the westerly line of Lot 3, Block 78, of the Town of San Luis Obispo, as recorded in Book A of Maps at Page 178, in the office of the aforementioned County Recorder;
    THENCE, southeasterly along said southwesterly lot line, and its prolongation, to the northwesterly right-of-way line of Montalban St., also being the southerly corner of Lot 4, Block 77 of said map of the Town of San Luis Obispo;
    THENCE, southwesterly along the northwesterly right-of-way line of Montalban St. 116 ft., more or less, to the angle point in said right-of-way line;
    THENCE, southeasterly at right angles to said northwesterly right-of-way line 110 ft. to a point distant 50 ft. southeasterly of the southeasterly right-of-way line of Montalban St.;
    THENCE, northeasterly along a line parallel with said southeasterly right-of-way line to the northeasterly line of Lot 2, Block 76 of the aforementioned Town of San Luis Obispo;
    THENCE, northwesterly a distance of 50 ft. to the northerly corner of said Lot 2, which point lies on the southeasterly right-of-way line of Montalban St.;
    THENCE, northeasterly along said southeasterly right-of-way line of Montalban St., to the northeast corner of Lot 1, Block 80 of the aforesaid Town of San Luis Obispo;
    THENCE, northwesterly 60 ft. to the POINT OF BEGINNING.
    Property owners shall be ready to receive service by July 15, 1997.
    Overhead electric wire facilities shall be removed from public property by October 15, 1997.
    Overhead telephone and cable television facilities shall be removed by December 15, 1997.
    14. Beginning at the westerly corner of Lot 1, Block 200 of the Buckley Tract in the City of San Luis Obispo, filed November 15, 1883, Book A, Page 46 of Maps, said point also being the intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of Marsh Street and the easterly right-of way line of Santa Rosa Street;
    THENCE, southeasterly along the easterly right-of-way line of Santa Rosa Street to the intersection of the northerly right-of-way line of Pacific Street;
    THENCE, westerly crossing Santa Rosa Street to the intersection of the northerly right-of-way line of Pacific Street with the westerly right-of-way line of Santa Rosa Street;
    THENCE, northwesterly along the westerly right-of-way line of Santa Rosa Street to the southerly right-of-way line of Marsh Street;
    THENCE, easterly, crossing Santa Rosa Street to the point of beginning.
    Property owners shall be prepared to receive underground service by October 30, 2000.
    Overhead facilities shall be removed from public property by December 30, 2000.
    15. That portion of real property being a strip of land described as State Route 227 in the City of San Luis Obispo, County of San Luis Obispo, State of California, being described as follows:
    A strip of land referred to as all that portion of State Route 227, as shown on the California Department of Transportation District 5, Right-of-Way Map – Edna to High Street in San Luis Obispo, SLO-227 (Post Mile 7.6 to Post Mile 12.9) said strip beginning at the intersection of the centerline of SR 227, and the prolongation of southerly corporate limit line for the city of San Luis Obispo as shown on the official map for Annexation No. 53 to said centerline with said prolongation having a bearing of N 54° 46′ 04′′ E thence northwesterly along said centerline of SR 227 approximately 2,898 meters more or less to the intersection of said strip with the prolongation of the northerly line of Lot 11, Yoakum Poultry Units recorded in Book 3 Page 89 of Maps, in the office of the Recorder for the County of San Luis Obispo.
    And that portion of real property being a strip of land more particularly described as Tank Farm Road in the City of San Luis Obispo, County of San Luis Obispo, State of California, being described as follows: A strip of land referred to as all that portion of Tank Farm Road as shown on a map recorded in Book 1 at Page 92 of Surveys in the County Recorders office of said County, said strip of land beginning at the intersection of Edna Road (SR 227) as shown on said map, and proceeding westerly to the prolongation of the west most line of Parcel 4 in Book 56 at page 90 and 91 of Parcel Maps in the County Recorder’s office of said County.
    Excluding that portion of real property described above not within the corporate limits of the City of San Luis Obispo.
    Property owners shall be prepared to receive underground service by September 30, 2005, and overhead facilities shall be removed from public property by June 30, 2007.
    Property owners shall not incur any costs required for conversions. (Ord. 1442 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1363 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1292 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1289 § 1, 1995; Ord. 1097 § 2, 1987; Ord. 1056 §§ 1, 2, 1986; Ord. 983 § 2, 1983: prior code § 8400.2.1)

13.12.050 Underground utility districts—Unlawful to maintain poles and overhead wires—Violation deemed misdemeanor.
A. Whenever the council by ordinance declares an area of the city an underground district as provided in Section 13.12.030, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to maintain any pole, overhead wire or associated overhead structures within the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed.
B. Any person or utility who shall erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate any such pole or overhead wire or associated overhead structure in the district, or who shall neglect to take down and remove any such pole, overhead wire or associated overhead structure within the time designated in the ordinance, or who shall otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor under Section 1.12.020. Each consecutive fifteen-day period during which the failure to comply with the provisions hereof shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Prior code § 8400.3)

13.12.060 Exception by special permission.
The council may grant special permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of emergency or unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate, poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 8400.4)

13.12.070 Non applicability of chapter provisions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following types of facilities:
A. Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
B. Wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district from which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings within the perimeter of such portion, when such wires originate in an area from which poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;
C. Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building;
D. Radio antennae, their associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; or
E. Service terminals in pedestals aboveground, used to distribute communication service in underground systems. (Prior code § 8400.5)

13.12.080 Notification to affected property owners and utility companies.
A. Within thirty days after the effective date of an ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 13.12.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utility companies and all persons owning real property within the district described in the ordinance, of the adoption thereof, and shall inform such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any other person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, T.V. or other similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location in the front sidewalk area adjacent to or at the property line, unless the utility specifies some other location as provided in Section 13.12.130, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Public Utilities Commission and to the requirements of the state and city laws and ordinances.
B. Notification by the city clerk shall be by letter, sent certified mail, return receipt. The notification letter to property owners shall reflect the ordinance number, its effective date, the date at which the property shall be ready to receive underground service and the names and phone numbers of contact representatives of the utility companies and the city.
C. The notification letter, to utility companies, shall be accompanied by a list of affected property owners and the assessor’s parcel maps for the new district. (Ord. 983 § 4, 1983: prior code § 8400.6)

13.12.090 Utility companies to supply city with list of subscribers.
Within fifteen days after receipt of the notice of the creation of an underground utility district, the utility companies with overhead wiring and related facilities shall send to the city clerk, a list of all subscribers to utility service within or affected by the district created by the ordinance. (Prior code § 8400.6.1)

13.12.100 Necessity for facility changes—Notification of property owners and utility subscribers.
A. Within fifteen days after receipt of the list of subscribers from the utility companies, the city clerk shall notify such subscribers and affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission and to the requirements of the state laws and city ordinances.
B. Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 13.12.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment tax roll of the county and/or to all subscribers to utility service as such are shown on the list of subscribers furnished by the utility companies. Notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt. (Prior code § 8400.6.2)

13.12.110 Utility companies to supply city with updated list of subscribers after installation of underground conduit.
Upon completion of the installation of all underground conduit, but not later than six months prior to the final completion date for undergrounding all overhead wiring and related facilities, the utility companies concerned shall send to the city clerk of the city, an updated list of all subscribers to utility service within or affected by the district created by the ordinance. (Prior code § 8400.6.3)

13.12.120 Necessity for facility changes—Notification of property owners and utility subscribers on updated list.
A. Within fifteen days after receipt of the updated list of subscribers from the utility companies, the city clerk shall notify such subscribers and affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at the new location within fifteen days from receipt of the notice.
B. This notice shall serve as the notice called for in Section 13.12.140(A). The notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt. (Prior code § 8400.6.4)

13.12.130 Utility companies responsibility to provide service up to sidewalk areas and property lines—Rules and regulations for underground construction to be followed.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within the area affected by any ordinance enacted pursuant to Section 13.12.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, boxes and associated equipment required to provide service in the sidewalk area at, or adjacent to, the property line of the building or structure being serviced; provided, that the utility may elect to serve a building or structure from some location other than that above specified. Underground construction by the utility shall be accomplished in accordance with the rules and regulations issued by the commission, and shall be completed within the time for removal of overhead facilities specified in the ordinance enacted pursuant to Section 13.12.030. (Prior code § 8400.7)

13.12.140 Property owners responsibility—Failure to carry out—Completion of work by city—Assessment of costs against property.
A. Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within an underground utility district established pursuant to Section 13.12.040 shall perform construction to provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.12.130 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the California Public Utility Commission. If the above is not accomplished within the time provided for in the ordinance enacted pursuant to Section 13.12.030, the city clerk shall give notice, in writing to the owner thereof, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to all subscribers to utility service as such are shown on the list of subscribers furnished by the utility companies, to provide the required underground facilities within thirty days after receipt of such notice.
B. The notice to provide the required underground utilities may be given by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner and subscriber thereof as such name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s or subscriber’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll and/or subscriber’s list, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of San Luis Obispo. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises’ the city clerk shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
C. The notice given by the city clerk to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city will install such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property.
D. If upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city clerk shall proceed to have the work done; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city clerk shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property.
Upon completion of the work, the city clerk shall file a written report with the council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.
E. The city clerk shall, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, to the utility subscriber, and to the owner thereof, in the manner set forth in this section for the giving of the notice, to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.
F. Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.
G. If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city clerk, and the city clerk is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per year. (Prior code § 8400.8)

13.12.150 City’s obligation to remove its poles and equipment.
The city shall remove its poles and fire alarm circuits or any similar municipal equipment at its own expense from all poles required to be removed under the provisions of this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the ordinance enacted pursuant to Section 13.12.030. (Prior code § 8400.9)

13.12.160 Extension of time to complete requirements due to unforeseeable circumstances.
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by an ordinance enacted pursuant to Section 13.12.030 cannot be performed within the time herein provided on account of shortages of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the parties, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such Limitation. (Prior code § 8400.10)

13.12.170 Project coordinator—Designated—Responsibilities.
A. Designation. The city engineer, department of public works, city of San Luis Obispo, is appointed as project coordinator.
B. Responsibilities. The project coordinator shall provide liaison between the city and the property owners, subscribers and utility companies. He or she shall assist the city clerk in the enforcement of Section 13.12.140, by notifying the city clerk of those properties which have not complied with the section, and by obtaining quotations from electrical contractors when it becomes necessary for the city to have the work accomplished, resulting from the property owners failure to do so. The project coordinator shall keep a record of all cost incurred by the city in undergrounding utilities on private property and shall report the costs to the city clerk upon completion of the work. (Ord. 983 § 5, 1983: prior code § 8400.11)

13.12.180 Undergrounding work to be done by city pursuant to Section 13.12.140—Cost quotations required.
A minimum of three firm quotations shall be obtained from licensed electrical contractors doing business within the city for each parcel or lot to be undergrounded pursuant to Section 13.12.140. The low bidder shall be awarded the bid subject to the approval of the city clerk and council. (Prior code § 8400.12)

Chapter 13.16 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE FOR PRIVATE USE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS

Sections:
13.16.010    City not to approve any provision of or entitlement to.
13.16.020    Exceptions.

13.16.010 City not to approve any provision of or entitlement to.
After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city shall not approve any provision or entitlement to water or sewer service for the use or benefit of properties outside the city limits. (Ord. 951 § 1, 1983)

13.16.020 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
A. Any property duly annexed after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein;
B. Any public or private party with which the city had an effective agreement for provision of services prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein;
C. Properties which currently receive city water or sewer service without a previously effective agreement;
D. Provision of sewer service to the Hidden Hills Mobile Home Park, as provided in the State of California Water Resources Control Board Order. No. WOO 824.
E. Provision of interim water and/or sewer service to the Fiero Lane and Clarion Court annexation area, as set forth in the memorandum of agreement between the city of San Luis Obispo and Fiero Lane Water Company and adopted by city council Resolution No. 10678 (2015 Series). (Ord. 1627 § 2, 2015; Ord. 951 § 2, 1983)

Chapter 13.20 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
(Superseded by Ord. 15471)
1Code reviser’s note: Ord. 1547 is codified in Chapter 17.87.

Chapter 13.24 RECYCLED WATER SERVICE

Sections:
13.24.010    Statement of policy.
13.24.020    Use and distribution of recycled water.

13.24.010 Statement of policy.
When in the judgment of the city, reclaimed water service can be feasibly provided to a particular parcel for particular uses, the utilities director shall require the use of reclaimed water in lieu of potable water for those uses. As used herein, the term “feasible” means reclaimed water is available for delivery to the property in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances and regulations and such reclaimed water can be delivered to the property at an overall cost to the user which does not exceed the overall cost of potable water service. (Ord. 1403 § 1, 2001)

13.24.020 Use and distribution of recycled water.
The use and distribution of recycled water shall be in accordance with the city’s Procedures for Recycled Water Use and all applicable federal, state and local laws, permits and regulations, including Titles 17 and 22 of the California Code of Regulations, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1526 § 1, 2009)

Title 14 COMMUNITY PRESERVATION

Chapters:
14.01        Historic Preservation Ordinance

Chapter 14.01 HISTORIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE

Sections:
14.01.010    Findings and purpose.
14.01.020    Definitions.
14.01.030    Cultural heritage committee (CHC).
14.01.040    Community development director role.
14.01.050    Historic resource designation.
14.01.055    Historic gardens, site features, signs, and other cultural resources.
14.01.060    Listing procedures for historic resources.
14.01.070    Evaluation criteria for historic resource listing.
14.01.080    Historic district designation—Purpose and application.
14.01.090    Process for establishing or amending historic districts.
14.01.100    Demolition of historic resources.
14.01.110    Relocation of historic resources.
14.01.120    Unpermitted demolition or destruction of resources.
14.01.130    Historic and cultural resource preservation fund established.
14.01.140    Enforcement.
14.01.150    Appeals.
14.01.160    Severability.

14.01.010 Findings and purpose.
A. Findings. 
    1. The city of San Luis Obispo has a distinctive physical character and rich history that are reflected in its many cultural resources, such as historic structures and sites. These irreplaceable resources are important to the community’s economic vitality, quality of life, and sense of place, and need protection from deterioration, damage, and inappropriate alteration or demolition.
    2. The city of San Luis Obispo has been fortunate to have owners who care about the history of their community and have undertaken the costly and time-consuming task of restoring, maintaining and enhancing their historic homes and commercial buildings. Their efforts have enhanced the distinctive character and sense of place of the community.
    3. The California Environmental Quality Act requires special treatment of historic resources and the establishment of clear local guidance for the identification and preservation of such resources lends clarity and certainty to the review of development applications involving historic resources. See Section 3.1.4 of the Historic Preservation Program Guidelines.
B. Purpose. The broad purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through the identification, protection, enhancement and preservation of those properties, structures, sites, artifacts and other cultural resources that represent distinctive elements of San Luis Obispo’s cultural, educational, social, economic, political and architectural history. Specifically, this chapter sets forth regulations and procedures to:
    1. Identify, protect, preserve, and promote the continuing use and upkeep of San Luis Obispo’s historic structures, sites and districts.
    2. Foster the retention and restoration of historic buildings and other cultural resources that promote tourism, economic vitality, sense of place, and diversity.
    3. Encourage private stewardship of historic buildings and other cultural resources through incentives where possible.
    4. Implement the historic preservation goals and policies of the conservation and open space element of the general plan.
    5. Promote the conservation of valuable material and embodied energy in historic structures through their continued use, restoration and repair, and on-going maintenance of historic resources.
    6. Promote the knowledge, understanding and appreciation of the city’s distinctive character, cultural resources, and history.
    7. Establish the procedures and significance criteria to be applied when evaluating development project effects on historic resources.
    8. Fulfill the city’s responsibilities as a certified local government under state and federal regulations and for federal Section 106 reviews.
    9. Establish the policy of the city to pursue all reasonable alternatives to achieve compliance with this chapter for the protection of historic resources prior to initiating penalty proceedings as set forth in Section 14.01.140. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms, words and their derivatives are used as follows:
    1. “Accessory structure” means a structure which is subordinate or incidental and directly related to a permitted use or structure on the same parcel. Accessory structures that include habitable space, as defined by the California Building Code, shall be no larger than four hundred fifty square feet. Accessory structures are located on the same parcel and are related to the primary structure but are subordinate or incidental, but may include structures that have achieved historic significance in their own right, as determined by the director, committee or council. (See “Primary structure.”)
    2. “Adjacent” means located on property which abuts the subject property on at least one point of the property line, on the same property, or located on property directly across right-of-way from subject property and able to be viewed concurrently.
    3. “Adverse effects” means effects, impacts or actions that are detrimental or potentially detrimental to a historic resource’s condition or architectural or historical integrity.
    4. “Alteration” means change, repair, replacement, remodel, modification, or new construction to: (1) the exterior of a historic resource or adjacent building, (2) the structural elements which support the exterior walls, roof, or exterior elements of the historic resource or adjacent building, (3) other construction on a lot, or (4) character defining features of the interior of a historic resource if the structure’s significance is wholly or partially based on interior features and the resource is publicly accessible. “Alteration” does not include ordinary landscape maintenance, unless the landscaping is identified as significant at the time a property is listed. “Alteration” also does not include ordinary property maintenance or repair that is exempt from a building permit, or is consistent with the Secretary of the Interior Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties.
    5. “Archaeological site” means those areas where archaeological resources are present and may be larger or smaller than the project site. An archaeological site may include prehistoric Native American archaeological sites; historic archaeological sites; sites or natural landscapes associated with important human events; and Native American sacred places and cultural landscapes.
    6. “ARC” means the architectural review commission as appointed by the city council.
    7. “California Register” means the California Register of Historical Resources defined in California PRC 5024.1 and in CCR Title 14, Chapter 11.5, Section 4850, et seq., as it may be amended.
    8. “CHC” means the cultural heritage committee as appointed by the city council.
    9. “Character defining features” means, as outlined in the U.S. Department of the Interior’s National Register Bulletin 15 and Preservation Brief 17: “How to Identify Character Defining Features,” the architectural character and general composition of a resource, including, but not limited to, type and texture of building material; type, design, and character of all windows, doors, stairs, porches, railings, molding and other appurtenant elements; and fenestration, ornamental detailing, elements of craftsmanship, and finishes, etc.
    10. “City” means the city of San Luis Obispo.
    11. “Community design guidelines” means the most recent version of the city’s community design guidelines as adopted and amended from time to time.
    12. “Contributing list resource or property” means a designation that may be applied to buildings or other resources at least fifty years old that maintain their original or attained historic and architectural character, and contribute either by themselves or in conjunction with other structures to the unique or historic character of a neighborhood, district, or to the city as a whole. They need not be located in a historic district. In some cases, buildings or other resources that are less than fifty years old, but are nonetheless significant based on architecture, craftsmanship or other criteria as described herein may be designated as a contributing list resource.
    13. “Council” means the council of the city of San Luis Obispo.
    14. “Cultural resource” means any prehistoric or historic district, site, landscape, building, structure, or object included in, or potentially eligible for local, state or national historic designation, including artifacts, records, and material remains related to such a property or resource.
    15. “Demolition,” for the purpose of this chapter, refers to any act or failure to act that destroys, removes, or relocates, in whole or part, a historical resource such that its historic or architectural character and significance are materially altered.
    16. “Deterioration” means the significant worsening of a structure’s condition or architectural or historic integrity, due to lack of maintenance, organisms, neglect, weathering and other natural forces.
    17. “Director” means the director of the community development department, or another person authorized by the director to act on his or her behalf.
    18. “Feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account cultural, economic, environmental, historic, legal, social and technological factors. “Structural feasibility” means that a building or other structure can be repaired or rehabilitated so as to be safe and usable without significant loss of historic fabric. Factors to be considered when making this determination include the existence of technology that will allow the design of the work and the ability to repair, supplement or replace load-bearing members and the thermal and moisture protection systems required for continued use of the structure; and the physical capacity of the structure to withstand the repair and/or rehabilitation process without the danger of further damage.
    19. “Historic Building Code” means the most recent version of the California Historical Building Code, Title 25, Part 8, as defined in Sections 18950 to 18961 of Division 12, Part 2.7 of Health and Safety Code (H&SC), a part of California state law.
    20. “Historic context” are those patterns, themes or trends in history by which a specific occurrence, property, or site is understood and its meaning and significance is made clear.
    21. “Historic district/historical preservation district” means areas or neighborhoods with a collection or concentration of listed or potentially contributing historic properties or archaeologically significant sites, where historic properties help define the area or neighborhood’s unique architectural, cultural, and historic character or sense of place. Historic districts are delineated on the official zoning map as historic (H) overlay zone under Chapter 17.54.
    22. “Historic Preservation Program Guidelines” means the most recent version of the Historic Preservation Program Guidelines, as adopted and amended from time to time.
    23. “Historic preservation report” means a document which describes preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, or reconstruction measures for a historic resource, based on the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties, and which includes standards and guidelines for recommended treatments for preserving the resource.
    24. “Historic property” means a property, including land and buildings, which possesses aesthetic, architectural, cultural, historic or scientific significance, and which is included in, or potentially eligible for local, state or national historic designation.
    25. “Historic resource” means any building, site, improvement, area or object of aesthetic, architectural, cultural, historic or scientific significance, and which is included in, or potentially eligible for local, state or national historic designation.
    26. “Historic status” means historic designation of a listed resource or property as approved by council.
    27. “Improvement” means any building, structure, fence, gate, landscaping, hardscaping, wall, work of art, or other object constituting a physical feature of real property or any part of such feature.
    28. “Inappropriate alteration” means alterations to historic resources which are inconsistent with these provisions and/or the Historic Preservation Program Guidelines.
    29. “Integrity, architectural or historical” means the ability of a property, structure, site, building, improvement or natural feature to convey its identity and authenticity, including but not limited to its original location, period(s) of construction, setting, scale, design, materials, detailing, workmanship, uses and association.
    30. “Inventory of historic resources” means the list of historically designated resources and properties consisting of master list and contributing properties list of historic resources, and any properties, objects, sites, gardens, sacred places and resources subsequently added to the inventory as determined to meet criteria outlined herein and approved by the city council.
    31. “Listed resource” means properties and resources included in the inventory of historic resources.
    32. “Massing” means the spatial relationships, arrangement and organization of a building’s physical bulk or volume.
    33. “Master list resource” is a designation which may be applied to the most unique and important historic properties and resources in terms of age, architectural or historical significance, rarity, or association with important persons or events in the city’s past meeting criteria outlined herein.
    34. “Minor alteration” means any structural or exterior change to a historic resource which the director determines to be consistent with the Historic Preservation Program Guidelines, Secretary of the Interior Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties and other applicable standards.
    35. “Modern contributing resources” is a designation which may be applied to properties and resources which are less than fifty years old, but which exemplify or include significant works of architecture or craftsmanship or are associated with a person or event significant to the city’s history.
    36. “National Register of Historic Places” means the official inventory of districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects significant in American history, architecture, engineering, archaeology and culture which is maintained by the Secretary of the Interior under the authority of the Historic Sites Act of 1935 and the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966.
    37. “Neglect” means the lack of maintenance, repair or protection of a listed property, resource, site or structure, which results in significant deterioration, as determined by the director or city council based on visual and physical evidence.
    38. “Noncontributing resource” means designation which may be applied to properties and resources in historic districts which are typically less than fifty years old and do not support the prevailing historic character of the district or other listing criteria as outlined herein.
    39. “Preservation” means the act or process of applying measures necessary to sustain a historic site, building or other structure’s historically significant existing form, integrity, and materials through stabilization, repair and maintenance.
    40. “Property owner” means the person or entity (public or private) holding fee title interest or legal custody and control of a property.
    41. “Primary structure” means the most important building or other structural feature on a parcel in terms of size, scale, architectural or historical significance, as determined by the committee.
    42. “Qualified professional” means an individual meeting the Secretary of the Interior’s Professional Qualifications Standards (36 CFR Part 61, Appendix A) in history, architectural history, historic architecture and other designated categories, or an individual determined by the CHC to have the qualifications generally equivalent to the above standards based on demonstrated experience.
    43. “Reconstruction” means the act or process of recreating the features, form and detailing of a non-surviving building or portion of building, structure, object, landscape, or site for the purpose of replicating its appearance at a specific period of time and in its historic location.
    44. “Rehabilitation” means the act or process of making possible a compatible use for a property through repair, alterations, and additions while preserving those portions or features which convey its architectural, cultural, or historic values.
    45. “Relocation” means removal of a resource from its original site and its reestablishment in essentially the same form, appearance and architectural detailing at another location.
    46. “Responsible party” means any person, business, corporation or entity, and the parent or legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen years, who has committed, permitted, directed or controlled any act constituting a violation of this chapter.
    47. “Restoration” means the act or process of accurately depicting the form, features, and character of a property as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of features from other periods in its history and reconstruction of missing features from the restoration period.
    48. “Scale” means the proportions of architectural design that relate to human size or other relative size measure.
    49. “Secretary of the Interior’s Standards” means the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties as published by the U.S. Department of the Interior and as amended from time to time.
    50. “Setting” means the physical area, environment or neighborhood in which a resource is located.
    51. “Sensitive site” means a site determined by the community development director, planning commission, architectural review commission or council, upon recommendation of the cultural heritage committee, to have special characteristics, constraints or community value such as: historic significance, historic context, creek-side location or visual prominence, requiring more detailed development review than would otherwise be required for other similarly zoned lots.
    52. “Site,” as used in this chapter, means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself possesses historic, cultural, or archeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure.
    53. “Siting” means the placement of structures and improvements on a property or site.
    54. “Stabilization” means the act or process of applying measures designed to reestablish a weather-resistant enclosure and the structural stability of an unsafe or deteriorated property while maintaining the essential form as it exists at present.
    55. “Statement of historic significance” means an explanation of why a resource is important within its historic context. It explains how the resource meets the eligibility criteria and integrity thresholds as established by local, state or federal government.
    56. “Structure,” as used in this chapter, includes anything assembled or constructed on the ground, or attached to anything with a foundation on the ground, including walls, fences, buildings, signs, bridges, monuments, and similar features.
    57. “Survey” means a systematic process for identifying and evaluating a community’s historic resources using established criteria. “Survey” may also refer to the documentation resulting from a survey project.
    58. “Threatened resource” means properties or resources at risk of loss of architectural, cultural or historic value due to physical alteration, relocation or demolition.
    59. “Zoning code” means Title 17 of the city’s municipal code, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.030 Cultural heritage committee (CHC).
A. Committee Membership and Terms. The city shall have a cultural heritage committee (the “CHC” or “committee”), consisting of seven members who shall be appointed by the city council (“council”) for terms of up to four years, which shall commence immediately upon appointment by the council consistent with Resolutions 6157 (1987 Series) and 6593 (1989 Series), and CHC bylaws or as subsequently amended. The CHC shall function within the guidelines and policies of the “Advisory Body Handbook” and perform other duties as assigned by council.
B. Duties. The CHC shall make recommendations to decision-making bodies on the following:
    1. Historic and archaeological resource preservation program guidelines that implement this chapter and provide guidance to persons planning development projects subject to cultural heritage committee review, and for city and property owner decisions regarding cultural resources in San Luis Obispo. Once adopted by the city council, a record copy of the guidelines shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and in the community development department. Copies shall be available on the city’s website and printed versions will be available at cost.
    2. Properties for inclusion on the city’s list of historic resources—those properties, areas, sites, buildings, structures or other features having significant historical, cultural, architectural, community, scientific or aesthetic value to the citizens of San Luis Obispo.
    3. The master and contributing properties lists of historic resources, and historic property and archaeological site inventories.
    4. Actions subject to discretionary city review and approval that may affect significant archaeological, cultural or historic resources.
    5. The application of architectural, historic, and cultural preservation standards and guidelines to projects and approvals involving historic sites, districts, and structures.
    6. Consolidation of information about cultural resources and promotion, participation in, or sponsorship of educational and interpretive programs that foster public awareness and appreciation of cultural resources.
    7. Alterations related to development or demolition applications involving listed resources and properties within historic preservation districts.
    8. Incentive programs approved by the council that are directed at preserving and maintaining cultural resources.
    9. Information for property owners preparing local, state and federal historic nominations to utilize preservation incentives, including the Mills Act and federal tax incentives, such as rehabilitation tax credits.
C. Actions Subject to Cultural Heritage Committee Review. The committee shall review and make recommendations to the director, architectural review commission, planning commission or city council on applications and development review projects which include any of the following:
    1. Changes to the inventory of historic resources.
    2. Changes to historic districts and applications to establish new historic districts.
    3. Statements of historic significance and historic inventories for existing and proposed historic districts.
    4. New construction, additions or alterations located in historic districts, or on historically listed properties, or sensitive archaeological sites.
    5. Applications to demolish or relocate listed historic resources or structures.
    6. Referrals to the committee by the community development director (“director”), architectural review commission, planning commission, or council.
    7. Proposed actions of public agencies that may affect historic or cultural resources within the city. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.040 Community development director role.
The CHC is assisted by staff of the community development department. The community development director (“director”) is responsible for interpreting and implementing this chapter and helping the CHC carry out its duties. Notwithstanding Section 14.01.030(C)(1) through (5) and (7), the director may determine that CHC review is not required for actions or projects that: (1) do not adversely affect historic resources, or (2) are consistent with this chapter, the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and the Historic Preservation Program Guidelines and no public purpose would be served by requiring CHC review. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.050 Historic resource designation.
The following classifications shall be used to designate historic resources and properties. The primary categories of historic significance are master list and contributing properties. Contributing properties include those properties that by virtue of their age, design and appearance, contribute to and embody the historic character of the neighborhood or historic district in which they are located.
A. Master List Resources. The most unique and important resources and properties in terms of age, architectural or historical significance, rarity, or association with important persons or events in the city’s past, which meet one or more of the criteria outlined in Section 14.01.070.
B. Contributing List Resources or Properties. Buildings or other resources at least fifty years old that maintain their original or attained historic and architectural character, and contribute, either by themselves or in conjunction with other structures, to the unique or historic character of a neighborhood, district, or to the city as a whole. They need not be located in a historic district. In some cases, buildings or other resources that are less than fifty years old, but are nonetheless significant based on architecture, craftsmanship or other criteria as described in Section 14.01.070 may be designated as a contributing resource.
C. Noncontributing. Buildings, properties and other features in historic districts which are less than fifty years old, have not retained their original architectural character, or which do not support the prevailing historic character of the district. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.055 Historic gardens, site features, signs, and other cultural resources.
A. Historic Site and Landscape Features. Historic gardens, site features and improvements, accessory structures, signs, Native American sacred places, cultural landscapes and areas or objects of archaeological, architectural, cultural or historic significance not part of a designated property may be added to the inventory of historic resources through CHC review and council approval as specified herein.
B. Cultural Resources on Public Property. Cultural and historic features on public property, such as Bishop’s Peak granite walls and curbing, sidewalk embossing, ornamental manhole covers and hitching posts, may be added to the inventory of historic resources through CHC review and council approval as specified herein.
C. Sign. A sign which contributes to the unique architectural or historic character of a building, site or historic district may be designated as a historic sign. Signs that meet at least one of the following criteria may be designated historic:
    1. The sign is exemplary of technology, craftsmanship or design of the period when it was constructed, uses historic sign materials and means of illumination, and is not significantly altered from its historic period. Historic sign materials shall include metal or wood facings, or paint directly on the facade of a building. Historic means of illumination shall include incandescent light fixtures or neon tubing on the exterior of the sign. If the sign has been altered, it must be restorable to its historic function and appearance.
    2. The sign is well integrated with the site and/or architecture of the building.
    3. A sign not meeting either criterion may be considered for inclusion in the inventory if it demonstrates extraordinary aesthetic quality, creativity, or innovation. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.060 Listing procedures for historic resources.
A. Application for Historic Listing. The property owner may request that a resource to be added to the master or contributing list of historic resources by submitting a completed application to the community development department (“department”), accompanied by all available information documenting the historic significance and architectural character of the resource. The CHC, ARC, or planning commission may also recommend, or city council may directly request, the addition of a resource to the master or contributing list of historic resources.
B. Review Process. The CHC shall review all applications for historic listing, whether initiated by the city or a property owner, to determine if a property proposed for listing meets eligibility criteria for historic listing. The CHC will review the eligibility criteria for a proposed listing at a noticed public hearing. The director shall provide notification to the property owner and public, as required by city standards. At the public hearing, or in no case more than sixty days from the hearing date, the CHC shall forward a recommendation on the application to the city council. The city council will take an action on the application to add or not add the resource to the master or contributing list of historic resources. The decision of the city council is final.
C. Removal from Historic Listing. It is the general intention of the city not to remove a property from historic listing. Council may, however, rezone a property to remove historic overlay zoning, or remove the property from historic listing if the structure on the property no longer meets eligibility criteria for listing, following the process for listing set forth herein. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.070 Evaluation criteria for historic resource listing.
When determining if a property should be designated as a listed historic or cultural resource, the CHC and city council shall consider this chapter and State Historic Preservation Office (“SHPO”) standards. In order to be eligible for designation, the resource shall exhibit a high level of historic integrity, be at least fifty years old (less than fifty if it can be demonstrated that enough time has passed to understand its historical importance) and satisfy at least one of the following criteria:
A. Architectural Criteria. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, region, or method of construction, or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic values.
    1. Style. Describes the form of a building, such as size, structural shape and details within that form (e.g., arrangement of windows and doors, ornamentation, etc.). Building style will be evaluated as a measure of:
        a. The relative purity of a traditional style;
        b. Rarity of existence at any time in the locale; and/or current rarity although the structure reflects a once popular style;
        c. Traditional, vernacular and/or eclectic influences that represent a particular social milieu and period of the community; and/or the uniqueness of hybrid styles and how these styles are put together.
    2. Design. Describes the architectural concept of a structure and the quality of artistic merit and craftsmanship of the individual parts. Reflects how well a particular style or combination of styles are expressed through compatibility and detailing of elements. Also, suggests degree to which the designer (e.g., carpenter-builder) accurately interpreted and conveyed the style(s). Building design will be evaluated as a measure of:
        a. Notable attractiveness with aesthetic appeal because of its artistic merit, details and craftsmanship (even if not necessarily unique);
        b. An expression of interesting details and eclecticism among carpenter-builders, although the craftsmanship and artistic quality may not be superior.
    3. Architect. Describes the professional (an individual or firm) directly responsible for the building design and plans of the structure. The architect will be evaluated as a reference to:
        a. A notable architect (e.g., Wright, Morgan), including architects who made significant contributions to the state or region, or an architect whose work influenced development of the city, state or nation.
        b. An architect who, in terms of craftsmanship, made significant contributions to San Luis Obispo (e.g., Abrahams who, according to local sources, designed the house at 810 Osos—Frank Avila’s father’s home—built between 1927 – 1930).
B. Historic Criteria. 
    1. History—Person. Associated with the lives of persons important to local, California, or national history. Historic person will be evaluated as a measure of the degree to which a person or group was:
        a. Significant to the community as a public leader (e.g., mayor, congress member, etc.) or for his or her fame and outstanding recognition—locally, regionally, or nationally.
        b. Significant to the community as a public servant or person who made early, unique, or outstanding contributions to the community, important local affairs or institutions (e.g., council members, educators, medical professionals, clergymen, railroad officials).
    2. History—Event. Associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of local or regional history or the cultural heritage of California or the United States. Historic event will be evaluated as a measure of:
        a. A landmark, famous, or first-of-its-kind event for the city—regardless of whether the impact of the event spread beyond the city.
        b. A relatively unique, important or interesting contribution to the city (e.g., the Ah Louis Store as the center for Chinese-American cultural activities in early San Luis Obispo history).
    3. History—Context. Associated with and also a prime illustration of predominant patterns of political, social, economic, cultural, medical, educational, governmental, military, industrial, or religious history. Historic context will be evaluated as a measure of the degree to which it reflects:
        a. Early, first, or major patterns of local history, regardless of whether the historic effects go beyond the city level, that are intimately connected with the building (e.g., County Museum).
        b. Secondary patterns of local history, but closely associated with the building (e.g., Park Hotel).
C. Integrity. Authenticity of a historical resource’s physical identity evidenced by the survival of characteristics that existed during the resource’s period of significance. Integrity will be evaluated by a measure of:
    1. Whether or not a structure occupies its original site and/or whether or not the original foundation has been changed, if known.
    2. The degree to which the structure has maintained enough of its historic character or appearance to be recognizable as a historic resource and to convey the reason(s) for its significance.
    3. The degree to which the resource has retained its design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.080 Historic district designation—Purpose and application.
A. Historic (H) District Designation. All properties within historic districts shall be designated by an “H” zoning. Properties zoned “H” shall be subject to the provisions and standards as provided in Chapter 17.54 (zoning) of the municipal code.
B. Purposes of Historic Districts. The purposes of historic districts and H zone designation are to:
    1. Implement cultural resource preservation policies of the general plan, the preservation provisions of adopted area plans, the historic preservation and archaeological resource preservation program guidelines; and
    2. Identify and preserve definable, unified geographical entities that possess a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development;
    3. Implement historic preservation provisions of adopted area and neighborhood improvement plans;
    4. Enhance and preserve the setting of historic resources so that surrounding land uses and structures do not detract from the historic or architectural integrity of designated historic resources and districts; and
    5. Promote the public understanding and appreciation of historic resources.
C. Eligibility for Incentives. Properties zoned as historic preservation (H) shall be eligible for preservation incentive and benefit programs as established herein, in the guidelines and other local, state and federal programs.
D. Where Applied. The (H) designation may be applied to areas or neighborhoods with a collection or concentration of listed historic properties or archaeologically significant sites, or where historic properties help define an area or neighborhood’s unique architectural and historic character or sense of place.
E. “H” District Combined. A historic preservation overlay district (H) may be combined with any zoning district, and shall be shown by adding an “H” to the base zone designation. H district boundaries shall be drawn to follow property lines or right-of-way lines, and as set forth in the zoning regulations. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.090 Process for establishing or amending historic districts.
A. Initiating or Amending Historic Districts. Any person may initiate the process to establish or alter the boundaries of a historic preservation district. The process can also be initiated by the CHC, ARC, planning commission or city council.
B. Application. An application to establish or alter the boundaries of a historic preservation district shall be submitted to the department. The application shall meet the requirements for rezoning as described in the zoning regulations. The application and supporting information and plans shall be submitted to the department and shall include:
    1. A map (eight and one-half inches by eleven inches) from the official zoning map, with the area to be changed shaded or outlined in a heavy, black line, with the proposed area to be changed clearly labeled;
    2. Information showing how the application meets the criteria to establish or alter a historic district designation;
    3. A statement of historic significance. A statement of historic significance shall be prepared by a qualified professional, as listed in the city’s list of qualified historians. The director may waive the requirement that the statement be prepared by a qualified professional if the applicant provides adequate information to enable informed review of the proposed district.
C. Contents. Statements of historic significance shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
    1. A visual and written description of the district’s boundaries.
    2. A description of the district’s architectural, historic, and cultural resources, character and significance, including a historic survey documenting the period of significance and how historic properties meet adopted local, state and, where applicable, federal criteria for historic listing.
    3. Preservation goals and concerns for the district including but not limited to:
        a. Identification of preservation priorities, important features, goals and objectives; and
        b. Identification of potential obstacles to preservation; and
        c. Identification of historic land use policies and goals for future land use; and
        d. Special considerations for development review of projects both involving and not involving historic resources.
    4. Graphic and written design guidelines applicable to the district’s preservation goals, historic character and features which shall include, but not be limited to:
        a. Guidelines for projects involving historic resources, focused on preserving the district’s character and significant archeological, architectural, and historic features; and
        b. Guidelines for projects within the district but not involving historically designated properties, focused on maintaining street character and compatibility with the district’s historic character while not necessarily mimicking historic styles.
D. Review. The CHC shall review the application and make a recommendation to the planning commission. The planning commission shall review the CHC recommendation and rezoning application and make a recommendation to the city council. The city council shall review the application and the recommendations of the CHC and planning commission, and approve or disapprove the application. The CHC, planning commission and the city council shall each conduct a public hearing on the application and the notice of such hearings shall be completed as provided in the city’s notification procedures.
E. Review Criteria. When considering a historic preservation district application, the reviewing body shall consider both of the following criteria:
    1. Environmental Design Continuity. The inter-relationship of structures and their relationship to a common environment; the continuity, spatial relationship, and visual character of a street, neighborhood, or area. Environmental design continuity is comprised of:
        a. Symbolic importance to the community of a key structure in the area and the degree to which it serves as a conspicuous and pivotal landmark (e.g., easily accessible to the public, helps to establish a sense of time and place); or
        b. Compatibility of structures with neighboring structures in their setting on the basis of period, style (form, height, roof lines), design elements, landscapes, and natural features; and how these combine together to create an integral cultural, historic, or stylistic setting; or
        c. Similarity to and/or compatibility of structures over fifty years of age which, collectively, combine to form a geographically definable area with its own distinctive character.
    2. Whether the proposed district contains structures which meet criteria for inclusion on the city’s list of historic resources. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.100 Demolition of historic resources.
A. Intent. Listed historic resources are an irreplaceable community resource that merit special protection to preserve them for future generations, and shall not be demolished unless the city council makes all of the findings specified in subsection D of this section; provided, however, that these thresholds shall not apply to repairs to listed historic resources that do not require a building permit, or where the CHC or the director has determined such work is consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties and with the Historic Preservation Program Guidelines.
B. Demolition Review. The CHC shall review and make recommendation to the city council concerning demolition applications for structures listed in the inventory of historic resources.
C. Demolition Thresholds. Demolition permits for structures which are included on the inventory of historic resources shall be required for:
    1. Alterations to or removal of greater than twenty-five percent of the original building framework, roof structure, and exterior walls; and
    2. Relocation of such resources to a site outside the city limits.
D. Required Findings for Demolition of a Historic Resource. The decision-making body shall approve an application for demolition of a structure listed in the inventory of historic resources only if it determines that the proposed demolition is consistent with the general plan and:
    1. The historic resource is a hazard to public health or safety, and repair or stabilization is not structurally feasible. Deterioration resulting from the property owner’s neglect or failure to maintain the property should not be a justification for demolition. The applicant may be required to provide structural reports, to the approval of the community development director or city council, to document that repairs or stabilization are not feasible; or
    2. Denial of the application will constitute an economic hardship as described under subsections (J)(1) through (3) of this section.
E. Demolition Timing. City regulations provide for a ninety-day waiting period before demolition of a listed historic resource to allow consideration of alternatives to preserve the building through relocation and/or property trades. The chief building official shall not issue a permit for demolishing a historic resource, except where the chief building official determines a listed historic resource may pose an imminent demonstrable threat to human life and safety, until:
    1. Public notice requirements in the city’s demolition and building relocation code have been met; and
    2. A construction permit is issued for a replacement building; and
    3. All permit fees for the new development are paid. Where no new development is proposed, the property owner shall provide to the director’s satisfaction, financial guarantees to ensure demolition plans and conditions of approval are implemented.
F. Historic and Architectural Documentation. Before the issuance of a demolition permit for structures listed in the inventory of historic resources, the resource and its site shall be documented as specified in city standards, to the satisfaction of the CHC and the director. The documentation shall be retained in a secure, but publicly accessible, location.
G. Historic Acknowledgement. An acknowledgment of demolished resources shall be provided through historic signage and/or the reuse or display of historic materials and artifacts on site, at the owner’s expense, to the director’s approval.
H. Code Requirements. Demolitions shall follow standards and procedures in the demolition and building relocation code and California Building Code as locally amended.
I. Expiration of Demolition Approval. Demolition approval of a listed historic resource shall expire two years after its date of approval, unless a building permit has been issued and construction has begun. A one-year extension may be granted by the director. Additional time extensions shall require reapplication to and approval by the CHC.
J. Economic Hardship. An economic hardship provision is established to ensure that denial of a demolition permit does not impose undue hardship on the owner of a historical resource. If the applicant presents evidence clearly demonstrating to the satisfaction of the CHC or the city council that the action will cause an extreme hardship, the CHC may recommend approval, and the council may approve or conditionally approve a demolition or other application to modify a listed historic resource even though it does not meet one or more standards set forth herein. The applicant shall be responsible for providing substantiation of the claim to the director, who shall review the information with the director of finance and make a joint recommendation to the CHC on the hardship request. The CHC shall consider and make a recommendation to the council regarding the financial impacts of denial of the demolition permit. Private financial information shall be maintained in confidence by the city. The CHC is authorized to request that the applicant furnish information, documentation and/or expert testimony, the cost of which shall be paid by the applicant, to be considered by the committee in its related findings. All additional required information shall be provided by a qualified individual or firm approved by the director. In determining whether extreme hardship exists, the committee and council shall consider evidence that demonstrates:
    1. Denial of the application will diminish the value of the subject property so as to leave substantially no economic value, after considering other means of offsetting the costs of retaining the historic resource, including, but not limited to, tax abatements, financial assistance, building code modifications, changes in allowed uses, grants; or
    2. Sale or rental of the property is impractical, when compared to the cost of holding such property for uses permitted in the zoning district; or
    3. Utilization of the property for lawful purposes is prohibited or impractical. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.110 Relocation of historic resources.
Relocation has the potential to adversely affect the significance of a historic resource and is discouraged. Relocation applications shall be evaluated as follows:
A. Review. The CHC and ARC shall review applications to relocate structures listed on the inventory of historic resources.
B. Criteria for Relocation. Relocation of structures included on the inventory of historic resources, or those that are determined by the CHC or the director to be potentially historic, is the least preferred preservation method and shall be permitted only when relocation is consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan, any applicable area or specific plans, and the Historic Preservation Program Guidelines, and:
    1. The relocation will not significantly change, destroy, or adversely affect the historic, architectural or aesthetic value of the resource; and
    2. Relocation will not have a significant adverse effect on the character of the historic district or neighborhood, or surrounding properties where the resource is located or at its proposed location; and
    3. The original site and the proposed receiving site are controlled through ownership, long-term lease or similar assurance by the person(s) proposing relocation, to the director’s approval; and
    4. The proposed receiving site is relevant to the resource’s historic significance; or
    5. The relocation is necessary to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition on the site and no other measures for correcting the condition are feasible; or
    6. The proposed relocation meets the findings required under Section 14.01.100(J) for demolition of a historic resource.
C. Relocation Timing. The historic resource shall not be relocated unless the chief building official issues a permit for relocation and all permit or impact fees for new development are paid; or, where no new development is proposed, an appropriate security is posted to guarantee that relocation plans are implemented, to the director’s approval.
D. Historical and Architectural Documentation. Prior to issuance of a construction permit for relocation, the resource and its site shall be historically documented as specified herein, to the satisfaction of the CHC and the director. An acknowledgment of the resource, such as a permanent, weatherproof historic plaque, shall be incorporated on the resource’s original site as provided by the applicant or property owner, subject to the approval of the CHC.
E. Relocation Plan and Procedures. Relocations shall follow a plan approved by the CHC or the director, standards and procedures in the demolition and building relocation code, the California Building Code, and the following:
    1. Application for relocation shall be made on forms provided by the department and shall include information to respond to the criteria in subsection B of this section.
    2. The CHC shall hold a noticed public hearing and recommend action to the ARC or city council on the application for relocation of a historic resource, and the ARC or council shall consider the CHC’s recommendation in making the final determination to approve or deny the permit.
    3. The ARC or the city council will not grant an approval for the relocation of a listed historic resource unless the criteria for relocation under subsection B of this section can be met. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.120 Unpermitted demolition or destruction of resources.
A. Preservation of Listed Historic Resources. The purpose of this section is to prevent unpermitted active demolition or demolition by neglect by ensuring that listed historic resources are maintained in good repair, and free from structural defects and safety hazards, consistent with the International Property Maintenance Code, Property Maintenance Standards (Chapter 17.17), and standards as specified herein. Alteration or demolition in whole or part, of any significant features or characteristics of a listed historic property or resource requires city authorization, pursuant to Section 14.01.100.
B. Enhanced Penalties for Unpermitted Demolition. In addition to penalties otherwise provided for violations of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code and this chapter, the city council, following notice and a public hearing, may impose the following enhanced penalties for unpermitted demolition of a listed resource, as defined herein, where a property owner has willfully demolished, or directed, or allowed the demolition of a listed resource, or where the property owner has failed to comply with notices to correct violations of this code, such that the continuance of such violations may result in the unpermitted demolition of the listed historic resource (either active or by neglect):
    1. Restoration. The owner may be required to restore the property or structure to its appearance prior to the violation to the satisfaction of the director.
    2. Building Permit Restriction. City may prohibit the owner(s), successors, or assigns from obtaining a building permit for development of the subject property for a period of up to five years from the date of violation, unless such permit(s) is for the purpose of complying with provisions of this chapter. In cases where this penalty is imposed, the city shall:
        a. Initiate proceedings to place a deed restriction on the property to ensure enforcement of this restriction.
        b. Require the property owner to maintain the property during the period of development restriction in conformance with standards set forth in this chapter.
        c. Initiate action to remove any such deed restriction within ten days of correction or compliance. Subsequent development applications shall be subject to CEQA review and conditions of development shall address the demolition of the historic resource.
    3. Loss of Preservation Benefits. Any historic preservation benefits previously granted to the affected property may be subject to revocation.
    4. Other Remedies. These enhanced penalties are nonexclusive, in addition to and not in lieu of penalties otherwise provided for violations of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code and this chapter, including, but not limited to, administrative citations, criminal prosecution, civil fines, and public nuisance proceedings. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.130 Historic and cultural resource preservation fund established.
The historic and cultural resource preservation fund (“fund”) is hereby established to provide for the conservation, preservation, restoration and rehabilitation of historic and cultural resources in the city of San Luis Obispo. The council shall provide the policy direction for funding and expenditures from the fund.
A. Program Administration. The director shall administer the fund, following specific procedures and funding priorities adopted by the council.
B. Purpose. The purpose of the fund is to provide funds for historic preservation projects within the city. All funds deposited in the fund shall be used for the conservation, preservation, restoration and rehabilitation of historic or cultural resources, as provided in this section and as directed by the council.
    1. Financial Administration. Financial administration of the fund shall be by the city finance director or designee, in accordance with state and local law. Any interest earned on the fund shall accrue to the funds, unless council specifically designates such funds for another purpose.
    2. Grants, Gifts and Donations. The finance director shall deposit into the fund any grants, gifts, donations, rents, royalties, or other financial support earmarked by council for historic or cultural resource preservation.
C. Cultural Heritage Committee Role. The committee shall advise the council on the fund regarding:
    1. Criteria for use and award of funds;
    2. Entering into any contract, lease, agreement, etc., for use of funds;
    3. Any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to achieve the fund purposes and the intent of this chapter.
D. Uses of Fund. The fund may be used for: (1) the identification and protection of cultural resources, including preparation of historic surveys and design guidelines, (2) for the repair, restoration, rehabilitation, preservation and maintenance of historical buildings, features, or archaeological sites, (3) for public education on cultural resources, (4) for real property acquisition if there is a willing property owner, including lease, purchase, sale, exchange or other forms of real property transfer or acquisition to protect significant historic resources, or (5) any other historic preservation related purpose approved by the council. Council decisions on the use of funds are final.
E. Loans and Grants. The fund may be used, upon council approval and recommendation by the committee, for loans and grants to public agencies, nonprofit organizations and private entities to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
F. Preservation Agreements. Loans, grants or other financial assistance shall require execution of an agreement between the city and the recipient to ensure that such award or assistance carries out the purposes of this chapter and is consistent with applicable state and local standards.
G. Funding Eligibility. The fund shall be used to benefit properties on the master or contributing properties list, or for other properties or uses deemed eligible by the council upon recommendation by the committee. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.140 Enforcement.
A. The director, chief building official and city attorney and their designees are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Time to Correct. Prior to assessment of any penalty or initiation of any prosecution for any violation of this chapter, the director shall provide written notice of noncompliance to property owners. Notice shall be by certified and regular mail. Following mailing of notice, property owner shall have sixty days to correct the violation or to inform the city why an extension is warranted. Additional time to correct the violation may be allowed where the property owner is exercising due diligence in acting to correct noticed violations. The director shall have the authority to place reasonable conditions on such an extension. Notwithstanding these provisions, if the director or the chief building official determines there is an imminent threat to a listed historic or cultural resource, the director shall notify the property owner of the imminent threat and property owner shall be required to provide urgent measures deemed reasonable and necessary to protect the public health and safety and for the protection of the resource within seventy-two hours of notification.
C. Work Stoppage. In addition to any other fines, penalties or enforcement provisions set forth in this chapter, failure to comply with an approved application shall constitute grounds for immediate stoppage of the work involved in the noncompliance until the matter is resolved.
D. Violation—Penalty. Every property owner and/or responsible party, as defined in this chapter, who violates provisions of this chapter is subject to penalty as set forth in Chapter 1.12 or administrative enforcement as set forth under Chapter 1.24 of the municipal code. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.150 Appeals.
Decisions of any city official or body under the provisions of this chapter are appealable in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.20, except that fees for appeals under this chapter by the property owner concerning the master or contributing list property in which said owner is residing at the time of appeal shall be waived. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

14.01.160 Severability.
Should any section or other portion of this chapter be determined unlawful or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining section(s) and portion(s) of this chapter shall be considered severable and shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1557 § 3 (part), 2010)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:
15.02        Building Codes Adopted
15.04        Construction and Fire Prevention Regulations
15.08        Repealed
15.10        Repealed
15.12        Alarm Systems
15.14        Expedited Permit Process for Small Residential Rooftop Solar Systems
15.15        Expedited Permit Process for Electric Vehicle Charging Stations
15.16        Repealed
15.20        Repealed
15.24        Repealed
15.28        Repealed
15.32        Docks
15.36        Repealed
15.40        Sign Regulations
15.44        Repealed
15.48        Safety Assessment Placards

Chapter 15.02 BUILDING CODES ADOPTED

Sections:
15.02.010    Adoption of codes.
15.02.020    Violation penalties.
Prior legislation: Ord. 1625 § 3.

15.02.010 Adoption of codes.
Fourteen documents, three copies each of which are on file in city offices, identified by the seal of the city of San Luis Obispo, marked and designated as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Parts 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12, also known as the California Building Standards Code, to include the 2019 Editions of the California Building Code (Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2), the California Residential Code (Part 2.5), and the California Fire Code (Part 9) published by the International Code Council, the 2019 Edition of the California Electrical Code (Part 3) published by the National Fire Protection Association, the 2019 Editions of the California Mechanical Code (Part 4) and the California Plumbing Code (Part 5) published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, the 2019 Edition of the California Energy Code (Part 6), the California Green Building Standards Code (Part 11), the California Historical Building Code (Part 8), the California Existing Building Code (Part 10), the 2019 California Referenced Standards Code (Part 12), the 2018 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) published by the International Code Council, and the 1997 Editions of the Uniform Housing Code and the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings published by the International Conference of Building Officials, are hereby adopted including chapters, sections and appendices not adopted by agencies of the state of California. Furthermore, only the chapters, sections and appendices of the 2019 California Residential Code and the 2019 California Green Building Standards Code adopted by the state of California are hereby adopted. These regulations collectively will be known as the building construction and fire prevention regulations of the city of San Luis Obispo. The provisions of such are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter except as modified hereinafter. (Ord. 1670 § 5 (part), 2019; Ord. 1630 § 5 (part), 2016: Ord. 1595 § 5, 2014)

15.02.020 Violation penalties.
Persons who shall violate a provision of the California Fire Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 1670 § 5 (part), 2019; Ord. 1630 § 5 (part), 2016)

Chapter 15.04 CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS

Sections:
15.04.010    Building official and fire code official designated.
15.04.020    Amendments—California Building Code.
15.04.030    Amendments—California Residential Code.
15.04.040    Amendments—California Existing Building Code.
15.04.050    Amendments—California Mechanical Code.
15.04.060    Amendments—California Plumbing Code.
15.04.070    Amendments—California Electrical Code.
15.04.080    Amendments—International Property Maintenance Code.
15.04.090    Permits required for well construction.
15.04.100    Amendments—California Fire Code.

15.04.010 Building official and fire code official designated.
The chief building official is hereby designated as the building official and code official for the city of San Luis Obispo. The fire chief is hereby designated as the fire code official for the city of San Luis Obispo. Where the “authority having jurisdiction” is used in the adopted codes, it shall mean the building official or fire code official, as applicable. (Ord. 1670 § 6 (part), 2019; Ord. 1630 § 6 (part), 2016: Ord. 1595 § 6 (part), 2014)

15.04.020 Amendments—California Building Code.
A. Delete Appendices A, B, D, E, H, K and M.
B. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 101.2, to read as follows:101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure, including pre-manufactured shipping containers, or any appurtenances connected to or attached to such buildings or structures.
Exception: The provisions of the California Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, and location of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures not more than two stories above grade plane in height and 3,000 sq. ft. in area.
C. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 103.1, to read as follows:103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The building and safety division is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official.
D. Add Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104.10.2, to read as follows:104.10.2 Alternate Means and Methods Fee. When a request for approval of an alternate means and methods is proposed under Section 104.10, an alternate means and methods fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the documents for review. Said fee shall be in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority.
E. Add Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104.12, to read as follows:104.12 Airspace subdivisions. The building official shall have the authority to apply the building ordinances of the city of San Luis Obispo and those building regulations mandated by State law to be enforced by the local agency to buildings and structures containing one or more airspace lots as defined in this code so as to treat the entirety of such buildings or structures as if they were on or within a single lot, provided:
1. That such buildings or structures or portions thereof would otherwise conform to such ordinances and regulations, but for the creation of such airspace lots; and
2. That a covenant agreement, in a form designed to run with the land and satisfactory to the Community Development Director, be recorded with the Office of County Recorder and a copy filed with the Community Development Department by the owners binding themselves and future owners and assigns to keep, preserve and maintain all portions of such buildings or structures in accordance with and pursuant to such building ordinances and regulations.
F. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.2, Building items 1, 2 and 5 to read as follows:Work exempt from permit.
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures associated with an R-3 occupancy building used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area is not greater than 120 square feet (11 m2). Maximum building height shall be 12 feet above grade to highest point of structure. Such structure must comply with all provision of Title 17 of the Municipal Code.
2. Fences not over 6 feet high constructed of conventional lightweight materials including wood, vinyl, and wrought iron.
5. A water tank or a group of water tanks intended for storage of irrigation water only supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 600 gallons in total on a parcel, the height does not exceed seven feet, and the ratio of height to width does not exceed 2:1 (provided that water tanks with minor ratio deviances may be allowed under this section in the discretion of the Chief Building Official, subject to review of the deviation by the Chief Building Official and verification that such minor deviations do not adversely impact structural stability), and it is not visible from the public right-of way that abuts the front yard.
G. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.3.2, to read as follows:105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee if additional review by the City is necessary. An application for a permit that is abandoned after adoption of new mandatory building codes by the State may not be extended and must comply with the new regulations.
H. Add Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.3.3, to read as follows:105.3.3 Plan review fees. When submittal documents are required by Section 107.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority.
Separate plan review fees shall apply to permits for retaining walls and major drainage structures in conjunction with grading. For excavation and fill on the same site, the plan review fee for grading shall be based on the volume of excavation or fill, whichever is greater.
The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 109.2 and are in addition to the permit fees.
Where submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review, or where the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 107.3.4.1, an additional plan review fee may be charged at a rate established by the applicable governing authority.
I. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.5, to read as follows:105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. Work shall be deemed abandoned if an inspection required to be performed under the work authorized by the permit is not approved within 180 days of the most recent prior approved inspection. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. A permit that is abandoned after adoption of new mandatory building codes by the State may not be extended and must be submitted for review to comply with the new regulations.
Permits issued to correct code violations pursuant to a code enforcement case shall be valid for a period of 90 days. Extensions to the permit may be granted at the discretion of the building official. Performance or approval of a required inspection will not automatically extend the permit.
J. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.7, to read as follows:105.7 Placement and Posting of Permit. A copy of the issued job posting card shall be displayed on the construction site within 20 feet of the curb and shall be visible and accessible to the public from the public right of way until completion of the project.
K. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 109.4, to read as follows:109.4 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a special investigation fee. Special Investigation fees are equal to 100% of the normally established permit fee and are in addition thereto, unless a lesser amount is determined to be appropriate by the building official. The building official may waive all or a portion of the special investigation fee in the following cases:
1. Where a property owner inherits unpermitted construction through the purchase of a property and voluntarily seeks a permit following initial discovery or notification of the violation.
2. When a property owner commences emergency repairs to protect life or property without first obtaining a permit during an emergency situation such as a natural disaster or severe weather conditions, provided that the property owner obtains a permit for such repairs as soon as practicable thereafter and no enforcement action is required.
3. In other cases where the building official determines that unpermitted work did not result from an intent to avoid compliance with building codes or permit requirements.
L. Add Chapter 1, Division II, Sections 109.4.1, to read as follows:109.4.1 Code Enforcement Investigation Fee. When work requiring a permit is discovered and through the investigation of the Code Enforcement Division a person obtains the necessary permits to correct the work performed, a code enforcement fee will be required at a rate established by the applicable governing authority. This fee is in addition to the Special Investigation Fee.
M. Add Chapter 1, Division II, Section 111.3.1, to read as follows:111.3.1 Temporary Certificate of Occupancy Fee. When an applicant wishes to receive permission to occupy a structure and they have not completed the work required under their permit and they request a temporary certificate of occupancy for limited use of the building, a fee shall be required for preparation of the agreement and certificate for the limited use of the building. Such fee shall be set at a rate established by the applicable governing authority. Additional inspections required to verify compliance with the temporary occupancy shall be required to be paid in advance at the current hourly inspection rate.
N. Add Chapter 1, Division II, Sections 112.4 and 112.5, to read as follows:112.4 Underground utility services. All new electric, telephone, television, and other communication service connections, for all new, altered, or enlarged buildings shall be provided by underground wiring. Extension of electric or communication distribution lines to serve such projects shall be by underground wiring.
Exceptions:
1. A building located in residential or conservation/open space zone established by the jurisdiction’s zoning regulations, provided that there are existing buildings on the property that are served by overhead connection lines.
2. Replacement or relocation of electric service equipment served by existing overhead wiring.
3. Where determined by the building official to be impractical or infeasible within the standards and practices of the utility or other companies providing such services.
Where the utility or other company’s distribution system is underground, the service lines shall terminate at a connection point designated by the utility company. Where the utility or other company’s distribution is overhead, the service lines shall terminate as a pole riser on a pole designated by the utility company.
112.5 Storage of solid waste containers. All new Group R, Division 3, occupancies shall provide a space adequate in size to store and screen all solid waste (trash, recycling and green waste) containers when viewed from the public right-of-way. The storage area shall have minimum dimensions of 3 feet (914 mm) by 8 feet (2,438 mm) or 6 feet (1,829 mm) by 6 feet (1,829 mm) and shall not conflict with required parking spaces. If the storage area is located in the front yard setback established by other ordinances, the storage area shall be screened by a fence, partition or other enclosure in compliance with maximum height limitations. In no case shall a partition or enclosure required by this section be less than 48 inches (1,219 mm) above adjacent grade.
O. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 113, to read as follows:113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official, code official or fire code official relative to the application and interpretations of the California Building Standards Code, the Uniform Housing Code, the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, and the International Property Maintenance Code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals. Said Board shall also serve as the Housing Appeals Board and the Local Accessibility Appeals Board referenced in the California Building Standards Code. The building official or fire code official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary to said board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the applicable governing authority and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business.
113.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form or construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. For appeals relating to accommodations for the disabled, the authority of the board shall include the ability to authorize reasonable alternatives to disabled access requirements imposed by the California Building Standards Code.
113.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of seven members, five of whom are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and building service equipment, hazards of fire, explosions, hazardous conditions or fire protection systems and are not employees of the jurisdiction. For matters subject to the appeal process referenced in Health and Safety Code 19957.5 paragraph (b) regarding accommodations for persons with physical disabilities, the board of appeals shall include two additional members who shall be persons with disabilities as defined in the California Building Code.
113.4 Fees. A fee titled “Appeal of Building Official Decision” or “Handicapped Board of Appeals” shall be collected for appeal of a decision of the building official, code official or fire code official to the appropriate board of appeals.
P. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 116.1, to read as follows:116.1 Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or public welfare, or that involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems necessary and as provided for in this section and the Uniform Housing Code, the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, and the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted. A vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe.
Q. Amend Section 202 by addition of the definitions for “boarding house,” “airspace lot,” “airspace subdivision” and “rainwater harvesting system” to read as follows:Boarding House. A building arranged or used for lodging for compensation, with or without meals, and not occupied as a single-family unit. A boarding house may have only one kitchen or facility for eating and cooking and such facility must be accessible to all residents or guests. See also definition of Congregate Residence.
Lot, Airspace. A division of the space above or below a lot with finite width, length and upper and lower elevation occupied or to be occupied by a use, building or portion thereof, group of buildings or portions thereof, and accessory buildings or portions thereof, or accessory uses. An Airspace lot shall be identified on a final map or a parcel map in the office of the County Recorder with a separate and distinct number or letter. An airspace lot shall have access to appropriate public rights of way by means of one or more easements or other entitlements to use in a form satisfactory to the Chief Building Official and the City Engineer.
Rainwater Harvesting System. A storm drainage collection system that collects rainwater from the roof area of a structure or structures as recommended by the American Rainwater Catchment System Association (ARCSA) guidelines or an equivalent standard as approved by the building official and the San Luis Obispo County Environmental Health Department. See also definition of Rainwater Catchment System.
Subdivision, Airspace. An airspace subdivision shall be as defined in Chapter 16 of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code.
R. Add Section 602.1.2 to read as follows:602.1.2 Commercial fire zone. Construction of interior walls, floors, ceilings and partitions as a part of additions or alterations to any existing building or structure located within the commercial fire zone shown in Figure 6-A shall be constructed with 5/8" Type “X” gypsum wallboard or its equivalent regardless of all other lesser minimum requirements to the contrary.
Exception: Buildings protected throughout by an approved automatic fire sprinkler system.FIGURE 6-A—COMMERCIAL FIRE ZONE
[IMAGE: <15.04.020.png>]
S. Amend Section 705.11 by addition of item 7 to the Exceptions to read as follows:7. The building is protected throughout by an approved automatic fire sprinkler system.
T. Delete Sections 903.2 through 903.2.10.1. Add new Sections 903.2 and 903.2.1 through 903.2.10.1 to read as follows:903.2 Where required. An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed:
1. Throughout new buildings.
Exceptions:
1. Buildings containing Groups A, B, E, F, H-4, M, S, and U occupancies where floor area is not more than 1,000 square feet (92.9 m2), unless located in the commercial fire zone shown in Figure 6-A.
2. Buildings of non-combustible construction located in the commercial fire zone shown in Figure 6-A containing Groups A, B, E, F, H-4, M, S, and U occupancies where floor area is not more than 1000 square feet (92.9 m2).
3. Buildings located in the commercial fire zone shown in Figure 6-A containing Groups A, B, E, F, H-4, M, S, and U occupancies where floor area is not more than 1,000 square feet (92.9 m2) and the building is entirely surrounded by yards or public ways not less than 20 feet (6,096 mm) in width.
2. Throughout an existing building whenever alterations or additions result in an increase of more than 1,000 square feet (92.9 m2) of floor area, including mezzanines or additional stories, or whenever the cost of alterations to an existing building having a floor area of more than 1,000 square feet (92.9m2) exceeds 50 percent of the replacement cost of the building as determined by the building official. The cost of alteration and increase in floor area shall include all corresponding data from permits issued to the building for the previous five years.
Exception: Group R, Division 3, and Group U occupancies.
3. In additions to existing buildings equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system.
4. Throughout an existing building where there is an occupancy classification change for floor area exceeding 1000 square feet (92.9m2). The provisions of Section 3406.1 shall not eliminate the requirement for an automatic fire sprinkler system.
Exceptions:
1. An attached Group U occupancy changed to a Group R, Division 3, occupancy, provided the building was constructed before July 7, 1990, and there is no increase in floor area.
2. Occupancy classification changes to Groups F, M, S, and U from an equivalent category as defined in previous editions of this code.
5. In buildings where cellulose nitrate film or pyroxylin plastics are manufactured, stored or handled.
For the purpose of requiring the automatic fire sprinkler systems specified in this chapter, the floor area within the surrounding exterior walls together with the floor area within the horizontal projection of the roof shall be considered as one building.
903.2.1 through 903.2.10.1 not used. Text continues with Section 903.2.11.
U. Amend Sections 903.3.1.1 and 903.3.1.1.1 to read as follows:903.3.1.1 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems. Where other provisions of this code require that a building or portion thereof be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with this section or where a building is considered as mixed occupancy due to the presence of two or more uses that are classified into different occupancy groups, sprinklers shall be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13 as amended in Chapter 35 except as provided in Section 903.3.1.1.1. Sprinkler system designs referenced in Sections 903.3.5.2 and 903.3.8 shall require special approval by the fire code official.
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. In other than Group I-2, I-2.1 and I-3 occupancies, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an approved alternative automatic fire extinguishing system in accordance with Section 904. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from any room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or contains electrical equipment.
1. Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard.
2. Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the fire code official, provided such rooms or areas are separated from the remainder of the building by fire barriers consisting of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated walls and 2-hour fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assemblies.
3. Generator and transformer rooms separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
V. Amend Section 903.4 to read as follows, with Exceptions to remain:903.4 Sprinkler system monitoring and alarms. All valves controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures, and water-flow switches on all sprinkler systems shall be electrically supervised by a central station service listed by Underwriters Laboratories for receiving fire alarms in accordance with NFPA 72. The central station shall contact and notify the police/fire dispatch center immediately on notification of an alarm and prior to making contact with the protected premises.
W. Amend Section 903.4.3 and add Exception to read as follows:903.4.3 Isolation control valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in all buildings two or more stories in height or in single-story buildings having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more zoned into no more than 5,000-square-foot areas for the purpose of maintaining system integrity for life safety and evacuation.
Exception: Isolation control valves may be omitted in buildings equipped with an automatic fire extinguishing system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3.
X. Amend Section 905.3.1 to read as follows, with Exceptions to remain:905.3.1 Building height. Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located more than 30 feet (9,144 mm) above the lowest level of the fire department vehicle access, or where the floor level of the lowest story is located more than 30 feet (9,144 mm) below the highest level of fire department vehicle access and in any parking structure exceeding one level above or one level below grade.
Y. Amend Section 907.6.6 to read as follows:907.6.6 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by this chapter or by the California Building Code or the California Fire Code shall be monitored by an approved central station service listed by Underwriters Laboratory for receiving fire alarms in accordance with NFPA 72. The central station shall contact and notify the police/fire dispatch center immediately on notification of an alarm and prior to making contact with the protected premises.
Exception: Supervisory service is not required for:
1. Single and multiple station smoke alarms required by Section 907.2.11.
2. Group I-3 occupancies shall be monitored in accordance with Section 907.2.6.3.
3. Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings.
Z. Add Section 910.3.2.1 to read as follows:910.3.2.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically by actuation of a heat responsive device rated at least 100 degrees above the operating temperature of the sprinkler heads.
AA. Delete Section 1030.1 Item 2, Exception 6.
BB. Add Section 1506.3.1 to read as follows:1506.3.1 Wood shake and shingle roof covering limitations. Wood shake or shingle roof coverings shall not be installed on any building.
Exception: A wood shake or wood shingle system listed as a Class A-rated roof covering.
CC. Add Section 1804.4.2 to read as follows:1804.4.2 Drainage. Provisions shall be made for the control and drainage of surface water around buildings. Drainage systems necessary shall be adequate to prevent water from entering and accumulating under the building. Drainage water from improvements and land contour changes shall not drain onto or across adjacent properties except in recorded drainage easements, natural waterways, or where the discharge is designed in accordance with the Drainage Design Manual.
DD. Add Section 1809.7.1 to read as follows:1809.7.1 Depth of isolated footings. Isolated footings and piers, exterior of perimeter foundation, shall have a minimum depth of 24 inches (609.6 mm) below the lowest adjacent natural undisturbed grade.
EE. Modify Table 1809.7 to read as follows:
+----------------------------+------------------+------------------+-----------+----------+
| NUMBER OF FLOORS SUPPORTED | WIDTH OF FOOTING |   THICKNESS OF   |  DEPTH BELOW GRADE   |
|      BY THE FOOTINGf       |     (inches)     | FOOTING (inches) |       (inches)       |
+----------------------------+------------------+------------------+-----------+----------+
| "                          | "                | "                | Perimeter | Interior |
+----------------------------+------------------+------------------+-----------+----------+
| 1                          | 12               | 6                | 21        | 12       |
+----------------------------+------------------+------------------+-----------+----------+
| 2                          | 15               | 8                | 24        | 18       |
+----------------------------+------------------+------------------+-----------+----------+
| 3                          | 18               | 8g               | 30        | 24       |
+----------------------------+------------------+------------------+-----------+----------+
aDepth of footings shall be in accordance with Section 1809.4.
bThe ground under the floor shall be permitted to be excavated to the elevation of the top of the footing.
cInterior stud bearing walls shall be permitted to be supported by isolated footings. The footing width and length shall be twice the width shown in this table and the footings shall be spaced not more than 6 feet on center.
dSee Section 1905 for additional requirements for concrete footings of structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F.
eFor thickness of foundation walls see section 1807.1.6.
fFootings shall be permitted to support a roof in addition to the stipulated number of floors. Footings supporting roofs only shall be as required for supporting one floor. Slabs supported on grade need not be considered a floor for purposes of footing depths and widths.
gPlain concrete footings for Group R-3 occupancies shall be permitted to be 6 inches thick.
hA grade beam 12" in width shall be provided at garage openings. Depth shall be as specified in this table.
FF. Amend Section 1907 to read as follows:1907.1 General. The thickness of concrete floor slabs supported directly on the ground shall be not less than 4 inches (101.6 mm). Concrete floor slabs shall be underlain with a minimum of 4 inches (101.6 mm) of clean granular material. A 6-mil (0.006 inch; 0.15 mm) polyethylene vapor retarder with joints lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm) shall be placed between the base course or subgrade and the concrete floor slab, or other approved equivalent methods or materials shall be used to retard vapor transmission through the floor slab.
Exception: A vapor retarder is not required:
1. For detached structures accessory to occupancies in Group R-3, such as garages, utility buildings or other unheated facilities.
2. For unheated storage rooms having an area of less than 70 square feet (6.5 m2) and carports attached to occupancies in Group R-3.
3. For buildings or other occupancies where migration of moisture through the slab from below will not be detrimental to the intended occupancy of the building.
4. For driveways, walks, patios and other flatwork which will not be enclosed at a later date.
5. Where approved based on local site conditions.
1907.2 Minimum reinforcing. Minimum reinforcing for slabs on grade shall be No. 3 bars at 24 inches (609.6 mm) on center each way placed at midpoint of slab thickness. Slab reinforcement shall extend to within 2 inches (50.8 mm) of the exterior edge of slabs.
1907.3 Slab to foundation connection. Tie bar reinforcing between slabs on grade and foundation stem walls shall be No. 3 bars at 24 inches (609.6 mm) on center, placed in foundation walls and bent at least 24 inches (609.6 mm) into the slabs and tied to the slab reinforcing.
Exception: Floating slabs justified by an engineered design.
1907.4 Moisture content. Moisture content for expansive soils shall be 100 percent of optimum to a depth of 18 inches (609.6 mm) below slab bottoms and shall be maintained until slabs are poured. Soils under slabs shall be tested for moisture content and slabs shall be poured within 24 hours of obtaining the required moisture content. The area under raised floors need not be premoistened.
1907.5 Penetrations. Openings in slabs on grade for bathtub piping and traps, planters or other similar uses shall be sealed with concrete not less than 2 inches (50.8 mm) in thickness.
Exception: Plastic tub boxes may be used in lieu of concrete if properly sealed around all edges and pipe penetrations.
GG. Add Sections 3109.3 through 3109.5 to read as follows:3109.3 Access to pool. Pools shall be accessible by means of ladders or steps. There shall be not less than one such access for each 300 square feet (27.87 m2) of pool area equally distributed around the perimeter.
3109.4 Lighting. Pools shall be equipped with artificial lighting adequate to illuminate all underwater areas.
3109.5 Abandoned pools. A pool that is not used, is neglected, and is a hazard to health and safety, shall be filled to the satisfaction of the building official. Before filling, holes shall be made in the bottom of the pool to insure proper drainage. Abandoned pools determined to be unsafe by the building official shall be abated in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code.
HH. Amend Appendix Section G102.2 to read as follows:G102.2 Establishment of flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are established in the current edition of the city of San Luis Obispo’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps. All construction work within designated flood hazard areas shall comply with the Floodplain Management Regulations contained in San Luis Obispo Municipal Code Section 17.84.
For the enforcement provisions of this appendix for flood resistant construction under the purview of the City Engineer, Building Official may mean City Engineer.
II. Amend the title of Appendix Section G501 to read as:BUILDINGS AND MANUFACTURED HOMES
JJ. Amend Appendix Section G501.1 to read as follows:G501.1 Elevation. All new and replacement buildings and/or manufactured homes to be built, placed or substantially improved within a flood hazard area shall comply with the Floodplain Management Regulations contained in San Luis Obispo Municipal Code Section 17.84.
KK. Amend Appendix Section G1001.3 to read as follows:G1001.3 Elevation. Utility and miscellaneous Group U buildings and structures, including substantial improvement of such buildings or structures, shall comply with the Floodplain Management Regulations contained in San Luis Obispo Municipal Code Section 17.84.
LL. Amend Appendix Section G1001.6 to read as follows:G1001.6 Protection of mechanical and electrical systems. New or replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and other service facilities shall be either protected or elevated to at least 1 foot above base flood elevation in conformance to San Luis Obispo Municipal Code Section 17.84. Sewer laterals shall be protected with backwater valves where the finish floor of the structure is located less than 1' above the BFE at the next upstream sewer manhole.
MM. Amend Appendix Section J101.1 to read as follows:J101.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter apply to grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills, embankments, and work within waterways. Where conflicts occur between the technical requirements of this chapter and the geotechnical report, the geotechnical report shall govern. This appendix recognizes the importance of the waterways of the city and the need to regulate all changes to these waterways.
For the enforcement provisions of this appendix for grading in new subdivisions under the purview of the City Engineer, building official shall mean city engineer.
NN. Add Appendix Sections J101.3 through J101.7 to read as follows:J101.3 Hazardous conditions. Whenever the building official determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the building official, shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of this code.
J101.4 Dust control. All graded surfaces shall be wetted, protected or contained in such manner as to prevent dust or spill upon any adjoining property or street.
J101.5 Emergency grading. The building official may authorize emergency grading operations upon any site when necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Other city departments may take emergency action necessary to protect public facilities.
J101.6 Special grading standards. The topography of a site proposed for development shall remain substantially in its natural state. Mass recontouring shall not be allowed. In all cases the average cross slope of a site shall be determined prior to any grading operations or approval of any grading plan. Where a site does not slope uniformly, the building official or city engineer shall determine average cross slope by proportional weighting of the cross slopes of uniformly sloping subareas. The percentage of the site, exclusive of building area, to remain in its natural state shall be in accordance with Table J101.6.
All graded planes shall be rounded on all edges to blend with natural slopes. The rounded edges shall have a radius equal to one-half the height of the cut or fill slope.
Exception: Grading specifically approved and/or conditioned in conjunction with a tentative subdivision map, development proposal, or similar entitlement consistent with General Plan policies and other hillside standards is not subject to the specific grading limitations noted in this section.
J101.7 Approval for building construction. Prior to commencement of any building construction, pursuant to a building permit for the graded site, a benchmark shall be provided to verify that the building site is graded in conformance with the approved grading plan. No building construction shall be started until the building official or city engineer has verified that the rough grading conforms to the approved plan, including any interim or permanent erosion control measures deemed necessary.
OO. Amend Appendix Section J102 by addition of the following definitions:AVERAGE CROSS SLOPE shall mean the ratio, expressed as a percentage, of the vertical difference in elevation to the horizontal distance between two points on the perimeter of the area, with the line connecting the two points being essentially perpendicular to the contours between the two points. Different portions of any area may have different average cross slopes.WATERWAY shall mean a well-defined natural or manmade channel, creek, river, lake or swale that conveys surface water, storm runoff, or other natural drainage either year-round or intermittently.
PP. Amend Appendix Section J103 to read as follows:J103.1 Permits required. Except as exempted in Section J103.2, no grading shall be performed without first having obtained a permit therefor from the building official. A grading permit does not include the construction of retaining walls or other structures. A grading permit shall be required for all work within any waterway, including, but not limited to, earthwork, construction of drainage devices or erosion control devices, removal of vegetation and modifications of banks and the bottom of the waterway which may in the natural course of events lead to changes in flow characteristics. A grading permit shall be required for all work that will create a stockpile of any earth material, subject to the surety bond required by Section J103.4 to guarantee restoration of the site to a natural or other condition acceptable to the building official.
J103.2 Exempted Work. A grading permit shall not be required for the following:
1. Grading in an isolated, self-contained area, provided there is no danger to the public, and that such grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
2. Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this code.
3. Cemetery graves.
4. Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
5. Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities.
6. Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, or stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate, or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses in, soil on adjoining properties.
7. Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a registered design professional.
8. An excavation which does not exceed fifty cubic yards and (1) is less than 2 feet (610 mm) in depth or (2) does not create a cut slope greater than 5 feet (1,524 mm) in height and steeper than 1 unit vertical to 2 units horizontal.
9. A fill less than 1 foot (305 mm) in depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than 1 unit vertical to 5 units horizontal, or less than 3 feet (914 mm) in depth, not intended to support structures, that does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.3 m3) on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course.
10. Routine streambed silt removal and vegetation control approved by the City Engineer.
Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
J103.3 Early grading. A grading permit shall not be issued prior to issuance of a building permit for the project unless:
1. A tentative minor subdivision or tract map, use permit, architectural review commission project approval or similar authorization has been granted; and
2. Related street and utility grades have been established; and
3. A surety bond in accordance with Section J103.4 is deposited to guarantee restoration of the site to a natural or other condition acceptable to the building official should the project not proceed to completion.
J103.4 Bonds. The building official may require bonds in such form and amounts as may be deemed necessary to ensure that the work, if not completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions or restore a graded site to the original condition. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may file a cash bond or instrument of credit with the building official in an amount equal to that which would be required in the surety bond.
The city engineer may require that bonds be posted to recover the full costs of any damage to public right-of-way which may occur because of the peculiar nature or large scope of the project, such as transportation of fill or heavy equipment on local streets not designed to accommodate the traffic.
QQ. Amend Appendix Section J104.2 to read as follows:J104.2 Site plan requirements. In addition to the provisions of Appendix Section 107, a grading plan shall show the existing grade and finished grade in contour intervals of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work and show in detail that it complies with the requirements of this code. The plans shall show the existing grade on adjoining properties in sufficient detail to identify how grade changes will conform to the requirements of this code. The plans shall show existing drainage conditions and drainage devices and all proposed changes thereto. The plans shall include the location and dimension of all trees on the site which are 3 inches (76.2 mm) in diameter or larger at the trunk, measured at 4.5 feet (1.37 m) above ground level, trees to be removed and trees to remain. A preservation plan shall be submitted for all trees to remain. The plans shall indicate where excess material, rocks, or rubble will be disposed of.
RR. Amend Appendix Section J110.1 to read as follows:J110.1 General. All disturbed surfaces shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion.
Exception: Erosion control measures need not be provided on cut slopes not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials.
Erosion control shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final inspection. Erosion control plantings shall be established in accordance with City Engineering Standards and/or to the satisfaction of the Building Official.
SS. Add Appendix Table J101.6 as follows:
+-----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Percent Average Cross Slope | Percent of Site to Remain in Natural |
|                             |                State                 |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 0-5                         | 0                                    |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 6-10                        | 25                                   |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 11-15                       | 40                                   |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 16-20                       | 60                                   |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 21-25                       | 80                                   |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 26-30                       | 90                                   |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Above 30                    | 100                                  |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1670 § 6 (part), 2019; Ord. 1637 § 5, 2017; Ord. 1630 § 6 (part), 2016: Ord. 1612 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1595 § 6 (part), 2014)

15.04.030 Amendments—California Residential Code.
Adopt as approved by state agencies and amend the following sections:
A. Delete Chapter 1, Division II. Administration of the residential code shall be as set forth in Chapter 1, Division II, of the California Building Code.
B. Amend Section R109.1.2, Exception, to read as follows:Exception: Back-filling of ground-source heat pump loop systems tested in accordance with ASTM Standards prior to inspection shall be permitted.
C. Delete Section R310.1, Exception 2.
D. Add Section R313.3.3.5 to read as follows:R313.3.3.5 Sprinkler Activation Alarm. An alarm audible from all sleeping rooms shall be provided.
E. Amend Section R322.1 to read as follows:R322.1 General. Buildings and structures constructed in whole or in part in flood hazard areas (including A or V Zones) identified in the current edition of the City of San Luis Obispo’s Flood Insurance Rating Map shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions contained in this section and the flood plain management regulations contained in San Luis Obispo Municipal Code Section 17.84, whichever is more stringent. Buildings and structures located in whole or in part in identified floodways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE 24.
F. Add Section R337.1.2 to read as follows:R337.1.2 Establishment of limits. The City of San Luis Obispo is considered a “Community at Risk” due to the threat of wildfire impacting the urban community. The City shall continue to enhance the fire safety and construction codes for new buildings in order to reduce the risk of urban fires that may result from wildfires. New buildings citywide shall incorporate the following construction methods and materials: Ignition resistant exterior wall coverings; Fire sprinkler protection in attic areas (at least one “pilot head”); Ember resistant vent systems for attics and under floor areas, protected eaves, and Class ‘A’ roof coverings as identified in the California Building Code Chapter 7A.
G. Delete Sections R403 and R404, and add Section R403.1 to read as follows:R403.1 Foundations. The design of foundations to support structures regulated under the California Residential Code shall be per California Building Code Section 1809 or 1810.
(Ord. 1670 § 6 (part), 2019; Ord. 1630 § 6 (part), 2016: Ord. 1595 § 6 (part), 2014)

15.04.040 Amendments—California Existing Building Code.
A. Amend Appendix Section A101 to read as follows:SECTION A101
PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of earthquakes on existing buildings of unreinforced masonry wall construction.
The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for structural seismic resistance established primarily to reduce the risk of life loss or injury. Compliance with these standards will not necessarily prevent loss of life or injury or prevent earthquake damage to retrofitted buildings.
B. Amend Appendix Section A102.1 to read as follows:A102.1 General. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing buildings having at least one unreinforced masonry wall. The elements regulated by this chapter shall be determined in accordance with Table A102.1. Except as provided herein, other structural provisions of the building code shall apply. This chapter does not apply to the alteration of existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire safety systems.
Exceptions:
1. Warehouses or similar structures not used for human habitation unless housing emergency equipment or supplies.
2. A building having five living units or less.
C. Amend Appendix Section A103 to add the following definitions:LEVEL A STRENGTHENING of an unreinforced masonry building is compliance with the provisions of this chapter, limited to the removal of or bracing of parapets, installation of anchors between walls and roof, and installation of anchors between walls and floors.
LEVEL B STRENGTHENING of an unreinforced masonry building is compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
D. Amend Appendix Section A109.2 to read as follows:A109.2 Selection of Procedure. Buildings shall be analyzed by the General Procedure of Section A110, which is based on Chapter 16 of the California Building Code, or when applicable, buildings may be analyzed by the Special Procedure of A111. Buildings with a substantially complete steel or concrete frame capable of supporting gravity dead and live loads and that utilize unreinforced masonry walls as non-bearing infill between frame members shall be analyzed by a procedure approved by the building official. Qualified historic structures may be analyzed per the California Building Standards Code, Part 8, California Historical Building Code.
E. Add new Appendix Section A115 entitled “Administrative Provisions” to read as follows:SECTION A115
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
A115.1 Compliance Requirements.
A115.1.1 Strengthening deadlines. The owner of a building within the scope of this chapter shall structurally alter the building to conform to Level B Strengthening by July 1, 2010, or when one of the following occurs:
1. The value of additions, alterations, and/or maintenance repairs requiring a building permit, cumulative from March 4, 1992, exceeds 50 percent of the replacement cost of the building established by the building official per Appendix Section 108.3 of the Building Code, which may include a certified appraisal report. The cumulative value of alterations and maintenance repairs need not include reroofing, Level A Strengthening, and installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system.
Exception: Buildings containing more than one tenant space if the floor area of altered tenant spaces, cumulative from March 4, 1992, does not exceed 50 percent of the total floor area of the building.
2. The use of the building changes to a different division of the same occupancy group or to a different occupancy group.
Exceptions:
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3408 of the Building Code, buildings containing more than one occupancy classification need not be strengthened if the total floor area for changes in use, cumulative from March 4, 1992, does not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the building.
2. Occupancy classification changes to Groups F, M, S and U from an equivalent category as defined in the previous editions of this code.
3. An occupancy classification change to a Group R-2 Occupancy with not more than five dwelling units.
4. An occupancy classification change to a Group S Occupancy used exclusively as a warehouse with no human habitation.
3. If Level A strengthening work is completed by July 1, 2007, completion of the remaining work to satisfy Level B strengthening requirements may be delayed until July 1, 2012. If Level A work is not completed by July 1, 2007, the City Council will set a Level B completion deadline for each building on the basis of relative hazard, but not later than July 1, 2010.
Exception: The building official, on a case-by-case basis, may approve an alternate strengthening plan deemed equivalent to Level A strengthening if:
1. A greater than 50 percent reduction in the unreinforced masonry hazard for the building is accomplished by July 1, 2007; and
2. A written agreement includes an acceptable work plan and timeline; and
3. The plan completes Level B strengthening by July 1, 2012.
A115.1.2 Permits. The owner of a building within the scope of this chapter shall submit a complete application for a building permit to the building official to strengthen the building to Level B requirements by July 1, 2005. The building permit shall be obtained by January 1, 2006 and shall remain valid until required Level B strengthening work is completed per Section A115.1.1.
Exception: For seismic strengthening or demolition projects that require approval of a planning application by a City process, the planning application shall be submitted to the Community Development Department by July 1, 2005. The application for building or demolition permit shall be submitted following approval of the planning application, and a building or demolition permit shall be obtained by January 1, 2006.
A115.1.3 Posting of sign. The owner of a building within the scope of this chapter shall post, at a conspicuous place near the primary entrances to the building, a sign provided by the building official stating “This is an unreinforced masonry building. Unreinforced masonry buildings may be unsafe in the event of a major earthquake.” The sign shall be posted within 60 days of receipt by the building owner per installation standards established by the building official.
A115.2 Notice and Order.
A115.2.1 General. The building official shall, within 30 days of the determination that a building is of unreinforced masonry construction issue a notice and order as provided in this section to the owner of a building within the scope of this chapter.
A115.2.2 Service of notice and order. A notice or order issued pursuant to this section shall be in writing and shall be served either personally or by certified or registered mail upon the owner as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and upon the person, if any, in apparent charge or control of the building. The failure of any such person to receive such notice or order shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him by the provisions of this chapter.
A115.2.3 Content of notice and order. The notice shall specify that the building has been determined by the building official to be within the scope of this chapter and, therefore, is subject to the minimum seismic standards of this chapter. The order shall direct the owner to obtain a building or demolition permit as required by this chapter and cause the building to be structurally altered to conform to the provisions of this chapter or cause the building to be demolished. The notice or order shall be accompanied by a copy of Section A115.1, which sets forth the owner’s responsibilities.
A115.3 Appeal. The owner of the building may appeal the building official’s initial determination that the building is within the scope of this chapter to the Board of Appeals established by Chapter 1, Division II, Section 113, of the California Building Code, as adopted. Such appeal shall be filed with the Board within 60 days from the service date of the order described in Section A115.2. Any appeal shall be decided by the Board no later than 90 days after filing and the grounds thereof shall be stated clearly and concisely. Appeals or requests for modifications from any other determinations, orders or actions by the building official pursuant to this chapter shall be made in accordance with the procedures established in Chapter 1, Division II, Section 104.10, of the California Building Code.
A115.5 Recordation. At the time that the building official serves the aforementioned notice, the building official shall also file and record with the office of the county recorder a certificate stating that the subject building is within the scope of this chapter and is a potentially earthquake hazardous building. The certificate shall also state that the owner thereof will be ordered to structurally analyze the building to determine compliance with this chapter.
If the building is either demolished, found not to be within the scope of this chapter, or is structurally capable of resisting minimum seismic forces required by this chapter as a result of structural alterations or an analysis, the building official shall file and record with the office of the county recorder a form terminating the status of the subject building as being classified within the scope of this chapter.
A115.6 Enforcement. If the owner in charge or control of the subject building fails to comply with any order issued by the building official pursuant to this chapter within the time limit set forth in Section A115.1, the building official shall verify that the record owner of this building has been properly served. If the order has been served on the record owner, then the following provisions apply:
1. The building official may order that the entire building be vacated and that the building remain vacated until such order has been complied with. If compliance with such order has not been accomplished within 90 days after the date the building has been ordered vacated or such additional time as may have been granted by the board of appeals, the building official may order its demolition in accordance with the provisions of Sections 107, 108, and 109 of the International Property Maintenance Code.
2. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to the penalty as provided for in Chapter 1.12 of the city of San Luis Obispo Municipal Code. The City may also pursue alternative civil remedies as set forth in Section 1.12.090 of the Municipal Code.
A115.7 Program monitoring and annual report. During January of each year, the building official shall submit a report to the City Council outlining the progress to date concerning reduction of the hazards presented by the unreinforced masonry building inventory for the City. The report shall include:
1. The number of unreinforced masonry buildings strengthened, demolished, or otherwise eliminated from the inventory;
2. The number of unreinforced masonry buildings remaining on the inventory, including the status of orders issued pursuant to this Chapter that are not resolved.
A115.8 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Buildings within the scope of this chapter located in the commercial fire zone shown in Figure 9-A of the California Fire Code, as amended, shall install an automatic fire sprinkler system in conjunction with level B strengthening deadlines in accordance with Section 903.2.1 of the California Fire Code, as amended in Municipal Code Section 15.04.100, unless a later installation date is granted by both the building official and fire code official.
TT. Add Appendix Chapter A6 to read as follows:Appendix Chapter A6
DEMOLITION AND MOVING OF BUILDINGS
SECTION 601
GENERAL
A601.1 Purpose. The purpose of this appendix is to establish minimum standards and procedures for the demolition and relocation (moving) of buildings and structures to safeguard life, property, health and public welfare. It is also intended to ensure that moved buildings are structurally sound, sanitary, habitable, and that they will harmonize with existing development in the area to which they are to be moved.
A601.2 Scope. This appendix sets forth rules and regulations to control demolition and relocation operations, establishes the administrative procedures for review of an application to demolish or move a building, and provides for the issuance of permits.
A601.3 Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision made under the terms of this chapter may appeal such decision. For matters concerning the technical provisions of this code, such appeal shall be subject to the provisions of the Chapter 1, Division II, Section 113, of the California Building Code; for all other matters, the appeal provisions of Chapter 1.20 of the Municipal Code shall apply.
SECTION 602
DEFINITIONS
Section A602 General. For the purposes of this appendix, certain terms, words and their derivatives shall be defined as specified in this section.
ARC means the Architectural Review Commission appointed by the City Council.
CHC means the Cultural Heritage Committee appointed by the City Council.
Demolition means the complete or partial removal of a structure.
Foundation means the structure, usually of concrete, resting on or in the ground, including the footing, on which a building is erected.
Foundation wall means the walls of concrete or masonry that support a building.
Inventory of Historical Resources is the Master List of Historic Resources and the Listing of Contributing Properties within Historical Preservation Districts approved by the City Council.
Municipal Code means the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code.
Potential Historic Resource means a building which may meet the Criteria for Historic Listing found in the City of San Luis Obispo Historic Preservation Program, but which has not been evaluated or listed as an historic resource.
Slab means a flat piece of material, usually of concrete, placed on the ground for use as a building floor, patio, driveway, walk, ball court and/or similar uses.
Structure means any human made site feature, including signs, walls, fences, buildings, monuments, or similar features.
Substructure means the foundation of a building or structure including the piers and piles.
SECTION A603
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
A603.1 Permit required. The demolition or relocation (moving) of any building or structure shall not commence until a permit has been issued by the building official in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 1, Division II, of the California Building Code.
Exception: Temporary construction offices.
A permit to move a building shall be a building permit when the building is relocated within the limits of the city. A permit to move a building shall be a demolition permit when the building is relocated to a site outside of the city limits.
A603.2 Moving and Relocation of Buildings.
A603.2.1 Inspection of buildings to be moved. All buildings to be moved into or within the city shall be inspected by the building official to determine compliance with this code and suitability for moving prior to permit issuance.
A603.2.2 Transportation and building permits required. For moving projects, a transportation permit shall be obtained from the public works director subsequent to issuance of a moving permit. Building, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical permits shall be required for all work necessary for the placement of a moved or relocated building.
A603.3 Procedure for permit application processing. Prior to issuance of a permit to demolish or relocate a building or structure, the permit application shall be subject to the following:
1. Demolition or relocation of historical resource. For any structure located on a property listed on the Inventory of Historical Resources, an application for Architectural Review shall be submitted and require approval prior to issuance of a permit for building relocation or demolition. The application shall include plans for replacement structures, at the discretion of the Community Development Director.
2. Demolition or relocation of structure not designated historical. For any structure that is not located on a property listed on the Inventory of Historical Resources and that is over 50 years old, the Community Development Director shall determine if the structure or structures proposed for demolition are a potential historic resource. If the Community Development Director determines that the structure or structures is/are a potentially historic resource(s), the applicant shall submit an application for Architectural Review. If the Community Development Director determines the structure or structures not to be a potential historic resource, the applicant shall provide evidence that for a period of not less than 90 days from date of permit application, the building was advertised in a local newspaper on at least 3 separate occasions not less than 15 days apart, as available to any interested person to be moved; and submit historic documentation for the structure in accordance with criteria established by the Community Development Director and the Cultural Heritage Committee.
Exceptions for Structures Not Designated Historical:
1. A building or structure determined by the building official to be a dangerous building as defined in the International Property Maintenance Code which poses an imminent, serious threat to the health, safety or welfare of community residents or people living or working on or near the site, and for which historic documentation acceptable to the Community Development Director has been submitted.
2. Accessory buildings, sheds, garages and similar structures, unless determined to be a potential historic resource by the Community Development Director.
A603.4 Guarantee. Prior to issuance of a permit to demolish or move a building or structure, the applicant shall provide the city with a guarantee in such form and amount as may be deemed necessary by the building official to assure completion of demolition or moving, removal of all debris, cleanup of the site, repair of damage to public improvements, erection of barricades when required and filling of depression below adjacent grade. The amount of the guarantee for demolition shall be not less than one thousand dollars or twenty percent of the value of the demolition contract price, whichever is greater. The amount of the guarantee for moving a building or structure shall be twenty percent of the total value of all work to be accomplished and associated with moving of the building, but not less than five thousand dollars. Work required to comply with this section may be completed by the city after the time limits stated have expired and shall be paid from the deposit. The deposit shall not be released until such work is completed.
Exceptions:
1. No guarantee will be required when the demolition permit is issued at the same time as a building permit for a redevelopment project.
2. When the structure to be moved is to be relocated outside the limits of the city, the amount of the guarantee may be reduced when approved by the building official, but in no case shall be less than one thousand dollars.
A603.5 Indemnity. Every person, firm or corporation to whom permission has been granted under the terms of this chapter and other ordinances to utilize public property for the demolition or moving of any building or structure shall at all times assume responsibility for any damage to public property. Such permission shall be further conditioned that any person, firm or corporation shall, as a consideration for the use of public property, at all times release, hold harmless and indemnify the city and all of its agents and employees from any and all responsibility, liability, loss or damage resulting to any persons or property caused by or incidental to the demolition or moving work. Written indemnification in a form acceptable to the city attorney shall be provided.
A603.6 Damage to public property. As a condition of obtaining a permit to demolish or move any building or structure, the permittee shall assume liability for any damage to public property occasioned by such moving, demolition, or removal operations. Applicants for demolition permits shall provide information and plans when requested for protection of public property. Information and plans shall be specific as to type of protection, structural adequacy and location. Approval to use or occupy public property shall be obtained before proceeding with demolition work.
A603.7 Insurance. Prior to the issuance of a permit to demolish or move any building or structure, the permit applicant shall deposit with the building official a certificate of liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured party on the insurance policy. Such insurance shall be valid at all times during demolition or moving operations. The liability insurance coverage shall be in an amount of at least five hundred thousand dollars per occurrence for injuries, including accidental death to any one person, and subject to the same limit for each additional person, in an amount at least one million dollars on account of any one accident: and property damage in an amount at least five hundred thousand dollars.
Exception: Demolition of a wood frame building not greater than two stories or twenty-five feet in height, measured to the top of the highest point of the roof, provided the building is not less than twenty feet from public property lines or, if less than twenty feet from public property lines, adequate protection is provided for pedestrians and public property to the satisfaction of the building official.
A603.8 Disconnecting service lines. Prior to the issuance of a permit to demolish or relocate a building or structure, the permit applicant shall complete the following to the satisfaction of the building official:
1. Electrical service. The power to all electric service lines shall be shut-off and all such lines cut or disconnected outside the property line. Prior to the cutting of such lines, the property owner or his agent shall notify and obtain the approval of the electric service agency.
2. Other service. All gas, water, steam, storm, sanitary sewers, and other service lines shall be shut-off and/or abandoned as required by the public works director, utilities director, or other agency.
SECTION A604
PUBLIC SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
A604.1 General. The demolition or moving of any building shall not commence until structures required for protection of persons and property are in place. Such structures and the demolition work shall conform to the applicable provisions of Chapter 33 of the California Building Code. Prior to permit issuance, a schedule of operations shall be submitted to the building official for review and approval, and shall set forth a sequence of work on the building, the need to barricade public streets, details of travel to and from the site for hauling operations, route of moving, estimated completion date, and any other significant work which may require inspection or coordination with city departments.
A604.2 Dust and debris. During demolition operations, all material removed shall be wet sufficiently or otherwise handled to control the dust incidental to removal.
All adjacent streets, alleys and other public ways and places shall be kept free and clear of all rubbish, refuse and loose material resulting from the moving, demolition or demolition removal operations, except as allowed by temporary encroachment permits approved by the public works director.
SECTION A605
REMOVAL OF MATERIALS
A605.1 General. All building rubble and debris shall be removed from the demolition site to an approved point of disposal.
A605.2 Foundations. All foundations, concrete slabs and building substructures shall be removed to the satisfaction of the building official.
Exception: Foundations, concrete slabs on grade and building substructures may remain if the site is fenced to the satisfaction of the building official.
A605.3 Completion. Upon completion of the removal of a building or structure by either demolition or moving, the ground shall be left in a smooth condition free of demolition debris. Holes in the ground, basements or cellars, shall be filled to existing grade.
Exception: The filling of such excavation may not be required when a building permit has been issued for a new building on the site and the construction thereof is to start within sixty days after the completion of demolition or moving operations and the permittee provides a temporary barricade protecting the excavation on all sides to the satisfaction of the building official.
(Ord. 1670 § 6 (part), 2019; Ord. 1630 § 6 (part), 2016: Ord. 1595 § 6 (part), 2014)

15.04.050 Amendments—California Mechanical Code.
A. Delete Chapter 1, Division II, and Table 104.5. Administration of the mechanical code shall be as set forth in Chapter 1, Division II, of the California Building Code.
B. Delete Appendix Chapter E. (Ord. 1670 § 6 (part), 2019; Ord. 1630 § 6 (part), 2016: Ord. 1595 § 6 (part), 2014)

15.04.060 Amendments—California Plumbing Code.
A. Delete Chapter 1, Division II, Table 104.5 and Appendix Chapters F and L. Administration of the plumbing code shall be as set forth in Chapter 1, Division II, of the California Building Code.
B. Amend Section 314.4 to read as follows:314.4 All excavations shall be completely backfilled as soon after inspection as practicable. A layer of sand or fine gravel shall be placed in all sewer trenches to provide a leveling and laying bed for pipe. Adequate precaution shall be taken to ensure proper compactness of backfill around piping without damage to such piping. Trenches shall be backfilled in thin layers to twelve (12) inches (.3 m) above the top of the piping with clean earth which shall not contain stones, boulders, cinderfill, frozen earth, construction debris or other materials which would damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action. Mechanical devices such as bulldozers, graders, etc., may then be used to complete backfill to grade. Fill shall be properly compacted. Suitable precautions shall be taken to ensure permanent stability for pipe laid in filled or made ground.
C. Amend Section 715.2 to read as follows:715.2 Joining Methods and Materials. Joining methods and materials for building sewers shall be as prescribed in this code and shall only have joints that are glued, solvent cemented, heat fused or welded.
Exception: “Strongback” type couplings may be used when connecting new or replaced pipe to existing materials.
D. Add Section 1101.3.1 to read as follows:1101.3.1 Rainwater Harvesting. Storm water drainage may be directed to an approved rainwater harvesting system and used as an alternate source of water for non-potable uses as approved by the Building Official and the San Luis Obispo County Environmental Health Department. The installation and use of such a system or systems must be designed to not interact with the potable water system, the building sanitary sewer or drainage systems that flow to any creek. Rainwater harvesting systems must be maintained in such manner as to not cause damage to neighboring properties.
E. Amend Section 1601.3, Exceptions, to read as follows:Exceptions:
(1) A permit is not required for exterior rainwater catchment systems used for outdoor non-spray irrigation with a maximum storage capacity of 600 gallons where the tank is supported directly upon grade, the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1 (except as exempted by the Chief Building Official upon confirmation of structural stability), and it does not require electrical power or a makeup water supply connection, the height does not exceed seven feet, and it is not visible from the public right-of-way that abuts the front yard.
(2) A permit is not required for exterior rainwater catchment systems used for spray irrigation with a maximum storage capacity of 360 gallons.
(Ord. 1670 § 6 (part), 2019; Ord. 1630 § 6 (part), 2016: Ord. 1612 § 4, 2015; Ord. 1595 § 6 (part), 2014)

15.04.070 Amendments—California Electrical Code.
A. Administration of the electrical code shall be as set forth in Chapter 1, Division II, of the California Building Code.
B. Amend Article (A)(1) to read as follows:(1) Readily Accessible Location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location either outside the building or other structure, or inside nearest the point of entrance of the service conductors. The disconnecting means shall be accessible to emergency personnel, either directly or by a remote actuating device, without requiring transit of the building interior. Dedicated electrical equipment rooms located at the building perimeter and providing direct access to the outside shall satisfy accessibility for emergency personnel.
(Ord. 1670 § 6 (part), 2019; Ord. 1630 § 6 (part), 2016: Ord. 1595 § 6 (part), 2014)

15.04.080 Amendments—International Property Maintenance Code.
A. Delete Chapter 1 with the exception of Section 101.1, which is amended to read as follows:101.1 Administrative Provisions. The administrative provisions for the enforcement of the International Property Maintenance Code shall be as set forth in the Uniform Housing Code, The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, and other provisions of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code.
(Ord. 1670 § 6 (part), 2019; Ord. 1630 § 6 (part), 2016: Ord. 1595 § 6 (part), 2014)

15.04.090 Permits required for well construction.
A. No person shall construct, repair, modify, abandon or destroy any water well without first obtaining a permit from the city. As used herein, “water well” shall mean an artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from, or injecting water into, the underground.
B. All work performed pursuant to each such permit shall be in conformance with all state laws and standards including applicable portions of Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-81, all city ordinances, resolutions and policies relating thereto, and such permit conditions as may be imposed by the city.
C. Any water well constructed, repaired, modified, destroyed, abandoned, or operated in violation of this section or the permit requirements shall constitute a public nuisance which may be abated by the city. A person who digs, drills, excavates, constructs, owns or controls any well and abandons such well and a person who owns, occupies, possesses or controls any premises on which an abandoned well exists shall cap or otherwise securely cover, cap or protect the entrance to the well. The capping or covering shall be so constructed and installed as will prevent any human being from suffering any bodily injury or death, through accident or inadvertence, by reason of the existence of the well. (Ord. 1670 § 6 (part), 2019; Ord. 1630 § 6 (part), 2016: Ord. 1595 § 6 (part), 2014)

15.04.100 Amendments—California Fire Code.
A. Delete Appendix Chapter A.
B. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 101.1, to read as follows:101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of San Luis Obispo, may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this code”.
C. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.1.1, to read as follows:105.1.1 Permits required. Permits required by this code shall be obtained from the fire code official. A fee for each permit shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the fire code official.
D. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 108, to read as follows:108 Board of appeals established. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be established as set forth in Chapter 1, Division II, Section 113, of the California Building Code, as amended in Section 15.04.020 of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code. The fire code official shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the fire code official.
E. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 109.3, to read as follows:109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than 1,000 dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
F. Amend Chapter 1, Division II, Section 111.4, to read as follows:111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than that established by Municipal Code Section 1.12.040.
G. Amend Section 302.1 to add the following definition to read as follows:SKY LANTERN. An airborne lantern typically made of paper with a wood frame containing a candle, fuel cell composed of waxy flammable material or other open flame which serves as a heat source to heat the air inside the lantern to cause it to lift into the air. Sky candles, fire balloons and airborne paper lanterns mean the same as sky lanterns.
H. Amend Sections 307.1.1 and 307.2 to read as follows:307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. No waste matter, combustible material or refuse shall be burned in the open air within the city. Agricultural, ceremonial or similar types of fires may be approved when authorized by the fire code official. Open burning, cooking or warming fires are prohibited on brush-covered public lands within the city.
307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled.
I. Amend Sections 307.4.1 and 307.4.2 to read as follows:307.4.1 Bonfires. Bonfires shall be prohibited.
307.4.2 Recreational fires. Recreational fires shall be prohibited.
Exception: Recreational fires may be permitted in approved, non-combustible commercially built containers, measuring no more than 3 feet in diameter and 2 feet tall, raised at least 6 inches off the ground with non-combustible legs and having a non-combustible spark arrester screen with holes no larger than ¼ inch. The ground beneath this container shall be clear of combustible material for 10 feet in diameter, and 10 feet away from combustible construction. The material being burned shall be wood only and shall not include pressure treated lumber. A pre-connected garden hose shall be accessible.
J. Amend Section 308.1.6.3 to read as follows:308.1.6.3 Sky lanterns. The ignition and launching of sky lanterns are prohibited.
Exceptions:
(1) Upon approval of the fire code official, sky lanterns may be used under the following conditions:
(a) When necessary for religious or cultural ceremonies and adequate safeguards have been taken in the discretion of the fire code official. Sky lanterns must be tethered in a safe manner to prevent them from leaving the area and must be constantly attended until extinguished.
K. Amend Section 405.7 to read as follows:405.7 Initiation. Where a fire alarm system is provided, emergency evacuation drills shall be initiated by activating the fire alarm system. Prior to initiating an alarm, the person initiating the alarm shall contact the fire alarm monitoring company and advise the company’s dispatcher of the fire drill. In cases where the fire alarm system is not monitored by a central station, notification shall be provided to the fire department dispatch center.
L. Amend Sections 503.1.1 and 503.1.2 to read as follows:503.1.1 Buildings and facilities. Approved fire apparatus access roads shall be provided for every facility, building or portion of a building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access road shall comply with the requirements of this section and shall extend to within 150 feet (45,720 mm) of all portions of the facility and all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of the building as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the building or facility.
Exceptions: The fire code official is authorized to increase the dimension of 150 feet (45,720 mm) to 300 feet (91,440 mm) where:
1. The building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3.
2. Fire apparatus access roads cannot be installed because of topography, waterways, nonnegotiable grades or other similar conditions, and an approved alternative means of fire protection is provided.
3. There are not more than two Group R-3 or Group U Occupancies, provided, in the opinion of the fire code official, firefighting or rescue operations would not be impaired.
503.1.2 Additional access. The fire code official is authorized to require more than one fire apparatus access/egress road based on the potential for impairment of a single road by vehicle congestion, condition of terrain, climatic conditions or other factors that could limit access/egress.
M. Amend Section 503.2.5 to read as follows:503.2.5 Dead Ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet (45,720 mm) in length shall be provided with an approved area for turning around fire apparatus.
Exception: Where buildings along the dead-end road are protected by an approved fire sprinkler system throughout, the distance may be increased to 300 feet (91,440 mm).
N. Amend Section 503.4.1 as follows:503.4.1 Traffic calming devices. Traffic calming devices may be installed provided they obtain acceptance of the design and approval of the construction by the fire code official.
O. Amend Section 505.1 to read as follows:505.1 Address numbers. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Numbers shall be a minimum of 5 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) or as otherwise determined necessary by the fire code official. Where required by the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained.
P. Amend Section 507.2 to read as follows:507.2 Type of water supply. A water supply shall consist of reservoirs, pressure tanks, elevated tanks, water mains or other fixed systems connected to the municipal water system and capable of providing the required fire-flow.
Q. Amend Section 507.5.1, and delete Exception 1, to read as follows:507.5.1 Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 300 feet (91,440 mm) from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official.
R. Add Section 507.5.4.1 to read as follows:507.5.4.1 Authority to remove obstruction. The fire code official and his authorized representatives shall have the power and authority to remove or cause to be removed, without notice, any vehicle, or object parked or placed in violation of the California Fire Code. The owner of any item so removed shall be responsible for all towing, storage and other charges incurred.
S. Amend Section 603.1.4 to read as follows:603.1.4 Fuel oil. The grade of fuel oil used in a burner shall be that for which the burner is approved and as stipulated by the burner manufacturer. Oil containing gasoline shall not be used.
T. Amend Section 603.9 to read as follows:603.9 Gas meters. Above-ground gas meters, regulators and piping subject to damage shall be protected by a barrier complying with Section 312 or otherwise protected in an approved manner. Gas meters shall be permanently marked and identified as to the building or system served.
U. Amend Section 608.1 to read as follows:608.1 Scope. Stationary storage battery systems having an electrolyte capacity of more than 50 gallons (189 L) for flooded lead acid, nickel cadmium (Ni-Cd) and valve-regulated lead acid (VRLA), or 1,000 pounds (454 kg) for lithium-ion and lithium metal polymer, used for facility standby power, emergency power, or uninterrupted power supplies or the indoor storage of electric carts, cars, fork-lifts and similar equipment, shall comply with this section and Table 608.1.
V. Amend Section 901.4.2 and Section 901.4.4 to read as follows:901.4.2 Non-required fire protection systems. Any fire protection system or portion thereof not required by this code or the California Building Code may be allowed, when approved by the fire code official, to be furnished for partial or complete protection provided such installed system meets the requirements of this code and the California Building Code.
901.4.4 Additional fire protection systems. In occupancies of a hazardous nature, where special hazards exist in addition to the normal hazards of the occupancy, or where the fire code official determines that access for fire apparatus is unduly difficult, or the location is beyond the four-minute response time of the fire department, the fire code official shall have the authority to require additional safeguards. Such safeguards include, but shall not be limited to, the following: automatic fire detection systems, fire alarm systems, automatic fire extinguishing systems, standpipe systems, or portable or fixed extinguishers. Fire protection equipment required under this section shall be installed in accordance with this code and applicable referenced standards.
W. Amend Section 901.6 to read as follows:Section 901.6 Inspection, testing and maintenance. Fire detection, alarm and extinguishing systems, mechanical smoke exhaust systems, and smoke and heat vents shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and shall be replaced or repaired where defective. Non-required fire protection systems and equipment shall be inspected, tested and maintained or removed. No person shall cause a response of emergency personnel due to failure of notifying police/fire dispatch of any drill, testing, maintenance, installation of, repair or alteration to any fire protection system.
X. Amend Section 903.2, add Sections 903.2.21 and 903.2.22, and delete Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10, to read as follows:903.2 General. An automatic fire-extinguishing system shall be installed in new buildings as set forth in Section 903.2 of the California Building Code as amended by Section 15.04.020 of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code.
903.2.1 Existing buildings in commercial fire zone. Existing buildings located in the commercial fire zone shown in Figure 9-A that are provided with an underground fire sprinkler lateral, shall have an automatic fire sprinkler system installed and operational within 24 months of the approval and acceptance of the lateral by the city.
Exceptions:
1. The installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system required by Section 903.2.1 in a building of unreinforced masonry construction not strengthened by July 1, 2007, shall coincide with the strengthening dates established by Resolution #9890 (2007). City council established dates range from 2008 to 2010 based on the relative hazard of the building.
2. An automatic fire sprinkler system required by Section 903.2.1 in a building of unreinforced masonry construction strengthened as required by Appendix Chapter 1 of the 1997 Uniform Code for Building Conservation, as amended, prior to July 1, 2007, shall be completed and operational by July 1, 2012.
3. An automatic fire sprinkler system required by Section 903.2.1 in a building of unreinforced masonry construction strengthened as required by Appendix Chapter 1 of the 1997 Uniform Code for Building Conservation, as amended, prior to October 1, 2004, shall be completed and operational by January 1, 2017.FIGURE 9-A—COMMERCIAL FIRE ZONE
[IMAGE: <15.04.100.png>]
903.2.2 Notification. Whenever the fire code official determines that a building is subject to the minimum requirements of Section 903.2.1, the building owner shall be notified in writing that an automatic fire-sprinkler system shall be installed in the building.
The notice shall specify in what manner the building fails to meet the minimum requirements of Section 903.2.1. It shall direct that plans be submitted, that necessary permits be obtained, and that installation be completed by the specified date. The fire department shall serve the notice, either personally or by certified or registered mail, upon the owner as shown on the last-equalized assessment roll and upon the person, if any, in real or apparent charge or control of the building.Sections 903.2.3 through 903.2.10 not used. Text continues with Section 903.2.11.
Y. Amend Sections 903.3.1.1 and 903.3.1.1.1 to read as follows:903.3.1.1 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems. Where other provisions of this code require that a building or portion thereof be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with this section and where a building is considered as mixed occupancy due to the presence of two or more uses that are classified into different occupancy groups, sprinklers shall be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13 as amended in Chapter 80 except as provided in Section 903.3.1.1.1.
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. In other than Group I-2, I-2.1 and I-3 occupancies, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an approved alternative automatic fire extinguishing system in accordance with Section 904. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from any room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or contains electrical equipment.
1 - 7 No change.
Z. Amend Section 903.4 to read as follows, with Exceptions to remain:903.4 Sprinkler system monitoring and alarms. All valves controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures, and water-flow switches on all sprinkler systems shall be electrically supervised by a central station service listed by Underwriters Laboratories for receiving fire alarms in accordance with NFPA 72. The central station shall contact and notify the police/fire dispatch center immediately on notification of an alarm and prior to making contact with the protected premises.
AA. Amend Section 903.4.3 and add Exception to read as follows:903.4.3 Isolation control valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in all buildings two or more stories in height or in single-story buildings having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more zoned into no more than 5,000 square-foot areas for the purpose of maintaining system integrity for life safety and evacuation.
Exception: Isolation control valves may be omitted in building equipped with an automatic fire extinguishing system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3.
BB. Amend Section 905.3.1 to read as follows:905.3.1 Height. In other than Group R-3 and R-3.1 occupancies, Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout at each floor where any of the following occur.
1. Buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located more than 30 feet (9,144 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
2. Buildings that are four or more stories in height.
3. Buildings where the floor level of the lowest story is located more than 30 feet (9,144 mm) below the highest level of fire department vehicle access.
4. Buildings that are two or more stories below the highest level of fire department vehicle access.
5. In any parking structure exceeding one level above or one level below grade.
CC. Amend Section 907.6.6 to read as follows:907.6.6 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by this chapter or by the California Building Code shall be monitored by an approved central station service listed by Underwriters Laboratory for receiving fire alarms in accordance with NFPA 72 and this section. The central station shall contact and notify the police/fire dispatch center immediately on notification of an alarm and prior to making contact with the protected premises.
Exception: Monitoring by a central station service is not required for:
1. Single- and multiple station smoke alarms required by Section 907.2.11.
2. Group I-3 occupancies shall be monitored in accordance with Section 907.2.6.3.
3. Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings.
DD. Add Section 910.3.2.1 to read as follows:910.3.2.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically by actuation of a heat responsive device rated at least 100 degrees above the operating temperature of the sprinkler heads.
EE. Delete Section 1030.1 Item 2, Exception 6.
FF. Amend Section 2306.2 and delete 2306.2.6 to read as follows:2306.2 Method of storage. Approved methods of storage for Class I, II and III liquid fuels at motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be in accordance with Sections 2306.2 through 2306.2.5.
GG. Amend Section 2306.2.3(3) to read as follows:3. Tanks containing fuels shall not exceed 8,000 gallons (30,274 L) in individual capacity or 16,000 gallons (60,549 L) in aggregate capacity. Installations with the maximum allowable aggregate capacity shall be separated from other such installations by not less than 100 feet (30,480 mm).
HH. Amend Sections 2306.2.4 and 2306.2.4.1 to read as follows, and delete Section 2306.2.4.2:2306.2.4 Above-ground tanks located in above-grade vaults or below-grade vaults. Above-ground tanks used for storage of Class I, II, or III liquid motor fuels are allowed to be installed in vaults located above grade or below grade in accordance with Section 5704.2.8 and shall comply with Sections 2306.2.4.1 and 2306.2.4.2. Tanks in above-grade vaults shall also comply with Table 2306.2.3 and the fuel shall not be offered for resale.
2306.2.4.1 Tank capacity limits. Tanks storing Class I, II or III liquids at an individual site shall be limited to a maximum individual capacity of 8,000 gallons (30,274 L) and an aggregate capacity of 16,000 gallons (60,549 L).
II. Amend Section 2306.2.6 items 1 and 6 to read as follows:1. The special enclosure shall be liquid tight and vapor tight. A leak detection-monitoring system capable of detecting liquid and providing an audible and visual alarm shall be installed and tested annually.
6. Tanks containing Class I, II, or III liquids inside a special enclosure shall not exceed 2,000 gallons (7,569 L) in individual capacity or 6,000 gallons (22,706 L) in aggregate capacity.
JJ. Delete Section 3304.3 and amend Section 3304.5 to read as follows:3304.5 Fire watch. When required by the fire code official for construction, alteration or building demolition that is hazardous in nature, qualified personnel shall be provided to serve as on-site fire watch. Fire watch personnel shall be provided with at least one approved means for notification of the fire department and their sole duty shall be to perform constant patrols and watch for the occurrence of fire.
KK. Amend Section 3310.1 to read as follows:3310.1 Required access. Approved vehicle access for firefighting shall be provided to all construction or demolition sites. Vehicle access shall be provided to within 150 feet of all combustible material. Vehicle access shall be provided by either temporary or permanent roads, capable of supporting vehicle loading under all weather conditions. Vehicle access roads shall be maintained until permanent fire apparatus access roads are available.
LL. Amend Section 3312.1 to read as follows:3312.1 When required. An approved water supply for fire protection, either temporary or permanent, shall be made available prior to combustible material arriving on the site.
MM. Amend Section 4901.1 to read as follows:4901.1 Scope. The mitigation of conditions where a wildfire burning in vegetative fuels may readily transmit fire to buildings and threaten to destroy life, overwhelm fire suppression capabilities, or result in large property losses shall comply with this chapter. In determining requirements for properties located within the wildland-urban interface fire area, the fire code official may be guided by the requirements of the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code and National Fire Protection Association Standards.
NN. Amend Section 4902.1, definition of Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area to read as follows:Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area: is a geographical area identified by the state as a “Fire Hazard Severity Zone” in accordance with the Public Resources Code Sections 4201 through 4204 and Government Code Section 51175 through 51189, or other areas designated by the enforcing agency to be at a significant risk from wildfires. Within the City of San Luis Obispo this includes those areas designated as local very high fire hazard severity zones.
OO. Amend Section 4905.3 to read as follows:4905.3 Establishment of limits. The City of San Luis Obispo is considered a “Community at Risk” due to the threat of wildfire impacting the urban community. The City shall continue to enhance the fire safety and construction codes for new buildings in order to reduce the risk of urban fires that may result from wildfires. New buildings citywide shall incorporate the following construction methods and materials: Ignition resistant exterior wall coverings; Fire sprinkler protection in attic areas (at least one “pilot head”); Ember resistant vent systems for attics and under floor areas, protected eaves, and Class ‘A’ roof coverings as identified in the California Building Code Chapter 7A.
PP. Amend Section 5601.1, and add Exceptions 11 and 12, to read as follows:5601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the possession, manufacture, storage, handling, sale and use of explosives, explosive materials, fireworks, rockets, emergency signaling devices and small arms ammunition.
Manufacture, possession, storage, sale, transportation, handling or use of explosive materials and the manufacture of explosive material and/or all fireworks, including Safe and Sane as designated by the Office of the State Fire Marshal, is prohibited within the city.
Exceptions:
1.-10. as written.
11. Use and handling of fireworks for display in accordance with Section 5601.1.3 exception (3) when authorized by the fire code official and in full compliance with Title 19, Division 1, Chapter 6.
12. The transportation, handling or use of explosive materials in conjunction with a City permitted construction or demolition project, subject to approval of the fire code authority and conforming to the requirements of the California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Division 1, Chapter 10.
QQ. Amend Section 5704.2.7, and delete the Exception to Section 5704.2.7.5.8, to read as follows:5704.2.7 Design, construction and general installation requirements for tanks. All tanks shall be protected tanks as defined in Section 5702. The design, fabrication, and construction of tanks shall comply with NFPA 30. Tanks shall be of double-walled construction and listed by Underwriters Laboratories (UL). Each tank shall bear a permanent nameplate or marking indicating the standard used as the basis of design.
5704.2.7.5.8 Over-fill prevention. An approved means or method in accordance with Section 5704.2.9.7.6 shall be provided to prevent the over-fill of all Class I, II and IIIA liquid storage tanks. Storage tanks in refineries, bulk plants or terminals regulated by Sections 5706.4 or 5706.7 shall have over-fill protection in accordance with API 2350.
An approved means or method in accordance with Section 5704.2.9.7.6 shall be provided to prevent the overfilling of Class IIIB liquid storage tanks connected to fuel-burning equipment inside buildings.
RR. Amend Section 5704.2.8.3 to read as follows:5704.2.8.3 Secondary containment. Vaults shall be liquid tight and there shall be no backfill around the tank or within the vault. The vault floor shall drain to a sump. For pre-manufactured vaults, liquid tightness shall be certified as part of the listing provided by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. For field-erected vaults, liquid tightness shall be certified in an approved manner.
SS. Add Section 5704.2.8.11.1 to read as follows:5704.2.8.11.1 Monitoring and detection. Activation of vapor detection systems shall also shut off dispenser pumps. Monitoring and detection systems shall be inspected and tested annually.
TT. Amend Section 5704.2.9 to read as follows:5704.2.9 Above-ground tanks outside of buildings. Above-ground storage of flammable and combustible liquids in tanks outside of buildings shall comply with Section 5704.2 and Sections 5704.2.9.1 through 5704.2.9.7.9 and Section 2306.2.3, condition 3.
UU. Amend Section 5704.2.13.1.4 to read as follows:5704.2.13.1.4 Tanks abandoned in place. A tank owner/operator proposing to abandon a tank in place shall submit a permit application to the fire department for assessment of soil contamination around the tank and product, vent and vapor piping. If contamination is confirmed, a work plan for additional assessment or remediation shall be submitted to the fire department within 30 days. If a tank is approved for abandonment in place, the property owner will be required place a deed notice on the property. The deed notice shall be notarized and recorded with the San Luis Obispo County Clerk Recorder’s Office within 30 days of tank abandonment. Tanks abandoned in place shall be as follows:
VV. Amend 5706.2.4 and the Exception to Section 5706.2.4 to read as follows:5706.2.4 Permanent and temporary tanks. The capacity of permanent above-ground tanks containing Class I, II or III liquids shall not exceed 1,100 gallons (4,164 L). The capacity of temporary above-ground tanks containing Class I, II, or III liquids shall not exceed 8,000 gallons (30,274 L). Tanks shall be of the single-compartment design, double-walled construction and shall be listed by Underwriters Laboratory (UL).
Exception: Permanent above-ground tanks of greater capacity which meet the requirements of 5704.2, as amended, may be permitted when approved by the fire code official.
WW. Amend Section 5706.2.5 to read as follows:5706.2.5 Type of tank. Tanks shall be listed for use by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), provided with top openings only, and overfill protection, and approved hoses/nozzles. Tanks shall be of double-walled construction or be provided with secondary containment. Elevated gravity discharge tanks shall be permitted only by approval of the fire code official.
XX. Amend Section 6104.2 to read as follows:6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. The installation of any liquid petroleum gas (LPG) tank over 500 gallons (1,892 L) water capacity is prohibited unless approved by the fire code official. In residential occupancies, LPG containers are limited to 5 gallons (19 L) for use in outdoor appliances.
YY. Delete the Exception to Appendix Section B105.1 and amend the title of Table B105.1(1) to read as follows:B105.1 One- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration for one- and two-family dwellings shall be as specified in Tables B105.1(1) and B105.1(2).
Table B105.1(1)
REQUIRED FIRE-FLOW FOR ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGSThe remainder of the table is unchanged.
ZZ. Amend Appendix Section B105.2 and the Exception to Section B105.2 to read as follows:B105.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration for buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be as specified in Table B105.1(2).
Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow of up to 50 percent, as approved by the fire code official, may be allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. The resulting fire-flow shall not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute (5,678 L/min) for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B105.1(2).
AAA. Amend Appendix Section D103.1 to read as follows:D103.1 Access road width with a hydrant. Where a fire hydrant is located on a fire apparatus road, the minimum road width shall be 26 feet (7,925 mm). See Figure D103.1.
Exceptions to Figure D103.1: Cul-de-sac diameter may be a minimum of 70 feet as approved by the fire code official. Parking in cul-de-sacs of less than 96 feet in diameter shall be approved by the fire code official.
BBB. Amend Appendix Section D103.4, Table D103.4 and Figure D103.1 to read as follows:D103.4 Dead ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet shall be provided with width and turnaround provisions in accordance with Table D103.4, as amended.
Exception: Where buildings along the dead-end road are protected by an approved fire sprinkler system throughout, the distance may be increased to 300 feet (91,440 mm).
Table D103.4: The minimum fire apparatus turnaround cul-de-sac diameter shall be 70 feet, curb to curb, when posted “No Parking”.
CCC. Amend Appendix Section D103.6 through D103.6.2 to read as follows:D103.6 Signs. Where required by the fire code official, fire apparatus roads shall be marked with permanent NO PARKING--FIRE LANE signs per city standards. Signs shall be posted on one or both sides of the fire apparatus road as required by Section D103.6.1 or D103.6.2.
D103.6.1 Roads less than 28 feet in width. Fire apparatus roads 20 to less than 28 feet wide shall be posted on both sides as a fire lane.
D103.6.2 Roads 28 or greater feet in width. Fire apparatus roads 28 to less than 36 feet wide shall be posted on one side of the road as a fire lane.
DDD. Amend Appendix Section D104.1 to read as follows:D104.1 Buildings exceeding three stories or 30 feet in height. Buildings or facilities exceeding 30 feet (9,144 mm) or three stories in height shall have adequate means of fire department access for each structure as approved by the fire code official.
EEE. Amend the Exception to Appendix Section D104.2 to read as follows:D104.2 Buildings exceeding 62,000 square feet in area. Buildings or facilities having a gross building area of more than 62,000 square feet (5,760 m2) shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads.
Exception: Buildings located in the commercial fire zone as shown on Figure 9-A of this code may be provided with fire apparatus access roads having a minimum width of 20 feet when approved by the fire code official.
FFF. Amend Appendix Section D105.2 by adding an Exception to read as follows:D105.2 Width. Aerial fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum unobstructed width of 26 feet (7,925 mm) in the immediate vicinity of any building or portion of a building more than 30 feet (9,144 mm) in height.
Exception: Buildings located in the commercial fire zone as shown on Figure 9-A of this code may be provided with fire apparatus access roads having a minimum width of 20 feet when approved by the fire code official.
GGG. Amend Section D106.1 to read as follows:D106.1 Projects having more than 100 dwelling units. Multiple-family residential projects having more than 100 dwelling units shall be equipped throughout with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads.
HHH. Delete Appendix Section D106.2.
III. Amend Appendix Section D107.1 and delete Exception 1, to read as follows:D107.1 One- or two-family dwelling residential developments. Developments of one- or two-family dwellings where the number of dwelling units exceeds 30 shall be provided with separate and approved fire access roads and shall meet the requirements of D104.3. Where the number of dwelling units is less than 30, the fire code official may require additional access in accordance with Section 503.1.2.
Exception: The number of dwelling units on a single fire apparatus access road shall not be increased unless fire apparatus access roads will connect with future development, as determined by the fire code official.
(Ord. 1670 § 6 (part), 2019; Ord. 1630 § 6 (part), 2016: Ord. 1595 § 6 (part), 2014)

Chapter 15.08 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
(Repealed by Ord. 1510)

Chapter 15.10 RENTAL HOUSING INSPECTION
(Repealed by Ord. 1632)

Chapter 15.12 ALARM SYSTEMS

Sections:
15.12.010    Purpose.
15.12.020    Definitions.
15.12.030    Alarm system standards.
15.12.040    Alarm business standards.
15.12.050    Alarm use standards.
15.12.060    Enforcement and appeals.

15.12.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce false alarms and to regulate burglary, robbery, fire and fire protection and medical attention alarm systems, and alarm businesses, agents and users. (Ord. 1162 § 2 (part), 1990)

15.12.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
A. “Alarm agent” means a person employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly, whose duties include selling, leasing, altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, servicing, responding to or monitoring an alarm system, or a person who manages or supervises a person employed by an alarm business to perform any of the duties described herein.
B. “Alarm business” means any business held by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity for the purpose of selling, leasing, altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, servicing, responding to or monitoring any alarm system in a building, structure or facility.
C. “Alarm system” means any mechanical or electronic device or series of devices which transmits a signal or message, either directly or indirectly, to the emergency dispatch center, or which emits an audible or visual signal at the alarm location, and which is designed to:
    1. Detect unauthorized entry into any building, structure or facility;
    2. Signal the occurrence of an unlawful act upon the premises;
    3. Detect a fire, or detect activation, equipment problems or the malfunction of a fire protection system;
    4. Detect a hazardous material leak or system malfunction; or
    5. Signal the need for medical attention.
For purposes of this chapter, devices operated by the city or devices which are not designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible or perceptible outside of the protected premises are not included within the meaning of alarm system.
D. “Alarm user” means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind that owns, leases, rents, uses or makes available for use by its agents, employees, representatives or family any alarm system.
E. “Chief of police” means the chief of police of the city of San Luis Obispo, or his/her designated representative.
F. “City” means the city of San Luis Obispo.
G. “Day” means calendar day.
H. “Department head” means the chief of police, the fire chief or their designated representatives.
I. “Direct dial system” means an alarm system which is connected to a telephone line and, upon activation of an alarm system, automatically transmits a message or signal to the emergency dispatch center indicating a need for emergency response.
J. “Emergency dispatch center” means the combined police and fire communications and dispatch center located at the police department facility.
K. “False alarm” means an activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or maintenance, or negligence of the alarm user when an emergency situation does not exist. A determination as to whether an alarm signal was a false alarm or an actual alarm shall be made by the appropriate department head. “False alarms” shall not include those alarms activated by extraordinary meteorological, atmospheric or other conditions or means as determined by the department head.
L. “Finance department” means the finance department of the city of San Luis Obispo.
M. “Fire chief” means the chief of the fire department of the city of San Luis Obispo or his/her designated representative.
N. “Notice” means written notice given by personal service upon the addressee or given by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her last known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service or upon the placing of the same in the custody of the United States Postal Service.
O. “Private alarm dispatch center” means a center maintained by an alarm business which receives emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter, immediately relays the message by live voice to the emergency dispatch center.
P. “Responsible department” means the city department having the responsibility of providing emergency services upon receipt of an alarm signal at the emergency dispatch center. For incidents related to fires, or waterflow in fire sprinkler systems, or other extinguishing agents in fire protection systems, as well as medical attention, the fire department is the responsible department. For incidents related to burglary, robbery, unauthorized building entry, etc., the responsible department is the police department. (Ord. 1162 § 2 (part), 1990)

15.12.030 Alarm system standards.
A. In General. 
    1. The council, upon recommendation of the chief of police or fire chief, may prescribe by resolution minimum standards and regulations for the construction and maintenance of all alarm systems installed in the city. All equipment shall meet or exceed these standards and regulations.
    2. No alarm system shall be installed unless the alarm user has either a service agreement with an alarm business qualified under this chapter or has available a designated person who will respond to the site of an activated alarm with the ability to deactivate the alarm.
B. Audible Alarm Systems. No audible alarm system shall be installed or used unless it shall have an automatic reset capability which shall silence the alarm within fifteen minutes of activation.
C. Silent Alarm Systems. 
    1. No direct dial systems shall be allowed within the city.
    2. All silent alarm systems shall be connected to a private alarm dispatch center. (Ord. 1162 § 2 (part), 1990)

15.12.040 Alarm business standards.
A. Alarm businesses operating within the city shall comply with all state licensing requirements and operate in accordance with the standards set forth in the State Alarm Company Act as to conduct of business and qualification of employees, including alarm agents.
B. No person or company which installs, or otherwise provides, an alarm system shall install such device or system without the ability to provide twenty-four-hour service for that system. “Service” for the purposes of this section shall-include the ability to promptly repair a malfunctioning alarm system and, in any event, a service response to the alarm location shall be accomplished within thirty minutes of a request for service. “Service” shall also include the ability to provide periodic maintenance necessary to assure normal functioning of the system. This section shall not apply to persons or businesses who merely sell from fixed locations, or who manufacture alarm systems, unless such persons or firms also install, monitor or service such systems.
C. Any alarm business operating a private alarm dispatch center shall, within one minute of receiving notice that an alarm has been activated, notify the emergency dispatch center of the activation. Notification shall normally be made via a designated one-way telephone line which is dedicated solely to the reporting of such notifications.
D. Each alarm business that monitors fire alarm systems must comply with all sections of National Fire Protection Association Bulletin #71-1988 and as amended.
E. It shall be the duty of the alarm business to cooperate fully at all times with the city and its employees. Every alarm business shall, upon request during normal hours of business, make any and all records and information in its possession relating to alarm systems operating within the city available to personnel authorized by the chief of police or fire chief. Each alarm business must possess a valid city business license. (Ord. 1162 § 2 (part), 1990)

15.12.050 Alarm use standards.
A. 
    1. All existing and prospective users of alarm systems shall obtain an alarm user permit approved by the responsible department head within sixty days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or prior to the installation and use of an alarm system, as the case may be. A separate permit shall be required for each separate alarmed building or facility and for each separate alarm system. Application for the permit, and a fee as established by council resolution, must be filed for each year or part thereof. Each permit application shall contain the current name, address, telephone number and signature of the individual accepting responsibility for the proper functioning and maintenance of the alarm system covered by the permit. A copy of the permit shall be posted upon the premises where the alarm system is installed. Each permit will bear the signature of the issuing official and the chief of the responsible department. All permits shall expire one year after the date of issuance.
    2. Application for permits more than sixty days after the need for such permit arises shall require the payment of a one hundred percent penalty fee.
B. The alarm user shall, at all times, insure that the emergency dispatch center is in possession of a minimum of three names, telephone numbers and home addresses of persons with twenty-four-hour access to the alarm location and the alarm system who are authorized to and will respond to the location where an alarm has been activated. The response shall be within a reasonable time and, in any event, within thirty minutes of being requested to do so. At any time that one of these persons no longer possesses such access to the alarm location, the alarm user shall immediately notify the emergency dispatch center and, in any event, this notification shall be made within forty-eight hours of the time at which the person no longer possesses access to the location.
C. 
    1. It shall be the duty of the alarm user to properly use the alarm system and to maintain it mechanically and technically to insure safe and responsible operation and minimize the number of false alarms. If the chief of police or fire chief determines that a system lacks in quality, components, servicing, or is improperly used by the alarm user, he/she may require that modifications be made to the system to make it comply with this chapter.
    2. False alarms shall be considered excessive when they exceed three activations in any twelve-month period.
    3. As provided by resolution of the city council, a fee shall be paid to the city by each alarm user for excessive false alarms. The police chief or fire chief shall cause to be issued a monthly bill for the unpaid fees accrued during any monthly billing period and any prior periods. Such bills shall be due and payable within thirty days after the billing date.
    4. A penalty of fifteen percent shall be added to the fees required by this section in connection with any fees not paid in the time and manner set forth above.
    5. The amount of any fee and late penalty assessed pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city and an action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction in the amount of the delinquent debt.Payment of any user fees and late charges shall not prohibit criminal prosecution for the violation of any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1162 § 2 (part), 1990)

15.12.060 Enforcement and appeals.
A. Revocation. In addition to other remedies provided, the department head of the responsible department may revoke an alarm user’s permit for a violation of this chapter.
B. Civil Penalties. For violations of this chapter, the department head of the responsible department may assess a civil penalty of up to five hundred dollars for each violation.
C. Criminal Penalties. A violation of this chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor.
D. Appeals. The decision of a department head to revoke an alarm user’s permit or to assess a civil penalty may be appealed to the city council. All appeals must be filed within thirty days of receipt of notice of the department head’s action. (Ord. 1162 § 2 (part), 1990)

Chapter 15.14 EXPEDITED PERMIT PROCESS FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS

Sections:
15.14.010    Purpose and intent.
15.14.020    Definitions.
15.14.030    Applicability.
15.14.040    Solar energy system requirements.
15.14.050    Applications and documents.
15.14.060    Permit review and inspection requirements.

15.14.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014, California Government Code Section 65850.5) in order to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 1612 § 2 (part), 2015)

15.14.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
A. “Solar energy system” means either of the following:
    1. Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.
    2. Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.
B. “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:
    1. A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal.
    2. A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city, and all state and city health and safety standards.
    3. A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or two-family dwelling.
    4. A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city.
C. “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of electronic email or submittal via the Internet.
D. “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.
E. “Reasonable restrictions” on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.
F. “Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance” means:
    1. For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed.
    2. For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. (Ord. 1612 § 2 (part), 2015)

15.14.030 Applicability.
A. This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city.
B. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit.
C. A use permit and/or architectural review may be required for properties on the city’s list of historic resources as deemed necessary by the community development director. (Ord. 1612 § 2 (part), 2015)

15.14.040 Solar energy system requirements.
A. All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city.
B. Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.
C. Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1612 § 2 (part), 2015)

15.14.050 Applications and documents.
A. All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the city website.
B. Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email or the Internet shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.
C. The city’s building and safety division shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.
D. The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. (Ord. 1612 § 2 (part), 2015)

15.14.060 Permit review and inspection requirements.
A. The community development director shall implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The building and safety division shall issue a building permit, the issuance of which is nondiscretionary, on the same day for over-the-counter applications or within one to three business days for electronic applications upon receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. The chief building official may require an applicant to apply for an administrative use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission.
B. Review of the application shall be limited to the chief building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.
C. If an administrative use permit is required, the city may deny such application if it makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission.
D. Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.
E. “A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance.
F. If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.
G. Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building and safety division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.
H. The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections.
I. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized. (Ord. 1612 § 2 (part), 2015)

Chapter 15.15 EXPEDITED PERMIT PROCESS FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS

Sections:
15.15.010    Purpose and intent.
15.15.020    Definitions.
15.15.030    Applicability.
15.15.040    Electric vehicle charging station requirements.
15.15.050    Applications and documents.
15.15.060    Permit review and inspection requirements.

15.15.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined electric vehicle charging station permitting process that complies with California Government Code Section 65850.7 so long as the action does not supersede the building official’s authority to identify and address higher priority life-safety situations. This chapter encourages the use of electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles and unreasonable barriers to, and minimizing costs of, permitting electric vehicle charging stations. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 1637 § 2 (part), 2017)

15.15.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words used in this chapter shall be construed in compliance with the definitions set forth in Government Code Section 65850.7:
A. “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with California Electrical Code Article 625, as it reads on the effective date of this section, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.
B. “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following: email; the internet; facsimile.
C. “Feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit.
D. “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 1637 § 2 (part), 2017)

15.15.030 Applicability.
A. This chapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging stations in the city.
B. Routine operation and maintenance shall not require a permit.
C. Electric vehicle chargers installed on listed historic properties shall be found consistent with the historic preservation ordinance including historic preservation guidelines and Secretary of the Interior standards for the treatment of historic properties, as deemed necessary by the community development director. (Ord. 1637 § 2 (part), 2017)

15.15.040 Electric vehicle charging station requirements.
A. All electric vehicle charging stations shall meet all applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by local, state and federal law.
B. An electric vehicle charging station shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1637 § 2 (part), 2017)

15.15.050 Applications and documents.
A. All documents required for the submission of an electric vehicle charging station application shall be made available on the city website. The building official shall adopt, and post on the city’s website, a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.
B. Electronic submittal of the required permit application, plans and documents by email or the internet shall be made available to all electric vehicle charging station permit applicants.
C. The city will accept an electronic signature on all forms, applications and other documents in lieu of a wet signature by an applicant.
D. The electric vehicle charging station permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” published by the Office of Planning and Research. (Ord. 1637 § 2 (part), 2017)

15.15.060 Permit review and inspection requirements.
A. The building official shall implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of electric vehicle charging stations.
B. If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.
C. Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.
D. The building and safety division shall issue a building permit, the issuance of which is nondiscretionary within five business days for residential installations, and ten business days for commercial installations upon receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan.
E. The building official may require an applicant to apply for an administrative use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety.
F. If an administrative use permit is required, the city may deny such application if it makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission.
G. Any condition imposed on an application shall be a feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.
H. Approval of a permit for any electric vehicle charging station shall not be conditioned on the approval of an electric vehicle charging station by an association, as that term is defined in Civil Code Section 4080.
I. Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building and safety division for electric vehicle charging stations eligible for expedited review.
J. The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections.
K. If an electric vehicle charging station fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized. (Ord. 1637 § 2 (part), 2017)

Chapter 15.16 RETAINING WALLS
(Repealed by Ord. 1213)

Chapter 15.20 SOLAR WATER HEATING REGULATIONS
(Repealed by Ord. 1353)

Chapter 15.24 TENTS
(Repealed by Ord. 1353)

Chapter 15.28 GARDEN WALLS
(Repealed by Ord. 1213)

Chapter 15.32 DOCKS

Sections:
15.32.250    Permit applications—Submission of plans required.
15.32.260    Encroachment restrictions.
15.32.270    Safety requirements.
15.32.280    Variances.
15.32.290    Exceptions.
15.32.300    Removal of nonconforming docks required.
Ord. 1213 § 2, 1992, changed the title of this chapter from “Swimming Pools and Docks” to “Docks” and deleted §§ 15.32.010 – 15.32.240, derived from prior code §§ 8700.1 – 8700.11, 8710.1 – 8710.4, 8710.6 – 8710.12, 8710.14 – 8710.16.

15.32.250 Permit applications—Submission of plans required.
A. Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive a permit shall make such application on forms provided for that purpose. He or she shall give a description of the character of the work proposed to be done and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in connection therewith.
B. Application for permits for new construction shall be accompanied by legible plans in triplicate and in sufficient detail including the following:
    1. A plot plan, drawn to scale of not less than one-eighth inch per foot, showing property lines with side property lines projected beyond the rear line into the body of water;
    2. The location and size of the proposed dock, superimposed on the plot plan;
    3. Working drawings of dock construction, to include details of connection and anchorage;
    4. Means of access;
    5. Information and schematics of all electrical, mechanical and plumbing work. (Prior code § 8720.1)

15.32.260 Encroachment restrictions.
A. No fixed dock shall encroach into that portion of Laguna Lake which is under the jurisdiction of the city. All such docks shall be located on private property.
B. Floating docks may encroach into Laguna Lake not more than thirty feet distance from the nearest property line and such floating docks shall not exceed one hundred eighty square feet in area. Total allowable area shall include any ramp or gangway constructed in conjunction with the floating dock and included in the encroachment.
C. No dock shall encroach beyond the projected lot lines of adjoining properties. (Prior code § 8720.2)

15.32.270 Safety requirements.
A. All new construction shall be in accordance with applicable codes and ordinances as adopted by the city.
B. Any fixed or floating dock or portion thereof that, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe or insecure shall be deemed a nuisance, and shall be repaired or removed by the owner of the property upon which such dock is attached, within thirty days after notice in writing by the city.
After thirty days, the city may cause such dock to be removed and the cost of such removal shall become a lien against the real property.
The city may cause any dock which is in immediate peril to persons or property to be removed or corrected summarily and apply the cost as a lien against the real property. (Prior code § 8720.3)

15.32.280 Variances.
The planning commission may grant a variance to the standards as set forth in subsections A and B of Section 15.32.260, provided the following three conditions are satisfied:
A. That there are exceptional circumstances applying to the site, such as size, shape or topography, which do not apply generally to land in the vicinity;
B. That the exception will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity;
C. That the granting of such exception will not adversely affect the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity. (Prior code § 8720.4)

15.32.290 Exceptions.
The director of the community development department may grant an exception to subsection C of Section 15.32.260, provided a written consent from the adjoining property owner is furnished with the application for permit. (Prior code § 8720.5)

15.32.300 Removal of nonconforming docks required.
Fixed and floating docks which do not conform to this chapter shall, within five years after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein (February 17, 1978), be removed or made to conform. (Prior code § 8720.6)

Chapter 15.36 REPEALED*
*Chapter 15.36, “Demolition and Moving of Buildings,” §§ 15.36.010—15.36.340, was repealed by Ord. 1306 § 2, 1996.

Chapter 15.40 SIGN REGULATIONS

Sections:
Article I.  General Provisions
    15.40.100    Title.
    15.40.105    Authority.
    15.40.110    Findings and purpose.
    15.40.120    Applicability.
    15.40.130    General rules and interpretation.
Article II. Exempt Signs
    15.40.200    Types of signs exempt from a sign permit.
Article III. Prohibited Signs
    15.40.300    Prohibited signs.
Article IV. Sign Standards
    15.40.400    Area and height measurement.
    15.40.410    Setbacks.
    15.40.420    Maximum height and location.
    15.40.430    Illumination.
    15.40.440    Clearance.
    15.40.460    Sign standards by district.
    15.40.470    Sign standards by sign type.
    15.40.480    Design principles.
    15.40.485    Sign programs.
Article V.  Sign Permits—Application and Processing Procedures
    15.40.500    Permit required.
    15.40.510    Sign permit application—Contents.
    15.40.520    Architectural review application.
    15.40.530    Level of review and action by the director.
    15.40.540    Permit issuance.
    15.40.550    Denial.
    15.40.560    Appeals.
Article VI. Exceptions to Sign Standards
    15.40.600    Requests for exceptions.
    15.40.610    Findings for approval of an exception.
Article VII. Sign Maintenance and Abandonment
    15.40.700    Maintaining signs.
    15.40.720    Unsafe signs.
Article VIII. Nonconforming Signs
    15.40.800    Existing nonconforming signs.
    15.40.840    Removal of nonconforming signs.
Article IX. Enforcement
    15.40.900    Type of offense.
    15.40.910    Public nuisance.
Article X.  Definitions
    15.40.1000   Definitions.

Article I. General Provisions

15.40.100 Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the “sign regulations of the city of San Luis Obispo.” (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.105 Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority vested in the city of San Luis Obispo and the state of California, including but not limited to: the State Constitution, California Government Code Sections 38774 and 65850, California Business and Professions Code Section 5230 and California Civil Code Section 713. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.110 Findings and purpose.
The council of the city of San Luis Obispo has determined that these sign regulations are necessary for the following purposes:
A. Protecting and enhancing the character of the community and its various neighborhoods and districts against visual blight. Furthermore, a proliferation of signs can seriously detract from the pleasure of observing the natural scenic beauty of San Luis Obispo and the built environment;
B. Regulating the size, type and location of signs to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication and to provide equality and equity among sign owners and those who wish to use signs;
C. Controlling the size and number of signs is consistent with community goals and policies expressed in the general plan to ensure that new signs are consistent with overall city goals to protect San Luis Obispo’s physical identity and character by maintaining and enhancing the community with distinctive, attractive, and pedestrian-oriented commercial areas and neighborhoods. The sign regulations work together with the community design guidelines and historic preservation guidelines to achieve these goals;
D. Ensuring that the design of signs are architecturally compatible with affected structures and the character of surrounding development in order to maintain the overall quality of a neighborhood or commercial district;
E. Limiting the number and size of all signs to avoid visual clutter which is detrimental to the character of the community;
F. Protecting public safety by ensuring that official traffic regulation devices be easily visible and free from nearby visual obstructions and distractions, such as attention-getting signs, an excessive number of signs, or signs in any way resembling official signs;
G. Protecting the constitutionally guaranteed right of free speech by enacting regulations to regulate the time, place and manner under which signs are permitted, and not the content of signs. Although examples of content may be provided in these regulations, content will not be used as a basis for determining whether or not a proposed sign may be permitted. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.120 Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all property and land within the jurisdiction of the city of San Luis Obispo. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation that owns, occupies, or controls property in the city of San Luis Obispo to construct, maintain, display or alter or cause to be constructed, maintained, displayed or altered a sign within the city except in conformance with this chapter. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.130 General rules and interpretation.
A. Signs Must Comply with This Code. In all zones, only such signs that are specifically permitted or exempted in this chapter may be placed, erected, maintained, displayed or used, and the placement, erection, maintenance, display or use of signs shall be subject to all restrictions, limitations and regulations contained in this chapter. The placement, erection, maintenance, display or use of all other signs is prohibited.
B. Enforcement Authority. The community development director (the “director”) is authorized and directed to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter with the public works director’s authority where noted.
C. Permit Requirement. Unless expressly exempted by a provision of this chapter, or by other applicable law, signs within the regulatory scope of this chapter may be displayed only pursuant to a permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter and any applicable permits required by the building code or Title 12.
D. Message Neutrality. It is the city’s policy to regulate signs in a way that does not favor commercial speech over noncommercial speech and is content neutral as to noncommercial messages which are within the protections of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the California Constitution.
E. Regulatory Interpretations. All regulatory interpretations of this chapter are to be exercised in light of the city’s message neutrality policy. Where a particular type of sign is proposed in a permit application, and the type is neither expressly allowed nor prohibited by this chapter, or whenever a sign does not qualify as a “structure” as defined in the building code, then the director shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove, or refer the sign to the architectural review commission, based on the most similar sign type that is expressly regulated by this chapter.
F. Substitution of Messages. Subject to the property owner’s consent, a noncommercial message of any type may be substituted for any commercial message or any noncommercial message; provided, that the sign is otherwise legal without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary within this chapter. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, lot or land use; does not affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted; does not allow a change in the physical structure of a sign or its mounting device; and does not allow the substitution of an off-site commercial message in place of an on-site commercial message.
G. Property Owner’s Consent. No sign may be displayed without the consent of the legal owner(s) of the property on which the sign is mounted or displayed. For purposes of this policy, “owner” means the holder of the legal title to the property and all parties and persons holding a present right to possession, control or use of the property.
H. Severance. If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion or provision of this chapter is held invalid, or unconstitutional, or unenforceable, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect, impair, or invalidate any other section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion, or provision of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid portion. In adopting this chapter, the city council affirmatively declares that it would have approved and adopted the chapter even without any portion which may be held invalid or unenforceable. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

Article II. Exempt Signs

15.40.200 Types of signs exempt from a sign permit.
The city has a compelling interest in permitting the following signs in order to comply with state and local laws and to promote public safety on city property and in the public right-of-way. The following signs may be installed without a sign permit, provided they meet the requirements listed below. Under certain circumstances these signs may require a building permit or encroachment permit. Contact the building division of the community development department and the public works department for permitting requirements prior to installing any of the signs listed below. These signs shall not be included in the determination of type, number, or area of signs allowed on a given property.
A. Address Signs. Signs installed in compliance with California Fire Code Section 505.1 or, if updated, the applicable fire code section as determined by the city fire marshal.
B. Signs Posted during Construction. A maximum of four nonilluminated signs located on construction sites not exceeding sixteen square feet in aggregate area, while a valid construction permit is active. For commercial and residential projects on sites three acres or larger, the maximum exempt sign area under this subsection is thirty-two square feet.
C. Gasoline Price Signs. Not more than one price sign for each frontage, not to exceed twenty square feet each and subject to height and setback limits established by zoning district. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, signs may include digital readouts or LED technology as necessary to comply with Business and Professions Code for the display of fuel prices.
D. Official Signs. Official federal, state, local government signs and notices issued by any court, person, or officer in performance of a public duty; signs required by federal, state, or local law; and signs placed by utility companies as part of the normal operation and maintenance of utility facilities.
E. Miscellaneous Small Signs. Signs with an aggregate area not to exceed three square feet and located within five feet of an entrance to a building.
F. No Trespassing Signs. Trespass warnings that are posted in compliance with applicable federal, state, and local laws.
G. Traffic Safety Signs. Signs warning of construction, excavation, or similar hazards if expressly approved by the city’s public works director. Parking lot and other private traffic directional signs each not exceeding three feet in height and five square feet in area and limited to guidance of pedestrian or vehicular traffic within the premises on which they are located.
H. Temporary Window Signs. Temporary signs posted for thirty days or less on commercial properties that are painted directly on a window, affixed to the inside of a window, or hung within thirty-six inches of a window and promoting any message, including, but not limited to, grand openings and special events (commercial and noncommercial), provided the sign or signs do not exceed ten percent of each window area, or four square feet per window, whichever is greater.
I. Vehicle Signs. Painted signs or decals affixed to the body of any vehicle, unless parked or operated for the primary purpose of displaying the sign. See prohibited vehicle signs in Section 15.40.300(K).
J. Signs within Building Interior. Signs or other visual communicative devices that are located entirely within a legally established building or other enclosed structure and are not intended to be oriented or be made visible from the exterior.
K. Signs in Residential Zones or Signs on Residential Properties in Commercial Zones. In addition to addressing signs in conformance with subsection A of this section, and flag signs in conformance with Section 15.40.470(K), up to three temporary signs are allowed in conformance with the following requirements: (1) regardless of the total number of signs posted at any time, temporary signs shall not exceed one hundred twenty days per sign in total duration per calendar year; (2) individual signs shall not exceed five square feet; (3) temporary signs may only be placed in the yard area. Examples of such signs include yard sale signs, real estate signs, and campaign signs. Exempt residential signs shall not include features from Section 15.40.300, Prohibited signs, which would be incompatible with the residential neighborhood such as audio, flashing or blinking lights or other attention-getting devices. The content of the message conveyed has no application to compliance with the requirements of this section. Signs in multi-unit apartments, condominiums, or common interest subdivisions with no ground level ownership may have up to two temporary window signs not to exceed twenty percent of the window area in which they are displayed and not exceed one hundred twenty days in total duration per calendar year.
L. Temporary Signs in Nonresidential Zones. Three nonilluminated and nonelectronic temporary signs not to exceed ten square feet for a total not to exceed one hundred twenty days per calendar year. Examples of such signs include campaign signs, real estate signs, or notice of special events. Temporary signs shall not include audio, movement, or other characteristics listed in Section 15.40.300, Prohibited signs, which would be incompatible with area character and/or create distractions which could inhibit the safe movement of traffic. Temporary signs shall be posted below the roofline of the building and not obscure architectural features or cover windows. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

Article III. Prohibited Signs

15.40.300 Prohibited signs.
The city has a compelling interest to prohibit the following signs to further the findings and purpose (Section 15.40.110) of these sign regulations and to enforce local, state and federal law. All signs below are specifically identified as prohibited with some exceptions, and any other signs not expressly provided for or exempted from this chapter are prohibited. Sign types which, in the determination of the community development director, are similar to those listed in this section or which are not described in these regulations are also prohibited.
A. Attention-Getting Devices. Pennants, streamers, spinners, balloons, inflatable signs, search lights, beacons, flashing lights or messages and other similar attention-getting devices, unless authorized in conjunction with a temporary use permit or special event permit, or architectural review, and provided the city’s public works director determines that such a sign will not create an unsafe distraction for users of the public right-of-way.
B. Banner signs are prohibited unless:
    1. Approved in conjunction with an approved temporary or intermittent use, or outdoor event permit or special event permit; or
    2. Approved with a sign permit as a temporary sign pending manufacture and installation of an approved permanent sign for not more than thirty days or within a specified time frame as determined by the community development director; or
    3. Approved by the public works director over designated rights-of-way in compliance with Chapter 12.04 (Encroachments and Excavations); or
    4. The sign is exempt under Section 15.40.200.
C. Backlit Translucent Awning Signs. Any sign located on an awning that is translucent or semi-transparent and illuminated from a light source under or within the awning.
D. Outdoor Advertising Displays and Off-Site Signs. Outdoor advertising displays such as billboards, handheld signs, mascots, and all off-site commercial signs that display advertising for a business, commodity, service, facility, or other such matter that is not located, conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where the sign is located are prohibited within the city of San Luis Obispo. Any such outdoor advertising displays that are located within the public right-of-way are considered off-site and are prohibited. The on-site/off-site distinction applies only to commercial messages on signs.
E. Highly Reflective and Fluorescent Signs. Signs made wholly or partially of highly reflective material and fluorescent or DayGlo painted signs.
F. Signs on Utility Poles or Traffic Control Devices. Signs attached or placed adjacent to any utility pole, traffic sign, signal, or marking, or any other official traffic-control device, unless in accordance with the California Vehicle Code.
G. Signs on Street Trees. Any sign posted on a street tree.
H. Signs That Block Ingress or Egress. Any sign, such as a sandwich board sign, placed or maintained so as to interfere with free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape, or parking lot.
I. Signs in the Street Right-of-Way. Any sign placed in any street right-of-way without a valid encroachment permit or prior approval of the public works director for the purpose of safety or traffic control.
J. Simulated Traffic Signs. Any sign which simulates or imitates in size, color, lettering or design any traffic sign or signal, or which makes use of words, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
K. Vehicle Signs or Mobile Advertising Displays. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.300K.jpg>]
Mobile billboard advertising displays and advertising signs on motor vehicles parked or left standing upon a public street, except for advertising signs that are permanently affixed to the body of, an integral part of, or a fixture of a motor vehicle for permanent decoration, identification, or display and that do not extend beyond the overall length, width, or height of the vehicle, advertisement on license plate frames installed in compliance with Vehicle Code Section 5201, and paper advertisements issued by a dealer contained within a license frame installed in compliance with Vehicle Code Section 5201. For purposes of this section, “permanently affixed” means any of the following: (1) painted directly on the body of a motor vehicle, (2) applied as a decal on the body of a motor vehicle, or (3) placed in a location on the body of a motor vehicle that was specifically designed by a vehicle manufacturer as defined in Vehicle Code Section 672 and licensed pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 11701, in compliance with both state and federal law or guidelines, for the express purpose of containing an advertising sign. The city has determined this prohibition is necessary because mobile advertising as a primary purpose inhibits the safe movement of traffic, contributes to air pollution, and detracts from the overall aesthetics of the city. This prohibition applies citywide irrespective of the content of the message or ideas expressed.
L. Prohibited or Unpermitted Uses. Any sign displaying a commercial message promoting a business that is not a permitted use pursuant to Title 17 (Zoning Regulations).
M. Roof Signs. Unless expressly allowed by Section 15.40.420, roof signs are prohibited in all zones.
N. Electronic Message Centers (EMC Signs) and Digital Display. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.300N.jpg>]
Signs using digital displays or other means to present images or messages. These signs typically use light emitting diode (LED), liquid crystal display (LCD), plasma or other technology to present a series of still images, full motion animation, or other text messages. (Does not apply where preempted by state law for fuel price signage or other applicable codes.)
Exemption: City parking facilities are exempt from the EMC prohibition in order to provide information to the public regarding parking availability. This exemption is necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare of the community in order to manage unnecessary car trips and reduce greenhouse gas emissions resulting from unnecessary vehicle parking space searches in city parking facilities and to minimize driver confusion and distraction that can increase the likelihood of vehicle and pedestrian accidents and injuries. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

Article IV. Sign Standards

15.40.400 Area and height measurement.
The sign area is calculated by determining the periphery of the sign. The periphery of the sign shall be established by drawing no more than eight straight lines encompassing the limits of the sign within the smallest possible area. In determining the area of an individual sign that has more than one face (e.g., a monument or projecting sign), the single sign face with the greatest area shall be used. The total sign area is the sum of all individual sign areas. Sign area does not include supporting structures, such as sign bases and columns without lettering or graphics.
The height of a sign shall be measured from the ground, adjacent to the sign, to the top of the sign and support structure. If the ground under the sign slopes, the height shall be measured from the average grade under the sign itself. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.410 Setbacks.
Except as provided in these sign regulations, sign location shall conform with setbacks established in the zoning regulations.
A. Signs taller than three feet may not be located within the visibility triangle depicted below. Minor exceptions may be granted for controlled intersections if approved by both the public works director and community development director, if a finding is made that the proposed sign will not affect the line of sight of vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection.
[IMAGE: <15.40.410.png>]
B. With public works director approval, traffic directional signs may be placed in the required setback, providing they do not interfere with visibility required for safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation, especially at street corners.
C. With public works director and community development director approval, signs may be located in the required setback area, provided they are outside of the visibility triangle and provide adequate site distance for driveways.
D. The community development director may approve reduced setbacks for signs, provided the public works director concurs the sign does not interfere with visibility required for safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation and provided that the sign is architecturally compatible with the proposed location. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.420 Maximum height and location.
The maximum height of any sign is as provided for each sign type specifically identified in this chapter in Section 15.40.470, or with sign program approval or by exception as provided in Sections 15.40.485 and 15.40.600 respectively.
All signs that are attached to a building must be located on a building face that has a public entrance. The community development director may make exceptions to this requirement in circumstances where the purpose and intent of these regulations is maintained and where the orientation of the public entrance to a building is such that the sign would not have sufficient visibility from the public right-of-way to provide for adequate identification of the business or use.
The community development director may make exceptions to the prohibition of roof signs in circumstances where the sign does not extend above the roofline, the building lacks an architectural feature to locate a sign, or other special circumstances. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.430 Illumination.
Where illumination of signs is permitted, the following standards shall apply:
A. Lighting for signs shall not create a hazardous glare for pedestrians or vehicles either in a public street or on any private premises.
B. The light source, whether internal to the sign or external, shall be shielded from view. This requirement is not intended to preclude the use of diffused exposed neon, LED, or similar technology.
C. Sign illumination for externally illuminated signs shall utilize focused light fixtures that do not allow light or glare to shine above the horizontal plane of the top of the sign and to limit direct illumination of any object other than the sign or onto any public right-of-way or adjoining property.
D. Each sign shall be designed so that illumination does not exceed one hundred luxes (ten foot-candles) measured at a distance of ten feet from the sign.
E. In the office zone, illumination of the sign face shall not exceed ten luxes (one foot-candle) measured at a distance of ten feet from the sign.
F. Signs located in residential zones may not be illuminated, except externally illuminated directory signs approved for residential projects, which shall not exceed ten luxes (one foot-candle) measured at a distance of ten feet from the sign.
G. Internally illuminated cabinet signs are prohibited in the downtown commercial (C-D) zone and allowed in other zoning districts in compliance with the design principles.
[IMAGE: <15.40.430G_001.jpg>]Encouraged
[IMAGE: <15.40.430G_002.jpg>]Discouraged
Internally illuminated cabinet signs consist of frame and face(s) with a translucent message panel. Signs with a backing or case of opaque material with punch through letters so only the letters or business symbol are illuminated are not classified as internally illuminated cabinet signs.
H. Signs in the Downtown (C-D Zone). Signs in the downtown (C-D zone) may only use external illumination, halo backlighting, push through, neon, channel letters, or LED tubing with a similar appearance and brightness level which simulates neon.
[IMAGE: <15.40.430H.jpg>]Channel Letter Signs
[IMAGE: <15.40.430H_002.jpg>]Backlit (Halo) Signs
All signs with internal illumination including monument signs, walls signs, projecting signs and pole signs shall have opaque only lettering illuminated, subject to compliance with the standards in subsections E, F, and G of this section. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.440 Clearance.
Where permitted, awning, projecting, marquee, and suspended signs shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Vertical Clearance. The minimum clearance between the lowest point of a sign and the grade immediately below shall be eight feet for public right-of-way and private sidewalk areas.
B. Horizontal Clearance. The minimum horizontal clearance between a sign and the curb line shall be two feet; the maximum projection over a public sidewalk shall be two-thirds the width of the sidewalk or six feet, whichever is less. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.460 Sign standards by district.
The following standards shall be applied in each of the city’s zoning districts, notwithstanding the standards for each sign type established by Section 15.40.470 or the design principles established by Section 15.40.480. In no case may the maximum number or size of signs, or their illumination levels, exceed the standards provided by this section, unless approved through a sign program or exception as provided by Section 15.40.485 or 15.40.600.
A. The cumulative area and number of signs requirements provided in Sections 15.40.460 and 15.40.470 summarized in this table represent maximum standards for signs which conform to the requirements for each sign type in Section 15.40.470 and design principles of Section 15.40.480.
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------------------------+-----------------+
|   Zoning Designation    |   Sign Types Allowed    |  # of Signs  |       Illumination       | Max. Cumulative |
|                         |                         | per Premises |                          |    Sign Area    |
|                         |                         |              |                          |     (Notes)     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------------------------+-----------------+
| Residential Zones       | Wall, hanging and       | 1            | Not allowed              | 20 square       |
| (R-1—R-4)               | suspended, freestanding |              |                          | feet            |
|                         | post, flags             |              |                          | Flags: see      |
|                         |                         |              |                          | 15.40.470(K)    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------------------------+-----------------+
| Office (O)              | All sign types          | 2            | External only Section    | 50 square       |
|                         | except pole signs       |              | 15.40.430                | feet            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------------------------+-----------------+
| Neighborhood Commercial | All sign types          | 2            | No internal illumination | 50 square       |
| (C-N)                   | except pole signs       |              | May be external          | feet            |
|                         |                         |              | only or include          |                 |
|                         |                         |              | low level backlit        |                 |
|                         |                         |              | signs behind opaque      |                 |
|                         |                         |              | surface                  |                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------------------------+-----------------+
| Retail Commercial       | All sign types          | 4            | See requirements         | 200 square      |
| (C-R), Downtown         | except pole and         |              | of Section 15.40.430     | feet            |
| Commercial (C-D),       | multi-tenant signs      |              | and 15.40.470(F)         |                 |
| Business Park (BP)      | in the C-D zone         |              | for monument signs       |                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------------------------+-----------------+
| Tourist Commercial      | All sign types          | 2            | See requirements         | 200 square      |
| (C-T), Service          | except projecting,      |              | of Section 15.40.430     | feet            |
| Commercial (C-S),       | pole, and multi-tenant  |              |                          |                 |
| Manufacturing (M)       | signs in the M          |              |                          |                 |
|                         | zone                    |              |                          |                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------------------------+-----------------+
| Public Facility         | All sign types          | 2            |                          | 100 square      |
| (PF), Community         | except projecting,      |              |                          | feet            |
| Commercial (C-C)        | pole, and multi-tenant  |              |                          |                 |
|                         | signs in the PF         |              |                          |                 |
|                         | zone                    |              |                          |                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------------------------+-----------------+
| Conservation to         | Wall, freestanding      | 2            | External only,           | 50 square       |
| Open Space (C/OS),      | post, monument,         |              | Section 15.40.430        | feet            |
| Agricultural (AG)       | hanging and suspended   |              |                          |                 |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------+--------------------------+-----------------+
(Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.470 Sign standards by sign type.
This section is intended to be used in conjunction with other standards contained in these sign regulations. Signs shall also comply with Section 15.40.430, Illumination. Each sign type shall also comply with design standards Section 15.40.480 in addition to design and quality requirements within the sign standards for each sign type within this section.
A. Wall Signs. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.470A_001.jpg>]Signage Guidelines
Wall signs include most types of signage that are attached to the face of a building wall. These include channel letters made out of wood, metal or plastic. Wall signs may be painted on a wall, or on a board that is attached to a wall. Wall signs should be oriented to achieve balanced composition and harmony with other architectural elements of a building facade. Wall signs should be placed on a flat building surface and should not be placed over or otherwise obscure architectural building features.
    1. Location and Number Permitted. Wall signs shall be located on a building face that has a public entrance (unless allowed, Section 15.40.420). One wall sign is permitted per wall face for each occupant, with up to two per occupant space where conditions of Section 15.40.420 are applicable. The maximum height of wall signs on multi-story buildings is the uppermost point of the second story unless additional height is approved through a sign program or exception as provided in Sections 15.40.485 and 15.40.600.
    2. Size. Wall signs may be a maximum of one hundred square feet or fifteen percent of the building face where the sign is attached, whichever is less. Wall signs shall not exceed maximum cumulative areas of Section 15.40.460. The building face area is determined by multiplying the length of the linear frontage of the tenant space or building by the average height of the tenant space or building.
    3. Illumination. Wall signs may be illuminated externally or internally consistent with Section 15.40.430 and the design standards set forth in subsection (A)(4) of this section.
    4. Design. Internally illuminated cabinet signs are prohibited in the downtown commercial district. Examples of allowed internally illuminated signs include backlighting, halo, or neon lit letters or emblems, channel letters, or logos. All wall signs shall consist of high-quality installations using a direct or flush mount without exposed wiring, raceways, or other stabilizing devices or mounts including backer mounts. Attachments shall be hidden from view in the least destructive manner possible. For masonry, attachments should be embedded into the mortar, not the brick or stone. Except as allowed herein, materials such as foam, poster board, or flat plastic which are usually associated with temporary signage are not appropriate.
        a. Balance and Proportion. Wall signs shall appear balanced and in proportion and scale with the building elevations which they are placed, and not obscure windows, or overwhelm architectural features such as pilasters and cornices (see examples shown below).
        [IMAGE: <15.40.470A_002.jpg>]
        b. Material. Unless approved as a temporary sign, wall signs shall not consist of materials such as foam, poster board, or flat plastic which are usually associated with temporary signage (see examples below).
        [IMAGE: <15.40.470A_003.jpg>]
    5. Zoning. Wall signs are allowed in all zoning districts.
B. Window Signs. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.470B.jpg>]Signage Guidelines
Window signs should be scaled to the pedestrian and oriented to window shoppers on the sidewalk, as opposed to vehicles passing by. Window signs should be limited to small graphics and text that serve to frame a window or to provide information. A window sign should not obscure the view into a store or place of business.
    1. Location and Number. There is no specific location requirement or limit to the number of window signs allowed. Window signs are located within thirty-six inches of the face of a window. Window displays, including merchandise displays, graphics and text, that are located more than thirty-six inches from the face of a window are not considered signs.
    2. Size. Window signs are limited to a maximum of twenty-four square feet or fifteen percent of the window area, whichever is less.
    3. Illumination. Window signs may be illuminated by any means consistent with Section 15.40.430.
    4. Zoning. Window signs are allowed in all commercial zoning districts.
C. Awning Signs. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.470C.jpg>]Signage Guidelines
Signs on awnings should be minimized and are only appropriate if there are no good alternatives for wall signs, projecting signs or hanging and suspended signs. Signage should be limited to the skirt of the awning and should not be on the awning face. Signs should only be considered for the awning face if there is no other adequate location for signage on a given storefront or property.
    1. Location and Number. Signs may be located on awnings subject to size criteria. One awning sign is permitted per tenant space and must maintain a minimum vertical and horizontal clearance requirement of Section 15.40.440.
    2. Size. Signs on awnings shall not cover more than twenty-five percent of the main area of the awning, or exceed twenty-five square feet in size, whichever is smaller.
    3. Illumination. Awning signs may be externally illuminated consistent with Section 15.40.430. Backlit, translucent awning signs are prohibited.
    4. Design. Graphics, logos, and signage language should have a quality integrated appearance and signage shall not be added to existing awnings with adhesive applications or other means of attaching a sign to the awning material. The awning material should incorporate a durable sign design and consist of long-lasting materials such as canvas or another durable outdoor fabric material.
    5. Zoning. Awning signs may be located in all commercial zones.
D. Projecting Signs. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.470D.jpg>]Signage Guidelines
Projecting signs are attached to a building face and project out perpendicular to the building wall. Projecting signs are very effective when oriented to pedestrians on the sidewalk level. Appropriate materials include wood and metal with carved or applied lettering, or any other material that is architecturally compatible with the building that the sign is attached to. Multiple projecting signs should not be installed within ten feet of each other if on the same property and should be separated from projecting signs on adjacent properties by ten feet to ensure proper visibility.
    1. Location and Number. Projecting signs must be attached to building facades that have a public entrance and must maintain minimum vertical and horizontal clearance requirements of Section 15.40.440. One projecting sign is allowed per tenant space. Multiple projecting signs shall not be installed within ten feet of each other if on the same property and shall be separated from projecting signs on adjacent properties or tenant spaces by ten feet to ensure proper visibility.
    2. Size. Projecting signs may have the following maximum areas:
        Office (O) zone: six feet.
        Neighborhood commercial (C-N) zone: twelve square feet.
        Downtown commercial (C-D) zone: twelve square feet.
        Community commercial (C-C) zone: twelve square feet.
        Retail commercial (C-R) zone: twenty-four square feet.
        Tourist commercial (C-T) zone: twenty-four square feet.
    3. Illumination. Projecting signs may be illuminated by any means consistent with Section 15.40.430.
    4. Design. Projecting signs shall attach to a building face and project out perpendicular to the building wall. Projecting signs are encouraged as an effective pedestrian scale sign. Appropriate materials include wood and metal with carved or applied lettering, or any other material that is architecturally compatible with the building that the sign is attached. Materials such as foam, poster board, or flat plastic which are usually associated with temporary signage are not appropriate.
    5. Zoning. Projecting signs are allowed in the O, C-N, C-D, C-C, C-R and C-T zoning districts only.
E. Hanging and Suspended Signs. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.470E.jpg>]Signage Guidelines
Hanging signs, or suspended signs, are used to help define entries and identify business names to pedestrians. They are small and can hang over a building entry if the appropriate clearance is provided. Hanging signs can be particularly useful for storefronts that have multiple tenants.
    1. Location and Number. Hanging or suspended signs shall be attached to building facades that have a public entrance and must maintain minimum vertical and horizontal clearance requirements of Section 15.40.440. One hanging or suspended sign is allowed per tenant space.
    2. Size. Hanging signs may have a maximum area of eight square feet.
    3. Illumination. Hanging signs and suspended signs may be externally illuminated consistent with Section 15.40.430.
    4. Design. Hanging and suspended signs are intended as pedestrian scale signs used to help define entries. Materials shall be durable and made of quality materials such as wood or metal to convey a sense of quality and permanence. Materials such as foam, poster board, or flat plastic which are usually associated with temporary signage are prohibited.
    5. Zoning. Hanging and suspended signs are allowed in all zoning districts.
F. Monument Signs. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.470F.jpg>]Signage Guidelines
Monument signs are typically used where building setbacks, orientation or design make it difficult to provide other types of signage, such as wall signs, that are plainly visible to people that are trying to identify a use. Monument signs have a solid base that the sign face is installed upon. These signs should be designed so that the style of the sign and its base are consistent with the architecture of the buildings on the site. They are typically oriented perpendicular to the adjacent street and sidewalk and have a maximum of two parallel sign faces. Monument signs provide opportunities for landscaping to enhance their appearance.
    1. Location and Number Permitted. Monument signs may be located in required street yards in all commercial districts and the public facility (PF) zone, subject to the approval of the community development and public works directors, as provided for in Section 15.40.410. Only one monument sign is permitted per premises, per street frontage.
    2. Size and Height. Monument signs may be a maximum of twenty-four square feet. The maximum height of a monument sign is six feet from the average natural grade at the base of the sign. In the C-R (retail commercial) and C-D (downtown commercial) zoning districts, the maximum size of a monument sign is twelve square feet and the maximum height is four feet. Where two or more uses are located on the same premises, the sign area for monument signs must be shared. The largest single sign face is used to calculate the area of monument signs.
    3. Illumination. If illumination of monument signs is desired, then external illumination or halo lighting is preferred. Internally illuminated monument signs downtown shall be consistent with Section 15.40.430. Internal illumination of monument signs as shown below are not allowed in the office (O) or neighborhood commercial (C-N) zone.
    [IMAGE: <15.40.470F_002.jpg>]
    4. Design. Monument signs shall be designed to be compatible with the architecture of the buildings on site with a solid base and background with a maximum of two parallel sides. Materials should be durable and made of quality materials such as wood or metal to convey a sense of quality and permanence. Materials such as foam, poster board, or flat plastic which are usually associated with temporary signage are not permitted.
G. Freestanding Post Signs. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.470G.jpg>]Signage Guidelines
Freestanding post signs are primarily used to identify office uses, especially where a former residence has been converted into an office. They are similar to monument signs, except they do not have a base other than the support posts, they usually have a single sign face, and they are usually oriented parallel to the sidewalk instead of perpendicular. The colors and materials used for the sign must be compatible with the associated building design. Lettering should be carved, routed or applied as opposed to painted on a flat board.
    1. Location and Number. Freestanding post signs may be located in required street yards, subject to the approval of the community development and public works directors, as provided for in Section 15.40.410. Only one freestanding post sign is permitted per premises, per street frontage.
    2. Size and Height. The maximum sign area for freestanding post signs is twenty square feet. Freestanding post signs shall not be taller than six feet, measured from average natural grade at the base of the sign to the top of the sign structure. Where two or more uses are located on the same premises, the sign area for freestanding post signs must be shared.
    3. Illumination. Freestanding post signs may be externally illuminated consistent with Section 15.40.430.
    4. Design. Colors and materials used for the sign construction shall include complementary colors and materials with the associated building design and the size and scale of the signs shall not detract or be out of character with the surrounding neighborhood. Materials should be durable and made of quality materials such as wood or metal to convey a sense of quality and permanence. Materials such as foam, poster board, or flat plastic which are usually associated with temporary signage are not permitted.
    5. Zoning. Freestanding post signs are allowed in all zoning districts.
H. Pole and Pylon Signs. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.470H.jpg>]Signage Guidelines
Pole signs are primarily intended to communicate with people in automobiles. The sign structure is typically located on a single pole, but other types of supports may be used.
    1. Location and Number. Pole and pylon signs may be located along arterial streets and must not impact the line of sight of people in cars to pedestrians or other vehicles in the street right-of-way. They must be located outside of required yard or setback areas, unless an exception is approved by the director during review of the sign design, as provided for by Section 15.40.410. One pole sign is permitted per premises along an arterial street frontage.
    2. Size. Pole signs may have a maximum height of sixteen feet and a maximum area of seventy-two square feet measured from the average natural grade of the ground immediately beneath the sign. Where two or more uses are located on the same premises, the sign area for pole signs must be shared on a single sign.
    3. Illumination. Pole signs may be illuminated by any means consistent with Section 15.40.430, and subject to approval by the director of the lighting design.
    4. Design. Colors and materials used for the sign construction shall include complementary colors and materials with the associated building design.
    5. Zoning. Pole signs are allowed in the C-R (retail commercial), C-S (service commercial) and C-T (tourist commercial) zones only along designated arterial routes as identified in the circulation element of the general plan, subject to the approval of the director.
I. A-Frame (Sandwich-Board) Signs. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.470I.jpg>]Signage Guidelines
Sandwich-board signs can be effective for certain types of uses, such as markets, restaurants or bakeries that have changing specials and menus. These signs may have rewritable surfaces, such as chalk boards or dry-erase boards.
    1. Location and Number. A-frame (sandwich-board) signs are prohibited in the public right-of-way and must be placed on private property. Sandwich-board signs may be located in required street yards for any given zone, subject to the approval of the community development director, as provided for in Section 15.40.410. They may be placed in a front yard or in a foyer, portico, or other building entry provided they do not interfere with pedestrian ingress or egress as required by the building code. Only one sandwich-board sign is permitted per tenant space.
    2. Size. Sandwich-board signs may have a maximum area of eight square feet and a maximum height of four feet, measured from the ground to the top of the sign structure.
    3. Illumination. Sandwich-board signs may not be illuminated.
    4. Design. Signs must be made of durable materials designed to withstand exterior conditions such as smooth particle board, medium density fiberboard, or plywood.
    5. Zoning. Sandwich-board signs are allowed in all commercial zones.
J. Shopping Center (or Multi-Tenant) Identification Signs. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.470J.jpg>]Signage Guidelines
Shopping center identification signs should be compatible with the design theme of the development. They may identify multiple tenants, but larger shopping centers with more than five tenants should avoid listing individual tenants, other than the project anchors, to avoid sign clutter. The sign structure should contain elements of the design theme of the buildings in the center.
    1. Location and Number. One shopping center identification sign may be located on each major street frontage of a development subject to approval of the director.
    2. Size. Shopping center identification signs for new developments shall be reviewed as part of the development application consistent with Section 15.40.485, Sign programs.
    3. Illumination. Shopping center identification signs may be illuminated consistent with Section 15.40.430. Shopping center identification signs shall not incorporate internally illuminated cabinet signs.
    4. Design. Shopping center identification signs shall be compatible with the colors, materials, and design theme of the development. Multi-tenant centers with more than five tenants shall only list the main anchor tenants with no more than five listed. Multi-tenant signs which list an excessive number of individual tenants can result in sign clutter.
    5. Zoning. Shopping center identification signs shall only be permitted in the C-S, C-C or C-R zoning districts.
K. Flags. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.470K.jpg>]
    1. Location and Number. Flagpoles shall be located outside of required setback areas. Only one flagpole is permitted per premises. Flagpoles consistent with this section and Section 15.40.200(K) do not require a sign permit but may require building permits. In residential zoning districts wall-mounted flags which do not project above the roofline are exempt from permit requirements.
    2. Size. The size (dimensions) of the flag shall be commensurate with the height and diameter of the pole, per recommended industry standards. The maximum height of the flag or pole which the flag is mounted to is the same as the maximum height for structures, as provided in the zoning regulations. Height and size standards for flags are shown in the table below:
    +---------------------+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
    |             Ground Set Poles             |            Roof-Mounted Poles             |
    +---------------------+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
    | Exposed Pole Height | Flag Dim. and Size | Exposed Pole Height | Flag Size (sq. ft.) |
    | (ft.)               | (sq. ft.)          | (ft.)               |                     |
    +---------------------+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
    | 15—20               | 3 x 5              | 15                  | 4 x 6               |
    +---------------------+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
    | 25                  | 4 x 6              | 20—30               | 5 x 8               |
    +---------------------+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
    | 30—35               | 5 x 8              | 35—40               | 6 x 10              |
    +---------------------+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
    | 40—45               | 6 x 10             | 45—50               | 8 x 12              |
    +---------------------+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
    | 50                  | 8 x 12             | 50—60               | 9 x 15              |
    +---------------------+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
    3. Illumination. Flags may be illuminated by any means consistent with Section 15.40.430.
    4. Zoning. Flags may be located in all zoning districts, subject to conformance with the above size and pole height criteria.
L. Directory Signs. 
[IMAGE: <15.40.470L.jpg>]Signage Guidelines
Directory signs are used for multi-tenant buildings to provide a directory of tenant locations within the building. They may also serve as the address sign for the property. Directory signs are small scale and are oriented to pedestrians.
    1. Location and Number. Directory signs may be freestanding or may be fixed on an exterior wall if the building has no setback. One directory sign may be permitted per premises.
    2. Size. Directory signs may be no larger than twelve square feet in area, and individual letters may not exceed six inches in height.
    3. Illumination. Directory signs may be illuminated by any means consistent with Section 15.40.430.
    4. Design. Directory signs are intended for multi-tenant buildings to provide visibility and guidance for pedestrians in locating tenant suites. Directory signs are small scale and oriented to pedestrians.
    5. Zoning. Directory signs are allowed in all zoning districts. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.480 Design principles.
In addition to meeting all criteria of Section 15.40.470, all signs shall be found consistent with the following design principles:
A. Architectural Compatibility. A sign’s scale shall be appropriate for the building on which it is placed and the area where it is located on the building. Signs shall integrate with the design of the building and incorporate materials, colors, and shapes that complement the building’s architectural style.
B. Scale, Proportions to Building and Placement. Signs shall be in scale with the building and not cover or obscure architectural details or ornamentation of a building’s facade. The outer perimeter of signs shall not extend beyond the limits of the architectural feature of the building on which it is installed and should include some separation to the edge of the feature.
C. Sign Quality and Installation Methods. Signs shall be made of durable materials designed to withstand the elements, such as wood or metal to convey a sense of quality and permanence. Unless approved as a temporary sign, signs shall not be made of plastic, plywood, or pressed board. Materials such as foam, poster board, or flat plastic which are usually associated with temporary signage are prohibited.
D. Community Design Guidelines. Signs are an integral review component of the community design guidelines. The community design guidelines has a specific chapter addressing signs including appropriate design, details, scale, location, consistency, types, illumination, and materials.
E. Historic Resources and Districts. Signs on historic buildings and/or in historic districts shall be compatible with the architectural character of the structure and not detract from the character of the resource or the district it is located in. Sign installations on historically designated buildings or which are eligible for historic listing shall comply with recommendations of the Secretary of Interior Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties.
F. Residential Zones, C-N Zone, and Office Zone. Signs shall not include internal illumination of any type, or signs typically designed for internal illumination such as channel letters, marquees, or cabinets. Bases, framing, and sign mounting and presentation methods shall use materials that are compatible with the architecture of the building on the parcel which they are located. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.485 Sign programs.
Sign programs are required for new commercial, office, and/or mixed-use projects in order to establish ongoing sign requirements and to ensure the signage is complementary and compatible with the development and surrounding neighborhood or commercial district. Sign programs create a coordinated set of standards for signs on properties with multiple buildings or tenants and establish uniform sign design elements such as size, color, materials, lighting, and placement on the property. Applications for new commercial, office and/or mixed-use projects shall include schematic plans for signage sufficient to demonstrate signs will be compatible with the project and surroundings. Conditions of approval may require a subsequent final sign program submittal subject to the approval of the community development director. Modifications to sign programs may be referred to the ARC as determined by the director with final decision being made by the director. Sign programs may supersede sections of these sign regulations (Sections 15.40.460 and 15.40.470). The purpose of sign programs is to provide for project specific designs and sign accommodations that take into account compatible and appropriate signage which can be reviewed concurrently with the review of building designs and site layout. Sign programs are not intended to primarily provide for additional signage than would otherwise be allowed and may not provide for approval of otherwise prohibited sign types. In order to approve a sign program, the community development director shall make findings that the sign program results in signage that is compatible with the development, complementary to project architecture, and coordinated among tenant spaces for consistency and superior design. Prior to submitting a sign permit application to the building division under a sign program, the program must have been approved and all appeal periods must have expired. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

Article V. Sign Permits—Application and Processing Procedures

15.40.500 Permit required.
No sign shall be constructed, maintained, displayed or altered without a sign permit obtained as provided in this chapter, unless the sign is specifically exempted from permit requirements. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.510 Sign permit application—Contents.
Any person desiring to construct, repair, alter or display a sign for which a permit is required shall submit an application and associated fees, established by resolution of the city council, to the community development department.
Such application shall include descriptive material sufficient to enable evaluation of the proposal’s conformance with the sign regulations including at least the following items:
A. A complete construction permit application and supplemental sign permit worksheet.
B. A site plan showing existing improvements and proposed sign locations.
C. A detailed plan of the proposed signage, including dimensions and method of illumination, if any.
D. Samples and descriptions of the proposed sign’s colors and materials.
E. Photographs of all existing signage and of the building faces or site areas where signage is proposed.
The community development department staff will review all sign permit applications for completeness and consistency with these regulations. Staff will notify the applicant within fifteen days if architectural review or an administrative use permit is required. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.520 Architectural review application.
When review is required by the architectural review commission, a separate application for such review together with fees, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be filed with the community development department. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.530 Level of review and action by the director.
Within fifteen working days after receiving a complete application for a sign permit, which does not require architectural review or the issuance of other permits, the community development director shall forward the sign permit application to the chief building official for issuance. The director may impose only such conditions as will assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Any sign not specified in this chapter for review by the architectural review commission, community development director, or planning commission, which does not, in the determination of the community development director, comply with these sign regulations, or with requirements of Section 15.40.470 or design principles of Section 15.40.480, may be denied consistent with Section 15.40.550. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.540 Permit issuance.
The chief building official shall be responsible for issuance of sign permits, determination of compliance with building code requirements, and inspection of installation. No sign permit shall be issued until other required permits and approvals, including architectural review, have been issued and granted, and any associated appeal periods have expired. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.550 Denial.
Denial of a sign permit application shall be based on specific findings explaining how the proposed sign fails to satisfy the evaluation criteria above or other provisions of these regulations. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.560 Appeals.
A. Community Development Director Decisions. 
    1. Appeal Body. Any discretionary decision of the community development director authorized by these regulations may be appealed to the planning commission.
    2. Filing Time. Appeals must be filed in writing at the community development department within ten calendar days of the director’s decision. If the tenth day is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the appeal period shall extend to the next use day.
    3. Public Hearing. Once an appeal has been filed, it shall be considered at the earliest available planning commission meeting, considering public notification requirements.
B. Planning Commission Decisions. Any decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the procedures set out in Chapter 1.20. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

Article VI. Exceptions to Sign Standards

15.40.600 Requests for exceptions.
Unusual site conditions or other design factors may warrant signs not otherwise permitted by these regulations. A sign permit application which includes a request for exceptions to standards established by these regulations is subject to approval by the community development director review consistent with Section 15.40.480 and may be subject to review by the ARC as determined by the director. Exceptions require a separate application and fees for ARC or community development director review, which must be approved before a sign permit will be issued. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.610 Findings for approval of an exception.
Exceptions to the sign regulations must meet all of the following findings:
A. There are unusual circumstances applying to the property which make strict adherence to the regulations impractical or infeasible, such as building configuration, historic architectural features, architectural style, site layout, intervening obstructions, or other unusual circumstances. Exceptions shall not allow for additional signage in number or size beyond what is necessary to compensate for the unusual circumstances. Unusual circumstances may also include sign designs which are not expressly provided for or exempted in this chapter, but which represent superior or innovative design appropriate for the building and location.
B. The exception is consistent with the intent and purpose of the sign regulations (see Section 15.40.110) and the exception is not being granted in cases where alternative options of allowed signage in this chapter could provide an adequate alternative for sufficient visibility to the public with equal or superior design.
C. The sign exception is for superior design and complies with design principles of this chapter, and will not result in: visual clutter; excessively sized signage in comparison to the building or surroundings; signage that is inconsistent with the character of the surroundings; or approval of signs that are prohibited in this chapter. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

Article VII. Sign Maintenance and Abandonment

15.40.700 Maintaining signs.
All signs must be maintained in the same condition as when the sign was installed. Normal wear and tear of aged signs shall be repaired when they detract from the visible quality of the sign, as determined by the community development director. When signs are repaired, they must be done so in a manner (paint colors shall match, etc.) that is consistent with the approved sign permit. When signs are removed, the wall behind the sign shall be repaired and painted to match the rest of the building wall. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.720 Unsafe signs.
Any sign that, in the opinion of the chief building official or the public works director, is unsafe or insecure shall be deemed an unsafe sign and shall be corrected or removed, together with any supporting structure, by the owner of the property on which the sign is located, within seventy-two hours of written notice by the community development department. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

Article VIII. Nonconforming Signs

15.40.800 Existing nonconforming signs.
Signs not compliant with this chapter which previously lawfully existed as conforming signs or legal nonconforming signs under sign regulations established by Ordinance 1455 and subsequent ordinances amending this chapter prior to 2018 shall be deemed legal nonconforming signs. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.840 Removal of nonconforming signs.
A. Removal of Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signs shall not be altered, enlarged, relocated, and/or reconstructed, and shall be removed if:
    1. The nonconforming sign is more than fifty percent destroyed, and the destruction is other than facial copy replacement. A nonconforming sign shall be deemed to be more than fifty percent destroyed if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds fifty percent of the replacement value as determined by the chief building official;
    2. The nonconforming sign is located on a building that is enlarged, remodeled, or expanded, if the nonconforming sign is affected by the construction, enlargement, remodel, or expansion. An enlargement, remodel, or expansion of the portion of the building upon which the nonconforming sign is located or that is more than fifty percent of the building area shall be deemed to affect the nonconforming sign;
    3. The nonconforming sign is temporary.
B. Deactivation of Flashing Features. The owner of a sign that contains flashing features shall permanently deactivate the flashing features.
C. Continuance of Nonconforming Signs. Except as provided in subsections A and B of this section, a nonconforming sign may be continued and shall be maintained in good condition as required by these regulations; provided, that it shall not be:
    1. Structurally changed to another nonconforming sign, although the content of the sign may be changed.
    2. Structurally altered to prolong the life of the sign, except to meet safety requirements.
    3. Expanded or altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity.
D. Repairing and Repainting. Nonconforming signs shall only be painted and repaired in place and shall not be removed from their existing location, except as part of a building remodel, unless removal of the sign for painting or repair is part of the sign’s customary maintenance and repair. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

Article IX. Enforcement

15.40.900 Type of offense.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Violations shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.12. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or constituted to prevent the city from commencing any civil proceeding otherwise authorized by law for the declaration or abatement of a public nuisance. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

15.40.910 Public nuisance.
If the owner of any premises fails or neglects to comply with the provisions of this chapter, it shall constitute a public nuisance, pursuant to Chapter 8.24. Any aggrieved party may, in addition to any other right or remedy they may possess either at law or in equity, pursue a private cause of action to abate a public nuisance, as specified in Chapter 8.24. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

Article X. Definitions

15.40.1000 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the indicated meanings:
“A-frame sign (aka sandwich-board sign)” means a temporary, portable, and freestanding sign composed of two panels hinged at the top and capable of standing on its own without external support or attachment.
“ARC” or “architectural review commission” means the commission with the jurisdiction to perform architectural review, per Chapter 2.48. When these sign regulations refer specifically to the ARC or architectural review commission, review by the commission is required.
“Architectural review” refers to the architectural review process authorized by Section 2.48.090.
“Attention-getting sign” means any sign with moving parts, flashing lights, and/or neon colors, or signs incorporating pennants, streamers, large helium balloons or any similar visual device used for the purpose of drawing attention.
“Backlit (halo letters)” means the letters or graphics have an opaque face with where only the back of the sign is illuminated. These signs are also often referred to as “reverse channel letters.”
“Banner sign” means a flexible sign including feather banners and pennants of lightweight fabric or similar material typically supported at two or more points and hung on a building or otherwise suspended down or across its face, or across a public right-of-way. This definition does not include flags as defined by this article.
“Blade sign” means a double-sided sign oriented perpendicular to the building wall on which it is mounted. (See “Projecting sign.”)
“Building face” means the whole of a building visible in an elevation view, excluding sloped roof surfaces.
“Building frontage” means the linear measurement of exterior walls enclosing interior spaces which are oriented to and most nearly parallel to public streets, public alleys, parking lots, malls or freeways.
“Cabinet sign” means an internally illuminated sign consisting of frame and face(s), with a translucent message panel in an enclosed case; also referred to as a panel sign. Cabinet signs are typically internally illuminated with a plastic or plexi-glass face.
“Changeable copy sign” means a sign displaying a message that is changed by means of moveable letters, slats, lights, light emitting diodes, or moveable background material.
“Channel letter sign” means a sign with multiple components, each built in the shape of an individual dimensional letter or symbol, each of which may be independently illuminated, with a separate translucent panel over the letter source for each element.
“Channel letters” means three-dimensional individual letters or figures typically made of formed metal, usually with an acrylic face, with an open back or front, illuminated or nonilluminated, that are affixed to a building or to a freestanding sign structure by sliding the letters into channels.
“Commercial speech or commercial message” means a message on a sign which identifies, advertises, or directs attention to a business or is intended to induce a purchase of a good, property, or service, including, without limitation, any sign naming a brand of good or service.
“Commercial zone” refers to all nonresidential zones, regardless of how the property is actually used.
“Digital display” means a display method utilizing light emitting diode (LED), liquid crystal display (LCD), plasma display, projected images, or any functionally equivalent technology, and which is capable of automated, remote or computer control to change the image, either in a “slide show” manner (series of still images), or full motion animation, or any combination of them.
“Directory sign” means a freestanding or wall sign that identifies all businesses and other establishments located within a commercial or industrial complex or an institutional establishment.
“Electronic message center or electronic message display” means a sign that uses digital display to present variable messages displayed by projecting an electronically controlled pattern and which can be programmed to periodically change the message display.
“Feather banner” means a type of vertical banner made of flexible materials, (e.g., cloth, paper, or plastic), the longer dimension of which is typically attached to a pole or rod that is driven into the ground or supported by an individual stand. Also called a “swooper” or “teardrop” banner. Also known as quill signs or quill banners.
“Flag” means a piece of fabric or other flexible material, usually rectangular, of distinctive design, used as a symbol, which is capable of movement, or fluttering in moving air or wind.
“Freestanding sign” means a sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and which are structurally independent from any building including “monument signs,” “pole signs,” and “pylon signs.” (Also called ground signs.)
“Frontage” is the horizontal distance along a lot line adjacent to a public street, or the side of a lot adjacent to a public street. (See “Building frontage.”)
Halo-Lit. (See “Backlit” definition.)
“Height” of a sign is the vertical distance from average grade (ground level) immediately below the sign to the top of the sign—including the support structure and any projecting design elements.
“Illegal sign” is any sign which does not meet the requirements of this code and which has not received legal, nonconforming status.
“Illuminated sign” means a sign that is illuminated with an artificial source of light incorporated internally or externally. Also called a lighted sign.
“Major street frontage” is any arterial road shown in the city’s circulation element.
“Mobile billboard advertising display” means an advertising display that is attached to a mobile, nonmotorized vehicle, device, or bicycle, that carries, pulls, or transports a sign or billboard, and is for the primary purpose of advertising, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 395.5. See Section 15.40.300, Prohibited signs.
“Monument sign” means a low-profile freestanding sign erected upon or supported solely by a planter, pedestal base, or similar ground structure approximately the same width as the sign and which is designed to incorporate the architectural theme and building material of the building on the premises. Internal supports, poles or pylons, if any, are enclosed by decorative covers or otherwise not exposed to view.
“Mural” means a one-of-kind, hand-painted, hand-tiled, or digitally printed image on the exterior of a building that does not contain any commercial message advertising a business, services rendered, or goods produced or sold. Murals are not regulated under this chapter but may be subject to the city’s public art program.
“Nonconforming sign” is a sign which was erected legally, but which does not now comply with these subsequently enacted sign regulations.
“Nonresidential zone” is any zone other than the R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 zone, regardless of how the property is actually used.
“Off-premises sign” means a sign that advertises commercial products, accommodations, services or activities not provided in or on the property or premises upon which it is located.
“Outdoor advertising display” is a sign, such as a billboard, that advertises a product or display.
“Pennant” means an attention-seeking device made of flexible materials, (e.g., cloth, paper, or plastic) that is typically triangular or swallow-tail in shape and may or may not contain copy.
“Permanent sign” means a sign that is solidly attached to a building, structure, or the ground by means of mounting brackets, bolts, welds, or other combination of attachment methods, thereby rendering the sign nonmoveable or difficult to reposition without the use of machinery, cutting devices, or mechanical devices. Contrast: temporary sign.
“Pole sign” means a freestanding sign that is supported by one or more exposed poles that are permanently attached directly into or upon the ground.
“Post sign” means a low-profile freestanding sign supported by posts that has a single sign face and is generally oriented parallel to the public right-of-way.
“Premises” means a lot or series of lots under common ownership and/or developed together as a single development site, regardless of how many uses occupy the site.
“Projecting sign” means a building wall sign, the surface of which is not parallel to the face of the supporting wall and which is supported wholly by the wall. See “Blade sign.”
“Public entrance” means one or more places of entry to a premises that are accessible to the general public.
“Pylon sign” means a freestanding sign that is supported and in direct contact with the ground or one or more solid, monumental structures or pylons and which typically has a sign face with a vertical dimension that is greater than its horizontal dimension.
Reverse Channel Letters. (See “Backlit” definition.)
“Roof sign” is any sign where any part of the sign is on or over any portion of any roof, eave, or parapet of a building or structure.
Sandwich-Board Sign. (See “A-frame sign” definition.)
“Shopping (or multi-tenant) center identification sign” means a freestanding sign that identifies the name of the shopping center and lists its tenants.
“Sign” means a structure, device, figure, display, message placard or other contrivance, or any part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is designed, constructed, intended or used to advertise, provide information in the nature of advertising, ideological, political, or social information, or direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, business, product, service, message, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, or illumination.
“Sign area” or “area of sign” is the number of square feet within which an individual sign face can be enclosed, as defined by Section 15.40.400.
“Sign face” is the visible portion of the sign, including all characters, symbols, and structural or nonstructural background (e.g., cabinet frame or painted border), but not including the base of a pole sign, monument sign, or freestanding sign.
“Storefront” is a distinct architectural feature that is immediately accessible from a public sidewalk and consisting of window displays and entry doors to one or more uses.
“Street right-of-way” means any road or other public place, including but not limited to a highway, alley, street, avenue, place, sidewalk, parkway (i.e., planted or landscaped area between a curb and the edge of a sidewalk), path, walk, park, plaza, boulevard, right-of-way or any other public place in the city whether or not currently improved.
“Temporary sign” is a sign that is temporary in nature and that is displayed for no more than one hundred twenty days within any three-hundred-sixty-five-day period.
“Tenant’s building face” is that portion of the building face enclosing the area of the building occupied by the tenant. In multi-tenant buildings with interior tenant spaces, each tenant’s building face shall be the proportionate share of the building face enclosing the area occupied by all tenants.
“V sign” is a sign consisting of two, essentially equal, sign faces positioned at an angle less than one hundred eighty degrees rather than parallel to each other.
“Window display” is a sign, window display, merchandise display, graphics and text, or lifestyle graphics that are painted on, hung, or attached to a window, or displayed visibly in any way so as to be viewed or legible from outside the window or structure. (Ord. 1667 § 3(2) (Exh. A (part)), 2019)

Chapter 15.44 EXCAVATION AND GRADING
(Repealed by Ord. 1213)

Chapter 15.48 SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS

Sections:
15.48.010    Intent.
15.48.020    Application of provisions.
15.48.030    Definitions.
15.48.040    Placards.

15.48.010 Intent.
This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure, following an earthquake or other destructive event, for continued occupancy. The chapter further authorizes the chief building official and his or her authorized representatives to post the appropriate placard at each entry to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. (Ord. 1502 § 1 (part), 2007)

15.48.020 Application of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the city of San Luis Obispo. The council may extend the provisions as necessary. (Ord. 1502 § 1 (part), 2007)

15.48.030 Definitions.
“Safety assessment” is a visual, nondestructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued use. (Ord. 1502 § 1 (part), 2007)

15.48.040 Placards.
A. The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate the condition for occupancy of buildings or structures.
    1. “Inspected – Lawful Occupancy Permitted” is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.
    2. “Restricted Use” is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restriction on continued occupancy.
    3. “Unsafe – Do Not Enter or Occupy” is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstances except as authorized in writing by the chief building official or his or her authorized representative. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered.
B. The placard must display the number of the ordinance codified in this chapter, name, address and phone number of the jurisdiction.
C. Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the chief building official. Pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard unless authorized pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1502 § 1 (part), 2007)

Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS

Chapters:
16.01        General Processing Overview for Subdivision Projects
16.02        General Provisions
16.04        Review Authority
16.08        Types of Maps Required
16.10        Tentative Maps
16.12        Vesting Tentative Maps
16.14        Parcel and Final Maps
16.16        Certificates, Adjustments and Mergers
16.17        Common Interest Subdivisions and Condominium Conversions
16.18        General Subdivision Design Standards
16.20        Physical Improvement Standards and Procedures
16.22        Dedications
16.23        Exceptions, Appeals, and Application Resubmittal
16.24        Violations and Enforcement
16.26        Definitions

Chapter 16.01 GENERAL PROCESSING OVERVIEW FOR SUBDIVISION PROJECTS

Sections:
16.01.010    General processing overview for subdivision projects.

16.01.010 General processing overview for subdivision projects.
A. Why Regulate Subdivisions? Property lines, parks and open spaces establish a community’s long-term development pattern, and distinguish the physical identity of one community from another. In California, local governments are required by law (the Subdivision Map Act) to adopt an ordinance regulating subdivisions within that agency’s jurisdiction. Subdivision regulations help determine who will pay for the public improvements needed to accommodate growth and help ensure the creation and preservation of adequate land records. They also protect consumers and the environment by establishing design and improvement standards for lot size, building spacing, drainage, access, resource buffer zones, provision of utilities, and solar access.
B. General Summary of San Luis Obispo’s Review Procedures. A summary of the city’s procedure for handling subdivision projects is included below. It provides an overview of the steps typically involved in subdividing a parcel of land:
    1. The applicant submits an initial application, tentative map and processing fees to the community development department. The Subdivision Map Act requires most subdivision maps to be prepared by a licensed surveyor or registered civil engineer authorized to practice land survey activities.
    2. City staff, and sometimes staff from other agencies, review the application for completeness. Staff will notify the applicant when the project is ready for processing or that additional information is necessary.
    3. For projects that are subject to environmental review under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), a separate application and fee is required and staff will prepare an initial study to identify potential environmental impacts and recommended mitigation. If the project can be modified to avoid significant impacts, a negative declaration (ND), or mitigated negative declaration (MND) is prepared. If significant negative impacts cannot be avoided by modifying the project or adding mitigation measures as conditions of subdivision approval, an environmental impact report (EIR) must be prepared.
    4. Once applications are complete and CEQA requirements for environmental review, if any, have been met, staff evaluates the project to see if it meets the design and improvement standards specified by these regulations and prepares a report with a recommendation for project approval or denial. The project is then scheduled for action. Depending on the type of subdivision, the community development director, the planning commission, or the city council will review the subdivision. The subdivision proposal may be approved, denied, or approved subject to conditions. Conditions may include (but are not limited to) dedication of land, physical improvements to the site or to an off-site location, street improvements, and provision of utilities.
    5. If approved, the applicant will need to file a final or parcel map (or other documents and exhibits for recordation) to the public works department. Maps and documents are recorded with the county recorder’s office once all required subdivision improvements have been completed or bonded for, and all conditions of project approval have been met or ensured. Time limits for submitting required material or completing conditions of approval are discussed in Section 16.10.050. Recordation of the map is usually the final process that establishes the subdivision.
Note: Application requirements are described in detail in Chapters 16.10 through 16.17. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
16.02.005    Purpose of provisions.
16.02.010    Title and authority.
16.02.020    Purpose.
16.02.030    Conformity to general plan, specific plans and zoning regulations.
16.02.040    Interpretation and application.
16.02.050    Projects subject to city subdivision regulations.
16.02.060    Projects excluded from subdivision regulations.
16.02.070    Processing fees.
16.02.080    Withdrawal of application.
16.02.090    Effect of annexation.
16.02.100    Conflict with public provisions.
16.02.110    Conflict with private provisions.
16.02.120    Actions by persons with interest.

16.02.005 Purpose of provisions.
This chapter describes the authority, purpose, applicability, and other general provisions of these regulations. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.02.010 Title and authority.
A. The title of this title of the municipal code shall be known and cited as the “subdivision regulations of the city.”
B. Nothing in this title shall be read to limit the right of the city, as a charter city, to enact additional provisions concerning the division of land as are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
C. Approval or conditional approval of a subdivision map shall not excuse applicants from meeting other applicable provisions of this code or other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations and policies adopted by the city. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.02.020 Purpose.
These regulations are adopted to supplement and implement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act pertaining to the design, improvements and survey data of subdivisions, as a “local ordinance” as that term is used in that act. All provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and future amendments thereto not incorporated in these regulations shall apply to all subdivisions, subdivision maps and proceedings under the following regulations.
Additionally, the regulations codified in this title are adopted for the following purposes:
A. To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare;
B. To guide the development of the city in accordance with the general plan and specific plans;
C. To ensure that real property, which is to be divided, can be used without danger to inhabitants or property due to fire, flood, soil instability, noise or other hazard;
D. To ensure that proper provision will be made for traffic circulation, public utilities, facilities, and other improvements within the subdivided land and within the city as a whole pursuant to the circulation element of the general plan;
E. To protect and enhance the value of land and improvements and to minimize conflicts among the uses of land and buildings;
F. To protect potential buyers and inhabitants by establishing standards of design, and by establishing procedures which ensure proper legal description and monumenting of subdivided land;
G. To protect the natural and cultural resources of the community, including topographic and geologic features, historic sites and structures, solar exposure, watercourses, wildlife habitats and scenic vistas, and to provide reasonable public access to such resources;
H. To enable innovations in subdivision procedures which facilitate development that will best reflect the capability of the land to support a desirable living environment. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.02.030 Conformity to general plan, specific plans and zoning regulations.
No land shall be subdivided and developed for any purpose which is not in conformity with the general plan and any specific plan of the city or permitted by the zoning regulations or other applicable provisions of the municipal code. The type and intensity of land use as shown on the general plan shall determine the type of streets, roads, highways, utilities and public services that shall be provided by the subdivider. The subdivision regulations are an implementation tool for general plan policy. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.02.040 Interpretation and application.
In their interpretation and application, these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.02.050 Projects subject to city subdivision regulations.
The regulations shall apply to all parts of subdivisions within the city of San Luis Obispo and to the preparation of subdivision maps and to other maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act. Except as noted in this section, each subdivision and each part thereof lying within the city shall be made and each map shall be prepared and presented for approval as provided for and required by these regulations. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.02.060 Projects excluded from subdivision regulations.
The following are not considered subdivisions and are therefore excluded from tentative and parcel or final map requirements:
A. The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks.
B. Mineral, oil, or gas leases.
C. Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the State Health and Safety Code.
D. A lot line adjustment between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels, where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created.
E. Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code for community apartment or cooperative housing projects.
F. The conversion of a residential community apartment project or a stock cooperative to a condominium if the requirements of Sections 66412(g) and (h) of the Subdivision Map Act are met.
G. The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion, for the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel, when the project is subject to planned development or use permit approval pursuant to the zoning regulations.
H. The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel.
I. The construction, financing or leasing of second residential units pursuant to the zoning regulations.
J. Leasing for agricultural purposes, cultivation of food or fiber, and grazing or pasturing of livestock.
K. Leasing of, or grant of easement to, a parcel of land, or any portion or portions of land, for financing, erection, and sale or lease of a wind-powered electrical generation device which is subject to discretionary action by the city. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.02.070 Processing fees.
A fee, established by resolution of the city council, is required for all applications and plan checks required or permitted by this title or the Subdivision Map Act. A list of application fees is available in the community development and public works departments. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.02.080 Withdrawal of application.
Requests for withdrawal of a subdivision application shall be submitted in writing to the community development director. Refunds, if due, will be based on the amount of work completed at the time of withdrawal request. No refunds will be granted following publication of the first staff report for the applicable subdivision hearing. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.02.090 Effect of annexation.
Any subdivision subject to annexation to the city shall comply with the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.02.100 Conflict with public provisions.
These regulations are not intended to annul any other law or regulation. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other regulation or law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.02.110 Conflict with private provisions.
These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction. Where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards, and such private provisions are not inconsistent with these regulations or determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.02.120 Actions by persons with interest.
When any provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or of these regulations require the execution of any certificate or affidavit or the performance of any act of a person in his official capacity who is also a sub-divider or an agent or employee thereof, such certificate or affidavit shall be executed or such act shall be performed by some other person duly qualified therefor and designated so to act by the council. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.04 REVIEW AUTHORITY

Sections:
16.04.005    Purpose of provisions.
16.04.010    City council.
16.04.020    Planning commission.
16.04.030    Community development director/subdivision hearing officer.
16.04.040    City public works director.
16.04.050    City attorney.
16.04.060    City clerk.
16.04.070    County recorder.

16.04.005 Purpose of provisions.
This chapter describes the duties and responsibilities of those authorized to review and act on subdivisions governed by these regulations. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.04.010 City council.
A. The city council shall review and have final approval authority for:
    1. Subdivisions processed in conjunction with a rezoning or any amendment to either the zoning regulations or the general plan.
    2. Subdivision improvement agreements, and the acceptance by the city of lands and/or improvements as may be proposed for dedication in conjunction with final maps.
    3. Right-of-way abandonment.
B. The city council shall act on all appeals of action taken by the planning commission on subdivisions governed by these regulations. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.04.020 Planning commission.
The planning commission shall review and make recommendations on:
A. All tentative map applications for subdivisions of five or more lots or units. The commission’s action shall be in the form of a recommendation to city council for approval, conditional approval, or denial.
B. Tentative map applications that also involve concurrent processing of a rezoning, an amendment to the zoning regulations or the general plan, residential condominium conversion, or any other legislative action. The commission’s action shall be in the form of a recommendation to city council for approval, conditional approval, or denial.
C. Tentative maps for minor subdivisions with requested exceptions to subdivision standards, providing they are not in conjunction with items listed in subsection B of this section. The commission may take final action on these items.
D. Residential condominium conversion requests. The commission’s action shall be in the form of a recommendation to city council for approval, conditional approval, or denial. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.04.030 Community development director/subdivision hearing officer.
A. The director shall review and have the authority to act on:
    1. Tentative maps for minor subdivisions not in conjunction with a rezoning, an amendment to either the zoning regulations or the general plan, residential condominium conversion, or any other legislative action.
    2. Lot line adjustments.
    3. Lot combinations (voluntary mergers).
    4. Certificates of compliance.
    5. Conditional certificates of compliance.
    6. Commercial condominium conversions together with a tentative map for projects eligible to record a parcel rather than a final map, pursuant to Section 66426(c) of the Subdivision Map Act.
    7. Parcel map waivers.
    8. Time extension requests for filing parcel or final maps.
    9. Minor amendments to tentative maps (see Section 16.10.160).
B. The director shall be responsible for responding to any notice of violation pursuant to Section 66499.36 of the Subdivision Map Act.
C. The director may appoint a subdivision hearing officer to act on any or all of the subdivision projects within the purview of the director as authorized by these subdivision regulations.
D. The director, at his or her sole discretion, may refer subdivision projects within the purview of the director to the planning commission or city council for action. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.04.040 City public works director.
A. The city public works director (or designee of) shall be responsible for:
    1. Developing public improvement design standards and construction details and specifications for subdivision improvements, consistent with land use development and conservation goals stated in the general plan and all implementing ordinances and guideline documents.
    2. Reviewing all subdivision projects to determine if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of these and other city regulations and with the Subdivision Map Act.
    3. Processing parcel and final maps, and reversion to acreage maps, to determine if they are in substantial compliance with approved or conditionally approved tentative maps, and certifying such by signature on the parcel or final maps to be filed with the county recorder.
    4. Inspection and approval or rejection of subdivision improvements.
    5. Recording notices of completion of private subdivision improvements that are not to be maintained by the city.
    6. Coordinating the filing of all maps and associated documents and exhibits with the county recorder.
B. The city public works director (or designee of) shall make recommendations to accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject lands and/or improvements as may be proposed for dedication to the city for minor subdivisions, and shall so certify by signature on the parcel map. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.04.050 City attorney.
The city attorney shall be responsible for approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements, easements, and offers of dedication. The city attorney shall also review and approve as to form any notice of violation before it is forwarded to the county recorder. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.04.060 City clerk.
The city clerk shall certify actions taken by the city council by signature on: (A) all resolutions approving subdivisions acted on by the council; and (B) the title sheet of the parcel or final maps. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.04.070 County recorder.
The county recorder is responsible for entering all maps and documents to be recorded into the official public record. The date of recordation is the date on which a subdivision is established for purposes of these regulations. The recorder certifies maps as acceptable for recordation by signature on the title sheet of the parcel or final map.
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Application Type                      | Decision Maker      | Appeal Body         | Environmental |
|                                       |                     |                     | Review?       |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Lot line adjustment, lot combination  | Director            | Planning commission | No*           |
| (voluntary merger)                    | (no hearing)        |                     |               |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Certificate of compliance             | Director            | Planning commission | No*           |
|                                       | (no hearing)        |                     |               |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Conditional certificate of compliance | Hearing officer     | Planning commission | No*           |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Tentative map for subdivision         | Hearing officer     | Planning commission | No*           |
| of four or fewer lots with no         |                     |                     |               |
| concurrent rezoning or other          |                     |                     |               |
| legislative action(1)                 |                     |                     |               |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Tentative map for subdivision         | Planning commission | Council             | Yes           |
| of four or fewer lots with exceptions |                     |                     |               |
| but no concurrent rezoning or         |                     |                     |               |
| other legislative action              |                     |                     |               |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Parcel map                            | City public works   | Council             | No*           |
|                                       | director            |                     |               |
|                                       | (no hearing)        |                     |               |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Tentative map for subdivision         | Planning commission | —                   | Yes           |
| of five or more lots, and all         | reviews/recommends; |                     |               |
| other maps with concurrent processing | council takes final |                     |               |
| of rezoning or other legislative      | action              |                     |               |
| action                                |                     |                     |               |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Final map                             | Council             | —                   | No*           |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Residential condominium conversion    | Planning commission | —                   | No            |
|                                       | reviews; council    |                     |               |
|                                       | takes final action  |                     |               |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Commercial condominium conversion     | Director            | Council             | No*           |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Reversion to acreage                  | Planning commission | Council             | No*           |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Minor amendments to tentative         | Director            | Planning commission | No*           |
| maps and time extensions              |                     |                     |               |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+---------------+
*Environmental review may be required if the director determines there are special site-specific circumstances such as significant slopes or cultural and natural resources, or if exceptions are requested.
(1)Some maps involving commercial property with greater than four lots may fit this category.
(Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.08 TYPES OF MAPS REQUIRED

Sections:
16.08.005    Purpose of provisions.
16.08.010    Subdivisions creating four or fewer parcels (minor subdivision).
16.08.020    Lot line adjustments.
16.08.030    Waiver of parcel map requirement.
16.08.040    Subdivisions creating five or more parcels, lot line adjustments involving five or more parcels—Tentative map and final map.
16.08.050    Substituting parcel maps for final maps.
16.08.060    Remainder parcels.
16.08.070    Other maps required.
16.08.080    Fees and deposits.

16.08.005 Purpose of provisions.
This chapter describes the Subdivision Map Act requirement for types of maps to be submitted as part of various subdivision project applications. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.08.010 Subdivisions creating four or fewer parcels (minor subdivision).
Unless exempt under the provisions of Section 16.02.050 or waived pursuant to Section 16.08.030, a tentative or vesting tentative map is required for all subdivisions creating four or fewer lots including condominium, townhouse, stock cooperative apartment or community apartment projects containing four or fewer lots. A parcel map is utilized to record a minor subdivision. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.08.020 Lot line adjustments.
If consistent with this section, and the Subdivision Map Act Section 66412(d), a tentative map and parcel map is not required for a lot line adjustment between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created. Instead a map exhibit (drawn to appropriate scale and detail as determined by the community development department) shall be submitted. The final lot line adjustment may be reflected in a deed, which shall be recorded. As an alternative, a parcel map may be utilized to record a lot line adjustment. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.08.030 Waiver of parcel map requirement.
A. Parcel maps may be waived pursuant to Sections 66428 and 66428.1 of the Subdivision Map Act for the following:
    1. Divisions of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees.
    2. Divisions of real property resulting from the conveyance of land or any interest therein to or from the city, public entities, or public utilities for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, or other public facilities.
    3. Any other division of real property which would otherwise require a parcel map.
B. The provisions of this section do not apply if rezoning is required or requested.
C. A subdivider wishing to request a waiver of the parcel map requirement shall include such request with his or her application for tentative map approval.
D. The decision to waive the parcel map requirement shall be made as part of the action taken on the tentative map, and only upon making a finding that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to lot area, physical improvement and design standards, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, utility installation, environmental protection, and other requirements of these regulations, other city ordinances, and the Subdivision Map Act.
E. A parcel map waiver may be conditioned to provide for the payment of park land dedication and any other fees generally applied to subdivision projects.
F. Such waiver automatically constitutes approval for the issuance of a certificate of compliance as specified in Section 66499.35 of the Subdivision Map Act. When the parcel map requirement has been waived, the director shall, within ninety days and without further application and proceedings, file the certificate of compliance and a map exhibit showing the land division with the county recorder. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.08.040 Subdivisions creating five or more parcels, lot line adjustments involving five or more parcels—Tentative map and final map.
Unless exempt under Section 16.02.060 or qualified for processing pursuant to Section 16.08.050, a tentative or vesting tentative and final map are required for all subdivisions creating five or more parcels, lot line adjustments involving five or more parcels, residential condominiums and townhouses with five or more units, stock cooperative apartment units, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels or an airspace subdivision containing five or more parcels. A final map is utilized as the recording instrument for a subdivision involving five or more parcels. (Ord. 1507 § 3(2), 2007)

16.08.050 Substituting parcel maps for final maps.
For the subdivisions listed below, a parcel map may be submitted in place of the final map, and therefore the application may be processed as a minor subdivision.
A. The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts a maintained public street, highway, or other approved access, and no dedications or improvements are required; or
B. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or
C. The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land (or airspace condominiums) having approved access to a public street or highway, which is comprised of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or
D. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of forty acres or more or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section; or
E. The land being subdivided is solely for the creation of an environmental subdivision pursuant to Section 66418.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.08.060 Remainder parcels.
A remainder parcel is that portion of an existing parcel that is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing. If a subdivider elects to designate a remainder, that remainder must be shown on the tentative map; however, the designated remainder shall not be counted as a parcel for the purpose of determining whether a parcel or final map is required. A designated remainder is not considered a legal lot under the provisions of these regulations until a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance has been recorded. (Also see Section 16.20.020 regarding remainder parcels and required fees and improvements.) (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.08.070 Other maps required.
Map requirements for other types of subdivision projects are summarized in Table 2—Maps Required for Various Subdivision Projects.
+--------------------------------+--------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Project Type                   | Maps Required            | Notes                              |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Subdivisions creating four     | Tentative map or vesting | Parcel map requirement may         |
| or fewer lots or condominiums  | tentative map and parcel | be waived, pursuant to Section     |
|                                | map                      | 16.08.030                          |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Subdivisions creating five     | Tentative map or vesting | Parcel map may be substituted      |
| or more lots or condominiums   | tentative map and final  | for final map, pursuant to         |
|                                | map                      | Section 16.08.050                  |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Lot line adjustments between   | Map exhibit, drawn to    | Tentative map or record of         |
| four or fewer existing         | scale, and suitable for  | survey may be submitted with       |
| adjoining parcels as described | recording                | the application                    |
| in the SMA 66412(d)            |                          |                                    |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Lot line adjustments between   | Tentative map or vesting | Parcel map may be substituted      |
| five or more existing          | tentative map and final  | for final map, pursuant to         |
| adjoining parcels              | map                      | Section 16.08.050                  |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Lot combinations (voluntary    | Map exhibit, drawn to    | Tentative map or record of         |
| mergers)                       | scale, and suitable for  | survey may be submitted with       |
|                                | recording                | the application                    |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Certificates of compliance     | Map exhibit, drawn to    | Also needed: legal descriptions    |
| and conditional certificates   | scale, and suitable for  | prepared by a qualified individual |
| of compliance                  | recording                | will also be required              |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Residential or commercial      | Tentative map or vesting | Commercial condominium projects    |
| condominium conversions        | tentative map and parcel | may submit a parcel map rather     |
|                                | or final map, depending  | than a final map, pursuant         |
|                                | on the number of lots    | to Section 16.08.050               |
|                                | created                  |                                    |
+--------------------------------+--------------------------+------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.08.080 Fees and deposits.
All persons submitting maps as required by this chapter shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by the city’s resolution establishing fees and charges. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.10 TENTATIVE MAPS

Sections:
16.10.005    Purpose of provisions.
16.10.010    Tentative map application requirement.
16.10.020    Tentative map—Form and contents.
16.10.030    Other material to accompany tentative map.
16.10.040    Submittal to community development department.
16.10.050    Time limits for city review.
16.10.060    Environmental review.
16.10.070    Notice of public hearing on tentative map.
16.10.080    Staff reports and recommendations.
16.10.090    Public hearings.
16.10.100    Tentative map action—Extension of time.
16.10.110    Submission of revised tentative map.
16.10.120    Required findings for tentative map approval.
16.10.130    Mandatory denial of tentative maps.
16.10.140    Appeal of director’s or planning commission’s action on a tentative map.
16.10.150    Expiration of approved tentative maps.
16.10.155    Time extension for parcel or final maps.
16.10.160    Correction and amendment of approved tentative maps.

16.10.005 Purpose of provisions.
This chapter describes tentative map application requirements, review procedures, and required findings for approval or denial. A “tentative” or “vesting tentative” map is the map initially reviewed for either a “parcel” or “final” map subdivision. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.010 Tentative map application requirement.
The subdivider shall provide the community development department with a completed application form and as many copies of the tentative map and supplementary material as requested by the community development director (minimum of ten copies), a copy of the tentative map reduced to eight and one-half inches by eleven inches and a digital copy on compact disc or e-mailed to the city in PDF format. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.020 Tentative map—Form and contents.
Unless exempted by the community development director, the tentative map shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a licensed land surveyor or a state-registered civil engineer authorized to practice land surveying. The map shall consist of one or more sheets, all of equal size. The scale of the map shall be one inch equals one hundred feet or larger (not to be in metric unless conversion units are noted on the map for each dimension). If necessary to provide the proper scale, more than one sheet may be used, but the relation of the several sheets shall be clearly shown on each. (Ord. 1507 § 3(4), 2007)

16.10.030 Other material to accompany tentative map.
The following supplementary material shall be filed with the tentative map:
A. Vicinity Map. A vicinity map of appropriate scale and showing sufficient adjoining territory to clearly indicate surrounding streets, other land in the subdivider’s ownership, and other features which have a bearing on the proposed subdivision;
B. Zoning. A statement of existing and proposed zoning and land use;
C. Site Development. A statement of proposed improvements and landscape modifications, including the estimated time of completion in relation to subdivision of the property;
D. Public/Private Areas. A description of proposed public or commonly held areas and draft open space easement agreements, if applicable;
E. CC&Rs. Draft covenants, conditions and restrictions if they are integral to the development concept or proposed atypical requirements;
F. Exceptions. A description of requested exceptions from the subdivision design standards for such items as lot area and dimensions, street sections or utility easements;
G. Setbacks. Proposed building setbacks and yards if different from those in the zoning regulations;
H. Drainage. Two copies of the preliminary drainage study showing or explaining the drainage area tributary to the subdivision and a statement setting forth in detail the manner in which storm water runoff will enter the subdivision, the manner in which it will be carried through the subdivision, and the manner in which disposal beyond the subdivision boundaries will be accomplished. This shall be done in accordance with the city’s waterways management plan and shall be prepared by a civil engineer registered in the state of California;
I. Faulting. A fault investigation report if the project is located in a fault zone;
J. Slope Analysis. A detailed slope analysis if the project contains any slopes of fifteen percent or greater;
K. Other Technical Reports. Three copies of all required technical reports such as biological, cultural, noise, traffic, and the like;
L. Soils Report. A preliminary soils report (prepared by a qualified engineer registered in this state), based on adequate test borings, is required. The requirement for a preliminary soils report may be waived by the city public works director in circumstances where earlier projects on the same site have provided a soils report, or where the director determines that adequate records (or knowledge of soil qualities) exist that do not warrant a soils report.
    1. The preliminary soils report shall describe the nature of the subsurface soils and any soil conditions which would affect the geometric of the proposed subdivision;
    2. The soils report shall state whether the proposed subdivision is feasible and provide general solutions for all known hazardous conditions or problems;
    3. The soils report shall include the locations and logs of any test borings, percolation test results and a hydrological evaluation if on-site sewage disposal is proposed;
    4. If the soils report indicates, or the city public works division has knowledge of, the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, could possibly lead to structural defects or hazardous conditions, a soils investigation of each lot of the proposed subdivision may be required. The soils report shall recommend corrective action to eliminate the hazardous conditions;
    5. The director or city council may approve a subdivision where such soils problems exist upon finding that the recommended corrective action is likely to prevent structural damage, and eliminate other hazardous conditions, to any structure to be constructed. As a condition to the issuance of any building permit, the director or hearing body may require that the approved recommended corrective action be incorporated in the construction of each structure;
M. Engineering Geology Report. For hillside or other geologically hazardous areas (as identified within the city’s safety element or as determined by the public works director), an engineering geology evaluation defining the geologic conditions of the site shall be submitted. The report shall be prepared by a state-registered geotechnical engineer. The report shall designate a suitable building site for each lot which is safe from settlement and landslides, and which has reasonable legal access;
N. Noise Study. In potential noise problem areas identified in the noise element of the general plan, specific site analysis by an acoustical engineer or other approved professional with qualifications in acoustic design may be required by the community development director. Such study shall define the noise exposure problems, conclusions and recommendations for corrective or mitigating measures, when necessary, and opinions and recommendations covering the suitability of the site for development;
O. Archaeological Resource Inventory. An archaeological resource inventory shall be provided where required by the archaeological resource preservation guidelines;
P. Endangered Species Survey. If the project site contains habitat indicative of any rare, threatened, or endangered species, the subdivider shall submit a biological and botanical report confirming the presence or absence of such species;
Q. Preliminary Title Report. Two copies of a preliminary title report, dated not more than three months prior to submittal of the application;
R. Owner Consent. An authorization consenting to the proposed subdivision signed by all parties having a record title interest in the property to be subdivided;
S. School Site. The subdivider shall obtain from the school districts involved their intention, in writing, concerning the necessity for a school site and/or facilities, if any, within the subdivision and shall present this information to the community development department prior to the consideration of the tentative map;
T. Environmental Assessment. The subdivider shall provide additional data and information and deposit and pay such fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents;
U. Affordable Housing Plan and Statement. Unless exempt (four or fewer lots or units are generally exempt), the applicant shall submit an affordable housing statement in compliance with the city’s inclusionary housing requirement. The map or plans should identify locations of affordable units. The city’s housing element and the city’s inclusionary housing ordinance list the criteria for affordable housing for subdivision projects. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.040 Submittal to community development department.
A. Application Acceptance. The tentative map shall be considered for filing only when the map conforms to Section 16.10.020 and when all accompanying data or reports have been submitted and accepted by the community development department.
B. Determination of Complete Application. The community development department shall determine whether the application is complete within thirty days after receipt of the application. If the application is not complete, the community development department will notify the applicant of its determination (including a list of items needed for a complete application) in writing. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.050 Time limits for city review.
A. The advisory or legislative body shall review the proposed tentative map within the time limits specified by applicable provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), Section 21151.5, and the Subdivision Map Act, Sections 66452.1 and 66452.2 (or as those sections may subsequently be amended), as follows:
    1. If an environmental impact report (EIR) is required, the EIR shall be adopted within one year of the project application being accepted as complete, subject to such limited extension as permitted by the Subdivision Map Act.
    2. If a negative declaration is required, the negative declaration shall be adopted within one hundred five days of the project application being accepted as complete, subject to such limited extension as permitted by the Subdivision Map Act.
    3. The director or planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the project within fifty days of the adoption of the environmental document.
Note: Subsections (A)(1) and (3) or (A)(2) and (3) of this section may be accomplished concurrently.
B. Any of the time limits for acting on tentative maps specified in these regulations may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the advisory agency or legislative body required to report or act, pursuant to Subdivision Map Act Section 66451.1. To do so, the subdivider must expressly waive, in writing or in the record at a public hearing, his or her right to have the map considered without those time limits. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.060 Environmental review.
A. Environmental Impact. Unless the project is exempt from environmental review, no tentative map filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be approved until an environmental impact evaluation has been prepared, processed and considered in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The subdivider shall submit such data and information, as required by the director, to allow a determination on environmental review to be made in compliance with CEQA.
B. Significant Natural Resources. Whenever a proposed subdivision contains significant natural resources (as defined by environmental assessment or local, state or federal designation), a plan for their protection and management shall be required as a condition of approval of the tentative map. Said plan shall be submitted for review and shall be approved prior to recordation of the final subdivision map.
C. Sensitive Sites. Whenever a proposed subdivision contains unique areas of citywide significance, such as creeks, hillsides, wetlands, or other significant natural features, the dedication of said area to the public or some other assurance, as approved by the director and city attorney, for future protection may be required as a condition of approval.
D. Historic and Cultural Resources. Whenever a proposed subdivision contains archaeological artifacts, or historic or cultural resources pursuant to CEQA, a plan for the protection, restoration (if necessary), and management of said resource shall be required as a condition of approval of the tentative map. Such plan shall be submitted for review and shall be approved prior to recordation of the final subdivision map. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.070 Notice of public hearing on tentative map.
A. At least ten calendar days before the public hearing, a notice shall be given including:
    1. Publication, at least once, in a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated in the city;
    2. First class mail to all owners and occupants of property shown on the latest county assessment roll as being located within three hundred feet of the subject property;
    3. Owners of other property which, as determined by the community development director, consistent with the requirements of Section 66451.4 of the Government Code, may be adversely affected by the proposed subdivision;
    4. In addition, in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative project, notice shall be given as required by Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act;
    5. In the event that the proposed application has been submitted by a person other than the property owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll, the city shall also give mailed notice to the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll;
    6. In addition, notice shall be given by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request with the secretary of the planning commission. The request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of the calendar year. The city may impose a reasonable fee on persons requesting the notice for the purpose of recovering the cost of the mailing;
    7. Posting a notice at each street frontage describing the proposed subdivision, applicant, hearing action date and contact information.
Note: Substantial compliance with these provisions for notice shall be sufficient, and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken according to the procedures in the article.
B. Public Agency Notification. The community development department shall forward copies of the tentative map to the affected public agencies which may, in turn, forward to the community development department their findings and recommendations. Public agencies and utilities shall state that the subdivision can be adequately served.
C. School District Notification. Within five days after the tentative map application is determined to be complete, the community development department shall send a notice of the filing of the tentative map to the governing board of any elementary, high school or unified school district within the boundaries of which the subdivision is proposed to be located. The notice shall also contain information about the location of the proposed subdivision, the number of units, density, and any other information which would be relevant to the affected school district. The governing board may review the notice and may send a written report to the planning commission. The report shall indicate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the affected school district and shall make recommendations as the governing board of the district deems appropriate. In the event the school district fails to respond within a fifteen-day period from receipt of notice of the tentative map, the failure shall be deemed approval of the proposed subdivision by the school district. The planning commission shall consider the report from the school district in approving, conditionally approving or denying the tentative map. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.080 Staff reports and recommendations.
Any staff report or recommendation on a tentative map shall be in writing and a copy shall be made available to the subdivider or applicant at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.090 Public hearings.
A. For tentative maps subject to director approval, a public hearing shall be held within fifty days of the adoption of the environmental document for the subdivision (a notice of exemption, or determination thereof, may constitute as the environmental document).
B. For tentative maps subject to planning commission review, a public hearing before the planning commission shall be held within fifty days of the adoption of the environmental document for the subdivision. If the map requires council review, the project shall be scheduled for final action by the city council within forty-five days of the planning commission action.
C. The director, planning commission or city council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map in writing, which action shall then be reported to the subdivider or applicant in writing. The approval, conditional approval, or denial shall be based on the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect on the date of notification to the subdivider of the determination that the application is complete. If the city has initiated formal proceedings and published notice of an ordinance or resolution amending ordinances, policies, and standards applicable to the subdivider’s project prior to a complete application, the amended ordinances, policies, and standards in effect on the date of tentative map approval shall apply. If the subdivider requests changes in applicable ordinances, policies, and standards, and if they are adopted, the changes shall apply.
D. Whether or not such a condition is explicitly listed as a condition of approval, every approved tentative map shall be deemed to include a condition requiring the subdivider to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its agents, officers and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the city or its agents, officers or employees to attach, set aside, void or annul an approval of the city council, planning commission, architectural review commission or city staff concerning a subdivision. The city shall promptly notify the subdivider of any claim, action or proceeding and shall cooperate fully in the defense. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.100 Tentative map action—Extension of time.
The time limits set forth above for acting on the tentative map may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the hearing officer, planning commission or the city council. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.110 Submission of revised tentative map.
Prior to consideration of a tentative map by the director or planning commission, a revised tentative map may be submitted for consideration. Significant changes may require additional fees and/or a new application. Changes required by the city shall not be considered map revisions. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.120 Required findings for tentative map approval.
No tentative map shall be approved unless the hearing body makes all of the following findings:
A. The proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, including compatibility with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan and any applicable specific plan (Subdivision Map Act Section 66473.5).
B. The design of the subdivision provides, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision (Subdivision Map Act Section 66473.1).
C. Whether or not such a condition is explicitly listed as a condition of approval, every approved tentative map shall be deemed to include a condition requiring the subdivider to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its agents, officers and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the city or its agents, officers or employees to attach, set aside, void or annul an approval of the city council, planning commission, or city staff concerning a subdivision. The city shall promptly notify the subdivider of any claim, action or proceeding and shall cooperate fully in the defense. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.130 Mandatory denial of tentative maps.
The tentative map shall be denied if any of the following findings are made:
A. That the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan or any other provision of this code.
B. That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan.
C. That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed type of development.
D. That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development.
E. That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the planning commission may approve such a tentative map if an environmental impact report was prepared with respect to the project and a finding is made pursuant to Section 21081(c) of the Public Resources Code that specific economic, social or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures and project alternatives are identified in the environmental impact report.
F. That the design of the proposed subdivision or the type of proposed improvements is likely to cause serious public health or safety problems.
G. That the design of the proposed subdivision or the type of proposed improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision or with public access to public resources as defined and regulated by Section 66478.1 et seq., of the Subdivision Map Act. In this connection, the director or city council may approve a tentative map if alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and these will be substantially equivalent to the ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is hereby granted to the city to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.
H. That the director or city council has not considered the effect of its action on the housing needs of the region or has not balanced those needs against the public service needs of its residents and available fiscal and environmental resources with favorable results pursuant to Section 66412.3 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.140 Appeal of director’s or planning commission’s action on a tentative map.
A. The subdivider or any other interested person may appeal the decision of the director by filing such appeal with the community development department within ten days of said decision. The appeal shall be filed in writing, stating the basis for the appeal, and be accompanied by any applicable application and fee. The department shall schedule the appeal for a planning commission hearing within thirty days of the date of the filing of the appeal or such longer period of time as may be agreed to by the appellant. The planning commission may sustain, modify, reject, or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the director and may make such findings as are not inconsistent with this title, the general plan, the Subdivision Map Act or any other applicable regulations.
B. The subdivider or any other interested person may appeal the decision of the planning commission by filing such appeal with the city clerk within ten days of said decision. The appeal shall be filed in writing, stating the basis for the appeal, and be accompanied by any applicable application and fee. The department shall schedule the appeal for a city council hearing within thirty days of the date of the filing of the appeal or such longer period of time as may be agreed to by the appellant. The map shall be reviewed anew as though there had been no decision, recommendation or ruling previously made. The city council may sustain, modify, reject, or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the planning commission and may make such findings as are not inconsistent with this title, the general plan, the Subdivision Map Act or any other applicable regulations. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.150 Expiration of approved tentative maps.
The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map or phases of a tentative map shall expire twenty-four months from the date of such approval. Failure to cause a parcel or final map to be officially acceptable to the city within twenty-four months after approval shall terminate all proceedings. Any subsequent subdivision of the same land shall require the submittal and processing of a new tentative map. The subdivider shall be responsible for keeping a record of the expiration date of a tentative map without further notice by the city beyond the written notice of approval, which shall state the expiration date. An extension of the approval time may be requested pursuant to Section 16.10.155. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.155 Time extension for parcel or final maps.
A. The director may extend the time for filing the final subdivision map for a period or periods not exceeding a total of three years.
B. Applications for extensions shall be made in writing to the community development department, and submitted together with application fees, prior to the date of tentative map expiration. The subdivider shall attach a statement of the reasons for requesting the time extension. Upon submittal of the application and required fees the map shall automatically be extended for sixty days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved or denied, whichever occurs first.
C. A time extension may be granted subject to the condition that the final map shall be prepared and improvements shall be constructed and installed in compliance with requirements in effect at the time the request for extension is considered. The director may also impose any other conditions which the city was empowered to impose at the time of the tentative map approval and he or she may revise or delete conditions.
D. A subdivider may appeal the director’s action to the city council. Appeals must be filed in writing to the city clerk within fifteen days of the director’s action. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.10.160 Correction and amendment of approved tentative maps.
A. Minor corrections or amendments to approved tentative maps or conditions of approval may be granted by the director; provided, that all of the following are true:
    1. No lots, units or building sites are added or deleted; and
    2. The proposed changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval; and
    3. The proposed changes are consistent with the zoning regulations and the building code, the general plan and the Subdivision Map Act.
B. Approval of minor corrections or amendments shall not change any expiration dates. Corrections and amendments to tentative maps and conditions of approval which are not deemed by the director to be minor shall be reviewed at a public hearing by the planning commission upon submittal of the appropriate modification application, materials, and fees by the subdivider. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.12 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS

Sections:
16.12.005    Purpose of provisions.
16.12.010    Applicability.
16.12.020    Application procedures and requirements.
16.12.025    Development inconsistent with zoning—Conditional approval.
16.12.030    Failure to obtain architectural review approval.
16.12.040    Approval of vesting tentative map.
16.12.045    Development rights.
16.12.050    Duration of vested rights.

16.12.005 Purpose of provisions.
This chapter describes the application and processing requirements for “vesting” tentative maps. An approved vesting tentative map guarantees that subsequent development of the subdivided property will be subject to the same ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the tentative map is approved. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.12.010 Applicability.
Whenever this title requires that a tentative map be filed, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed. Vesting tentative maps may be filed for residential, commercial, or industrial developments, consistent with the provisions of Section 66498 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.12.020 Application procedures and requirements.
A. A statement that architectural review approval has been granted, or a complete application for architectural review approval and plans have been filed which will be concurrently processed with the vesting tentative map for all buildings to be constructed on lots within the boundary of the vesting tentative map. Tentative maps that are part of a planned development zoning application or are part of a specific plan are exempt from this requirement.
B. A statement that the vesting tentative map is consistent with the current zoning, or that an application has been filed for rezoning or prezoning the land which will be processed concurrently with the vesting tentative map. If a planned development (PD) is required, the PD shall be processed prior to or concurrently with the vesting tentative map. (Ord. 1507 § 3(6), 2007)

16.12.025 Development inconsistent with zoning—Conditional approval.
Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. If a change in the zoning or issuance of a planned development rezoning or use permit is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning, planned development or use permit and the map as approved. (Ord. 1507 § 3(8), 2007)

16.12.030 Failure to obtain architectural review approval.
Unless exempted as described in Section 16.12.020(A), approval of a vesting tentative map is contingent upon architectural review approval of the site improvements and all structures within the boundaries of the map. If the subdivider filed a complete application for design review approval concurrently with filing the vesting tentative map application and final action has not been taken on the architectural review application, the subdivider may request that the city defer action on the vesting tentative map application until after final action has been taken on the architectural review application; provided, that the subdivider agrees to an extension of any time periods within which the city is legally required to act on the vesting tentative subdivision map application. (Ord. 1507 § 3(10), 2007)

16.12.040 Approval of vesting tentative map.
Approval of a vesting tentative map shall not be granted until after the project has received approval from the architectural review commission unless exempted as described in Section 16.12.020(A). Nor shall approval of the vesting tentative map be granted unless the review body first determines that the intended development of the subdivision is consistent with the zoning regulations applicable to the property, in addition to all other required findings for approval of tentative maps as outlined in Section 16.10.120. (Ord. 1507 § 3(12), 2007)

16.12.045 Development rights.
A. When a vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved, that approval confers a vested right to proceed with the development in compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards (excluding fees) in effect at the time the tentative map is approved. Consistent with Subdivision Map Act Section 66474.2, the effective date of the vesting rights shall be the date the vesting map application is deemed complete.
B. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, the review body may condition or require an amendment to the map or disapprove a permit, approval, extension or entitlement, if one of the following applies:
    1. Failure to do so will put the residents of the subdivision and/or the immediate community in a condition dangerous to their health or safety.
    2. Action is required to comply with state or federal law. (Ord. 1507 § 3(14), 2007)

16.12.050 Duration of vested rights.
A. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by these regulations for the expiration of a tentative map (see Section 16.10.150).
B. If a final map is approved, these rights shall remain in effect for the following time periods beyond the recording of the final map:
    1. An initial time period of one year. Where multiple parcel or final maps are to be recorded, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded, provided it is recorded prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map.
    2. The subdivider may apply for a one-year extension of the initial time period in subsection (B)(1) of this section, pursuant to the provisions in Section 16.10.155. Appeals of the results of the request for an extension of time are subject to the provisions of Section 16.10.155; provided, that the subdivider may appeal the director’s denial of an extension within fifteen days (Section 66452.6(g) of the Subdivision Map Act).
    3. Upon submittal of a complete application for a building permit during the time periods specified in subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any approved extension of that permit. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.14 PARCEL AND FINAL MAPS

Sections:
16.14.005    Purpose of provisions.
16.14.010    Application submittal.
16.14.020    Failure to file in time.
16.14.030    General preparation requirements.
16.14.040    Map form and contents.
16.14.050    Parcel map form and contents.
16.14.060    Title sheet.
16.14.070    Statements, documents and other data to accompany parcel and final map.
16.14.080    Action of public works director.
16.14.090    Council action on final subdivision maps.
16.14.100    Filing with the county recorder.
16.14.110    Multiple parcel or final maps.
16.14.120    Corrections and amendments to subdivision maps.

16.14.005 Purpose of provisions.
This phase of the subdivision process includes the final design of the subdivision, engineering of public improvements, and the submittal of either a “parcel” or “final” map together with improvement plans for city review and action. As discussed in the definitions section, a “parcel” map is generally the recording instrument for a minor subdivision and a “final map” is generally the recording instrument for tract maps with five or more lots. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.14.010 Application submittal.
The subdivider shall submit the original form of the final map or parcel map (hereafter referred to as “map”), prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, to the city public works department within twenty-four months of the date of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, together with review fees and any additional information or documents deemed necessary by the public works director to adequately evaluate compliance with the approved tentative map. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.14.020 Failure to file in time.
Failure to file a map within twenty-four months of the date of approval or conditional approval of a tentative map, or within any extended period of time granted in accordance with Section 16.10.155, shall terminate all proceedings. Before a map may thereafter be filed, a new tentative map shall be submitted and approved. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.14.030 General preparation requirements.
Parcel and final maps shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall be based on survey, and shall conform to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map. They shall be prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title. The map may be based upon a field survey made in conformity with the Land Surveyor’s Act, at the discretion of the city engineer. It may be compiled from recorded or filed data when sufficient survey information exists on filed maps to locate and retrace the exterior boundary lines of the map (if the location of at least one of these boundary lines can be established from an existing monumented line). (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.14.040 Map form and contents.
A. Materials. The map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process assuring a permanent record in black on durable, transparent material. All lines, letters, figures, certificates, affidavits and acknowledgments shall be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with waterproof opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. The map shall be made and shall be in such condition when filed so that legible prints may be made from it. An eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven-inch reduced copy of each sheet shall be delivered to the city engineer or supplied electronically.
B. Size and Scale. Each sheet of the final subdivision map shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six inches, with a marginal line drawn on all sides, leaving a one-inch blank margin. The map shall be to a minimum scale of one inch equals one hundred feet, and with all lettering a minimum of one-eighth inch, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. Drafting symbols shall be as shown in the standard details adopted by the city.
C. Sheet Key. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining street shall be clearly shown.
D. Miscellaneous Data. Each sheet of the final subdivision map shall state the number and name, if any, of the subdivision, the scale, and north point.
E. Survey Data. The map shall show all survey data necessary to locate all monuments and to locate or retrace all interior and exterior boundary lines, lot lines, and block lines appearing on the final map, including bearings and distances, to the nearest one-hundredth foot, of straight lines, and radii and arc lengths or chord bearings and lengths for all curves, and such information as may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves and ties to existing monuments used to establish subdivision boundaries.
F. Monuments. The map shall show monuments found or set in the manner described in subsection E of this section. If monument setting has been deferred, the map shall note which monuments are in place and which are to be set.
G. Vicinity Map. The final subdivision map shall show the definite location of the subdivision, particularly in relation to surrounding surveys.
H. Lot Numbering. Lots shall be numbered consecutively beginning with the numeral “1” and continuing without omission or duplication throughout the entire subdivision. No prefix or suffix or combination of letters and numbers shall be used. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet.
I. Blocks. Blocks shall not be designated by number or letter.
J. Lot Area. The area of each lot containing one acre or more shall be shown to the nearest one-hundredth acre; the area of each lot containing less than one acre shall be shown to the nearest square foot. The total acreage within the subdivision shall be stated on the parcel or final map.
K. Boundary Lines. The boundary lines of the subdivision shall be clearly identified and emphasized by appropriate line weight. The tract boundary shall be based on record data on file at the office of the county recorder and must be reestablished by methods commonly accepted in the field of surveying and in accordance with state law. The method of survey shall be clearly indicated on the final map. Any city boundary crossing or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown on the map.
L. Easements. The centerline or side lines of each easement to which the lots in the subdivision are subject shall be shown upon the final subdivision map. If such easement cannot be definitely located from the records, a statement showing the existence of such easement shall be placed on the title sheet of the map and the approximate location shall be shown. All easements shall be designated on the final map by fine dotted lines. Each easement shall be clearly labeled, identified and marked as to nature and purpose, and, if already of record, its record reference shall be shown. If not of record, a statement of such easement shall be placed on the title sheet of the final map. If such easement is being dedicated by the final map, it shall be properly set out in the owner’s certificate and dedication on the title sheet of the map.
M. Streets and Rights-of-Way. Each street, or other public way or public utility right-of-way within the boundaries of the subdivision, shall be shown on the final subdivision map. The centerline and width of each street shall be shown and, in the case of a proposed street or way, the width of that portion to be dedicated, if any, shall also be shown. On each centerline, the bearing and length of each tangent and radius central angle and length of each curve shall be indicated.
N. Centerlines. In the event the city public works division, State Highway Engineer or county engineer shall have established the centerline of any street in or adjoining the subdivision, such centerline shall be shown and the monuments which determine its position indicated with reference to a field book or map showing such centerline. If such position is determined by ties, that fact shall also be indicated on the map.
O. Future Streets. The location, width and extent of future streets and alleys shall be shown on the final subdivision map and shall be offered for dedication as public streets by a dedicatory clause conforming to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act.
P. Private Streets. Any street or way which is intended to be kept physically closed to public travel or posted as a private street at all times may be shown as a private street. Any such private street shown on the map shall be indicated by heavy dashed lines. Sufficient data shall be shown on each private street to define its boundaries and to show clearly the portion of each lot within such street. In order to provide for utility service to individual lots, such streets may be offered and accepted as public utility easements.
Q. Street Names. The names for streets and highways within the subdivision shall be shown on the final map spelled out in full and including suffixes such as “road,” “street,” “avenue,” “place,” “court” or other designations.
R. Watercourses. All watercourses, storm drains and areas subject to inundation during a one-hundred-year storm shall be outlined and marked on the map. Elevations of floodwater based on city datum shall be noted on the map. All other natural watercourses or bodies of water shall also be delineated. The top of bank for watercourses and the extent of any riparian vegetation along the watercourses shall be shown, based on a field survey.
S. Historic and Cultural Resource Areas. The final subdivision map shall show the footprint of all structures of historic and cultural significance and the extent of any archaeological surface surveys prepared for the site, together with the survey reference number.
T. Endangered Species. The final subdivision shall note the presence and extent of any rare, threatened, or endangered plant or animal species listed in Section 670.2 or 670.5, Title 14, California Administrative Code, or in Title 50 Code of Federal Regulations Section 17.11 or 17.12, pursuant to the Federal Endangered Species Act.
U. Hazard Areas. If any part of an area to be subdivided, lot or parcel, is subject to flood hazard, inundation, or geological hazard, or located in a fault zone, it shall be clearly shown on the final map by a prominent note on each sheet whereon such conditions exist.
V. Not a Part. All areas shown on the final subdivision map which do not constitute a part of the subdivision shall be labeled “not a part of this subdivision” or “N.A.P.O.T.S.” All lines delineating those areas shall be dashed.
W. Remainder. When a subdivision is of a portion of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, the map may designate as a remainder that portion which is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing. Such designated remainder parcel need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed reference to existing boundaries of such remainder if such remainder has a cross-area of five acres or more. If so designated, such remainder parcel shall be treated as set out in Section 66424.6 of the Subdivision Map Act or its successor section, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.14.050 Parcel map form and contents.
A. Materials. The map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process assuring a permanent record in black on durable, transparent material. All lines, letters, figures, certificates, affidavits and acknowledgments shall be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with waterproof opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester-base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. The map shall be made and shall be in such condition when filed so that legible prints may be made from it. An eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven-inch reduced copy of each sheet shall be delivered to the city engineer or supplied electronically.
B. Size and Scale. Each sheet of the final subdivision map shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six inches, with a marginal line drawn on all sides, leaving a one-inch blank margin. The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end.
C. Sheet Key. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining street shall be clearly shown.
D. Miscellaneous Data. Each sheet of the map shall state the number and name, if any, of the subdivision, the scale, and north point together with the description of the real property being subdivided.
E. Survey Data. The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by distinctive line weight and clearly designated on the map. The map shall show the location of each parcel and its relation to surrounding surveys. If the map includes a “designated remainder” parcel or similar parcel, and the gross area of the “designated remainder” parcel or similar parcel is five acres or more, that remainder need not be shown on the map and its location need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed reference.
F. Easements. The centerline or side lines of each easement to which the lots in the subdivision are subject shall be shown upon the final subdivision map. If such easement cannot be definitely located from the records, a statement showing the existence of such easement shall be placed on the title sheet of the map and the approximate location shall be shown. All easements shall be designated on the final map by fine dotted lines.
G. Monuments. The map shall show monuments found or set in the manner described in subsection E of this section. If monument setting has been deferred, the map shall note which monuments are in place and which are to be set.
H. Vicinity Map. The map shall show the definite location of the subdivision, particularly in relation to surrounding surveys.
I. Lot Numbering. Lots shall be numbered consecutively beginning with the numeral “1” and continuing without omission or duplication throughout the entire subdivision. No prefix or suffix or combination of letters and numbers shall be used. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet. Each street shall be named or otherwise designated. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.14.060 Title sheet.
The title sheet of each map shall contain:
A. A title consisting of the number and name of the tract, if any, and the words “in the City of San Luis Obispo.”
B. A description of all of the real property being subdivided, referring to such map(s) as have been previously recorded or filed with the county clerk pursuant to a final judgment in any action in partition. When necessary for greater clarity or definiteness, supplemental reference may be made to any other map on file in the office of the county recorder. Each reference to any tract or subdivision shall be so noted as to be a unique description and must show a complete reference to the book and page records of the county.
C. A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the final map, subject to the exceptions and under the conditions set out in Section 66436 of the California Government Code.
D. In the case of parcel or final maps filed for reverting subdivided land to acreage, the title sheet shall carry a subtitle consisting of the words “a reversion to acreage of (description as required).”
E. A basis of bearing shall be shown on every map containing a field survey. A basis of bearing is a line or record which has been reestablished based on points found on the line. The points should be the same points used to identify the line on the map of record which shows the line’s bearing.
F. In case of dedication or offer of dedication, a certificate signed and acknowledged by those parties having any record title interest in the real property subdivided, offering certain parcels of real property for dedication for certain specified public use, subject to such reservations as may be contained in any such offer as required by the Subdivision Map Act. If the offer includes dedication for street or highway purposes, and the council has so required, the certificate shall include a waiver of direct access rights from any property shown on the final map as abutting on the street or highway.
    1. If any street shown on the final map is not offered for dedication, the map certificate shall contain a statement to that effect. If such a statement appears on a map approved by the council, public use of such street shall be permissive only. Map certificates shall state the extent to which any street not offered for dedication is offered as a public utility easement.
    2. An offer of dedication for utilities, streets, or other purposes shall be deemed not to include any public facilities located within the area being dedicated unless and only to the extent the intent to dedicate such facilities is expressly stated in the certificate.
G. A certificate for execution by the city clerk. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.14.070 Statements, documents and other data to accompany parcel and final map.
Note: When possible these documents shall be submitted to the city in electronic (PDF file or other) format.
A. Improvement Plans. Improvement plans and specifications required by this chapter along with calculations and additional information to assist the city engineer in properly checking the improvement plans shall be submitted with the final map.
B. Improvement Agreement. All agreements and securities required by the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter shall be submitted with the final map. If all required improvements have not been accepted by the city prior to filing of the final map, an agreement and bond as provided by these regulations shall be submitted.
C. Tax Lien Letter. A current letter from the San Luis Obispo County tax assessor’s office, certifying that there are no tax liens against the subdivision or any part of it for unpaid state, county, or city taxes or special assessments, shall be submitted with the final map. The letter is deemed to be current if it is no more than thirty days old when submitted. No final map shall be accepted by the city engineer unless it is accompanied by a certification of the county tax collector that there are no liens for unpaid state, county, municipal or local taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special assessments not yet payable, against any of the land to be subdivided.
D. Subdivision Guarantee. A preliminary subdivision guarantee and a title report containing the legal description of the land being subdivided shall be submitted with the final map. The subdivision guarantee shall show the names of all persons having any record title interest in the subdivision together with the nature of their respective interests. The subdivision guarantee shall be for the benefit of the city in an amount to be determined by the public works director and shall cover all lands to be dedicated for public use. No final map shall be accepted unless it is accompanied by a preliminary title report or subdivision guarantee issued by a title company authorized by the laws of the state to write such insurance, showing the names of any persons having any record title interest in the land to be subdivided and the nature of their respective interest.
E. Deeds. Whenever land, easements or rights-of-way are to be dedicated for public use or whenever access to land, easements or rights-of-way is to be granted to public agencies, all such land, easements or rights-of-way not dedicated or granted by the owner’s certificate on the final subdivision map shall be granted by deeds submitted with the final subdivision map.
F. Soils and Geologic Reports. When a soils or geological report has been prepared, this fact shall be noted on the final map, together with the date of the report and the name and address of the soils engineer or geologist making the report and the name and address of the applicable subdivision. Any studies necessary to comply with air pollution control district (APCD) requirements (including naturally occurring asbestos) shall be included. The city shall keep those reports on file for public inspection in the public works division office.
G. Grading and Erosion Control. All maps approved in accordance with these regulations shall comply with the requirements for grading and wind and water erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property, as set forth by the city engineer and chief building official. Grading and erosion control plans shall be submitted to the building division of the community development department for review and shall be approved prior to recordation of the parcel or final map. For sites over one acre in size, copies of Regional Water Quality Control Board and APCD permits may be required.
H. Other Technical Reports. If a noise analysis, archaeological survey, traffic study, biological, botanical, or any other report has been prepared, as provided in these regulations, this fact shall be noted on the final map, together with the date of the report. The city shall keep these reports on file for public inspection in the office of the city engineer.
I. CC&Rs. A copy of any required covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be submitted with the parcel or final map.
J. Survey Data. Copies of reference maps, deeds, traverses of the boundaries or of the parcels being created and whatever other information is required by the city engineer to verify the accuracy of the survey. All boundary monuments and lot corners must be tied to the city’s control network. At least two control points shall be used and a tabulation of the coordinates shall be submitted with the final parcel or final map along with a computer disk, containing the appropriate data for use in AutoCAD, or a successor program utilized by the city, for geographic information system purposes.
K. Utility Statements. A statement from each utility system and cable television company stating that the easements shown on the parcel or final map are satisfactory for service to the proposed subdivision shall be submitted with each map. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.14.080 Action of public works director.
A. Upon receipt of a parcel or final map and accompanying documents, fees and materials for filing, the city public works director (or designee) shall determine if they are in substantial conformity with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map and modifications and conditions made or required by the review body. If they are found to be complete and in conformance with these and other applicable regulations, and the required improvements have been installed or an agreement for installation has been made in accordance with these regulations, the city public works department shall:
    1. Transmit the map to the city clerk for placement on the next available council agenda.
    2. Certify approval of the final subdivision maps by signature on the title sheet and forward it to the county recorder for recording, if all of the following findings can be made:
        a. The subdivision shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the tentative map, including any approved alterations or conditions.
        b. All provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map have been complied with.
        c. The map is technically correct.
B. Should the map or accompanying documents, fees or materials be found to be incomplete or incorrect in any respect, the public works director shall advise the subdivider in writing of the changes or additions that must be made before the parcel or final map may be certified.
C. If the city public works department determines circumstances concerning the design and improvement of the subdivision in relating to the public health, safety and welfare have materially changed since the approval of the tentative map, the city public works division need not certify the parcel or final map. In such instances, the city public works division shall forward the parcel or final map to the council for further consideration.
D. If the city public works department approves a parcel or final map, the city shall accept, subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication and shall so certify on the map.
E. The city public works department’s actions shall be reported to the council within four days of the date of the action. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.14.090 Council action on final subdivision maps.
A. At the meeting at which the council receives the map, or at the first regular meeting thereafter, the council shall approve the map if it conforms with the approved tentative map and meets the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, these regulations, and any rulings made pursuant to them. If the map does not conform, the council shall disapprove it unless it finds that the map is in substantial compliance pursuant to Subdivision Map Act Section 66474.1.
B. If the council fails to act within the prescribed time, the parcel or final map shall be deemed approved to the extent it meets the requirements enumerated above. Upon approval by either action or inaction, the city clerk shall certify approval of the final subdivision map.
C. Subject to exceptions in the Subdivision Map Act, at the time the council approves a map, it shall also accept, accept subject to improvement or reject all offers of dedication. This action shall be certified on the map by the city clerk. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.14.100 Filing with the county recorder.
After the council approves a final subdivision map, the city public works division is hereby authorized to transmit the map to the county recorder. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.14.110 Multiple parcel or final maps.
A. Multiple parcel or final maps relating to an approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if:
    1. The director is informed of the subdivider’s intention to file multiple parcel or final maps at the time of filing of the tentative map.
    2. In the event that the intention to file multiple parcel or final maps is not disclosed with the filing of the tentative map, the tentative map application may be deemed incomplete.
    3. In the event that the intention to file multiple parcel or final maps is not disclosed prior to tentative map approval, multiple parcel or final maps may not be filed.
B. The subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple parcel or final maps. However, the city may impose reasonable conditions, such as the sequence of map approvals, relating to the filing of multiple parcel or final maps. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.14.120 Corrections and amendments to subdivision maps.
A. Purpose. After a parcel or final map is filed in the office of the county recorder, the recorded map may be modified by a certificate of correction or an amending map in order to:
    1. Correct an error in any course or distance shown; or
    2. Show any course or distance that was previously omitted; or
    3. Correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map; or
    4. Indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments; or
    5. Show the proper location or character of any monument which originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character; or
    6. Correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the county surveyor or the city public works department which does not affect any property right. Such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names, and the identification of adjacent record maps.
Note: As used in this section, “error” does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the parcel or final map.
B. Form and Content. The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. An amending map shall conform to the requirements of Section 66434 of the Subdivision Map Act if a final map, or Section 66445(a) through (d) inclusive and (f) through (i) inclusive if a parcel map. The amending map or certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the corrections.
C. Submittal. The application for an amending map or certificate of correction shall be submitted to the city public works department upon payment of appropriate fees and on forms provided by the city.
D. Certification. The city public works department shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and if the only changes made are those set forth in subsection A of this section, describing the purpose for an amendment or correction, he or she shall certify this fact on the amending map or certificate of correction. Such certification shall not change any expiration dates.
E. Filing with County Recorder. After the amending map or certificate of correction has been certified by the city public works department, it shall be filed in the office of the county recorder.
F. Other Modifications. In addition to the amendments authorized by subsection A of this section, describing the purpose for amendments and corrections, the recorded parcel or final map may also be modified by a certificate of correction or amending map if:
    1. There are changes in circumstances which make any or all of the conditions of the parcel or final map no longer appropriate or necessary; and
    2. The modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owners of the property; and
    3. The modifications do not alter any right, title, or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map; and
    4. The city public works director and the community development director find that the map, as modified, conforms to the provisions of these regulations, the general plan and the Subdivision Map Act.
G. Public Hearing. For maps proposed for correction or amendment pursuant to subsection F of this section, the city public works department shall set the matter for public hearing before the legislative body or advisory agency that originally took final action on the project. Public notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with Sections 65090 and 65091 of the California Government Code. The hearing shall be confined to consideration of and action on the proposed modifications. Approval of the proposed modifications shall not change any expiration dates. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.16 CERTIFICATES, ADJUSTMENTS AND MERGERS

Sections:
16.16.005    Purpose of provisions.
16.16.010    Certificates of compliance.
16.16.020    Lot line adjustments.
16.16.030    Lot combinations/voluntary mergers.
16.16.040    Reversions to acreage.
16.16.050    Merger and resubdivision.

16.16.005 Purpose of provisions.
This chapter explains the application requirements and review procedures for lot line adjustments, certificates of compliance, lot mergers and reversions to acreage. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.16.010 Certificates of compliance.
A. Purpose. 
    1. Where no adequate record exists to demonstrate that a parcel of land was legally created (a) by approval of the City, or (b) in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act prior to March 4, 1972, a certificate of compliance may be requested. (The Subdivision Map Act did not regulate minor subdivisions of four or fewer parcels until March 4, 1972.)
    The Subdivision Map Act states:For purposes of this (section) or of a local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto, any parcel created prior to March 4, 1972 shall be conclusively presumed to have been lawfully created if any subsequent purchaser acquired that parcel for valuable consideration without actual or constructive knowledge of a violation of the local ordinance.
    A recorded certificate of compliance establishes for the public record that the subject parcel is recognized as a separate legal parcel. If the parcel was created illegally and does not comply with current city subdivision standards or those in effect at the time the parcel was illegally created, then a conditional certificate of compliance may be applied for (also see Chapter 16.24, Violations and Enforcement). In such cases, all conditions of the certificate of compliance must be satisfied prior to the city’s issuance of any permit or other grant of approval for development of the affected property.
    2. While issuance of a certificate of compliance may verify the legality of a parcel, it does not ensure that it is a developable parcel. Nor does the issuance of a certificate automatically entitle the parcel owner to issuance of a building permit or other development permits and approvals without applications for and compliance with city requirements for those permits and approvals.
B. Application Requirements. Any person owning real property may apply for a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance. Each separate parcel for which a certificate is requested shall require a separate application. The appropriate application form shall be submitted with the required fee, a preliminary title report not more than six months old, a chain of title, and any maps or other supporting documents deemed necessary by the director or the city engineer to clarify when and how the parcel was created.
C. Time Limits for City Review. Within fifty days of acceptance of a complete application, the director shall determine whether a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance should be recorded.
D. Certificate of Compliance. 
    1. Upon payment by the applicant of the appropriate recording fee, the director shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder if evidence contained in the application supports a finding that the subject parcel is in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act, this title and other applicable provisions of the municipal code.
    2. No Public Notice or Hearing. Except for notice to the applicant prior to action by the director, public notice and public hearings are not required for certificates of compliance under Section 66499.35(a) of the Subdivision Map Act because issuance of such certificates is ministerial.
E. Conditional Certificate of Compliance. 
    1. If the director determines that the subject property does not comply with provisions of the municipal code or the Subdivision Map Act, he or she may impose conditions currently applicable to subdivisions, or conditions applicable to subdivisions at the time the current owner of record acquired the property (if the current owner is not the same as the owner of record at the time of the initial creation of the lot).
    2. Appeal. The conditions imposed by the director may be appealed to the planning commission within ten calendar days of the action taken.
F. Recordation and Compliance with Conditions. Upon payment by the applicant of the appropriate recording fee, and following the expiration of the ten-day appeal period or the council’s action on appeal, the director shall cause a conditional certificate of compliance to be filed with the county recorder. The certificate shall identify the property and serve as public notice that fulfillment and implementation of the conditions shall be accomplished before any subsequent issuance of a permit or other approval for development of the property. Compliance with the conditions shall not be required until a permit or other grant of approval for development is issued. The property owner shall notify the director when all conditions have been met. If compliance with conditions is satisfactory, the director shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed with the county recorder.
G. Effect of Parcel or Final Map. Recordation of a final parcel or final map shall constitute a certificate of compliance for all parcels described therein. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.16.020 Lot line adjustments.
A. Purpose. Lot line adjustments of five or more parcels shall be subject to the same application requirements as those required for a tentative parcel map as described in Section 16.10.010. Lot line adjustments involving four or fewer lots, being adjustments between adjacent legal lots, may be used to accomplish the following objectives, subject to the required findings and possible conditions of approval outlined below:
    1. To eliminate an existing encroachment; or
    2. To meet or more closely meet the minimum lot size and area requirements of the zoning district classification in which the subject property is located; or
    3. To meet building setback requirements; or
    4. To better recognize topographic features; or
    5. Other purposes approved by the director.
B. Application Submittal Requirements. Applications and fees for lot line adjustments involving four or fewer parcels shall be filed with the community development department, and shall contain the following items:
    1. Preliminary title report.
    2. An authorization consenting to the proposed adjustment signed by all parties having a record title interest in the property to be subdivided.
    3. Assessor’s parcel map(s) with the affected properties highlighted.
    4. Name, if any, date of preparation, north arrow, scale, and, if based on a survey, the date of the survey.
    5. Name and address of the person or entity who prepared the map and the applicable registration or license number.
    6. The legal boundaries of the properties to be adjusted, with sufficient information to locate the property and to determine its position with respect to adjacent named or numbered subdivisions, if any.
    7. Names and addresses of the applicant(s) and all parties having record title interest in the property being adjusted.
    8. Topographic information based on city datum with a reference to the source of the information.
    9. Existing streets and lot lines and the location and outline to scale of all structures which are to be retained within the properties and all structures outside the adjustment area within ten feet of the boundary lines; the distances between structures to be retained and notations concerning all structures which are to be removed.
    10. The locations, widths and purpose of all existing and proposed easements for utilities, drainage and other public purposes, shown by dashed lines, within and adjacent to the subdivision (including proposed building setback lines, if known); all existing and proposed utilities including size of water lines and the size and grade of sewer lines, location of manholes, fire hydrants, street trees and streetlights.
    11. The name, location, width and directions of flow of all watercourses and flood-control areas within and adjacent to the property involved; the proposed method of providing storm water drainage and erosion control.
    12. The location of all potentially dangerous areas, including areas subject to inundation, landslide, settlement, excessive noise, and the means of mitigating the hazards.
    13. The locations, widths and names or designations of all existing or proposed streets, alleys, paths and other rights-of-way, whether public or private; private easements within and adjacent to the subdivision; the radius of each centerline curve; a cross-section of each street and planned line for street widening or for any other public project in and adjacent to the subdivision; private streets shall be clearly indicated.
    14. The lines and approximate dimensions of all lots, and the number assigned to each lot (lots shall be numbered consecutively); the total number of lots; the area of each lot.
    15. The locations of any existing or abandoned wells, septic leaching fields, springs, water impoundments and similar features to the extent they affect the proposed use of the property.
    16. Preliminary Map (five eighteen-inch by twenty-six-inch copies, folded, and one eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven-inch reduction). Each set of plans must contain:
        a. The location, type, trunk and canopy diameter of all trees on the property and indicate status (e.g., to be removed, maintained, or relocated); notations as to general type of vegetation in areas not occupied by trees.
        b. A preliminary development plan or statement detailing the purpose of the lot line adjustment.
        c. A vicinity map of appropriate scale and showing sufficient adjoining territory to clearly indicate surrounding streets, other land in the subdivider’s ownership, and other features which have a bearing on the proposed subdivision.
        d. A description of requested exceptions from the subdivision design standards for such items as lot area and dimensions, street sections or utility easements.
    17. Any additional information required by the director in order to verify the legal status of the affected lots and make the required findings.
C. Review Procedure. The community development director shall, within fifty days of the application being accepted as complete, approve, conditionally approve or deny the request and so notify the applicant in writing.
D. Required Findings for Approval. The community development director shall approve a lot line adjustment if all of the following findings can be made:
    1. The land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels or building sites than originally existed is not thereby created.
    2. The modified parcels are consistent with, or more closely compatible with, the parcel design, minimum lot area, setbacks, environmental quality, and public health and safety criteria specified in the municipal code, the general plan and any applicable specific plan (unless findings can support a reasonable exception).
    3. The lot line adjustment does not create (or increase existing) inconsistencies with the zoning regulations, building code and the general plan.
    4. The modified lot lines do not alter an existing right-of-way, except with written approval of the city public works director.
    5. The adjustment does not result in an increase in the number of nonconforming parcels nor increase the nonconformity of an existing parcel.
E. Required Findings for Denial. The director shall deny a lot line adjustment if any one of the required findings for approval cannot be made.
F. Conditions of Approval. Conditions of approval are limited to those necessary for the parcels to meet general plan or zoning and building code requirements, to require the prepayment of real property taxes prior to recordation of documents effecting the lot line adjustment, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements.
G. Recorded Deeds. The Subdivision Map Act requires that lot line adjustments be reflected in a recorded deed (Section 66412(d)). Therefore, following the director’s approval, the applicant shall submit for recordation an agreement relating to lot line adjustment, quitclaim deeds and acceptance thereof (if the adjustment involves parcels with separate landowners), or a declaration of lot line adjustment (if the adjustment involves only one landowner). No record of survey shall be required for a lot line adjustment unless required by Section 8762 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.16.030 Lot combinations/voluntary mergers.
Lot lines may be eliminated, and adjacent lots may be voluntarily joined into a single parcel of land through the recordation of a notice of merger and certificate of subdivision compliance.
A. Application Submittal Requirements. An application and required fees for processing and recording a voluntary merger shall be filed with the community development department, and shall contain such information and reports as may be required by the application submittal package or by the community development director in order to verify:
    1. Ownership;
    2. That the affected lots were legally created; and
    3. That the legal description of property to be merged matches the legal description of the same property as it is reflected in recorded deeds or maps.
B. Review and Recordation. Once planning and engineering staff have determined that information submitted with the application is consistent with recorded information pertinent to the merger, community development staff shall forward the notice of merger and certificate of subdivision compliance to the county recorder. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.16.040 Reversions to acreage.
This section establishes procedures for processing requests for reversions to acreage in accordance with Chapter 6, Article 1 of the Subdivision Map Act. Requests for reversions to acreage shall be reviewed and acted upon by the city council.
A. Initiation of Proceedings (Section 66499.12 of the Subdivision Map Act). Proceedings for reversions to acreage map may be initiated by either of the following:
    1. By Owner(s). A petition of all the owners of record in the form prescribed by and containing the information required by this section and the Subdivision Map Act.
    2. By City Council. A resolution of the city council at the request of any person or on its own motion.
B. Data Required for a Reversion to Acreage (Section 66499.13 of the Subdivision Map Act). The following data shall be provided:
    1. Adequate evidence of title to the real property within the subdivision and one or more of the following:
        a. Evidence of the consent of all the owners of any interest in the property; or
        b. Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the parcel or final map was recorded, or within the time allowed by the improvement agreement, whichever is later; or
        c. Evidence that no lots shown on the parcel or final map have been sold within five years from the date the map was recorded.
    2. A parcel or final map shall be provided with the petition, prepared in accordance with this title, which delineates the dedications which are not proposed to be vacated, as well as any dedications which are required as a condition of the proposed reversion to acreage.
C. Fees. All petitions for reversion to acreage shall be accompanied by the applicable fees for processing; such fees are nonrefundable. Fees for a reversion to acreage through resolution of the city council shall be paid by the person requesting such resolution.
D. Required Findings for Approval (Section 66499.16 of the Subdivision Map Act). Subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage only if the planning commission finds that:
    1. Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and
    2. Either:
        a. All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion; or
        b. None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the parcel or final map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is the later; or
        c. No lots shown on the parcel or final map have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record.
E. Required Conditions of Approval. As conditions of reversion to acreage the city shall require:
    1. Dedications or offers of dedication necessary for the public purposes specified in the general plan, municipal code or other applicable ordinance.
    2. Retention of all previously paid fees if necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter.
    3. Retention of any portion of required improvement security or deposits if necessary to accomplish the purpose of this title.
F. Filing Reversion Map with County Recorder. The proposed reversion to acreage shall be effective upon the recording of the parcel or final map by the county recorder.
G. Return of Fees, Deposits; Release of Securities. When a reversion to acreage is effective, all fees and deposits shall be returned and all improvement security released, except those retained in accordance with subsection E of this section. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.16.050 Merger and resubdivision.
Subdivided lands may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage by complying with all the applicable requirements for the subdivision of land as provided by this chapter pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act. Any unused fees or deposits previously made pursuant to these regulations pertaining to the property shall be credited pro rata towards any of the requirements for the same purposes which are applicable at the time of resubdivision. Any streets or easements to be left in effect after the resubdivision shall be delineated on the map. After approval the map shall be delivered to the county recorder for recording. The filing of the final map shall constitute legal merging of the separate parcels into one parcel and the resubdivision of such parcel and shall also constitute abandonment of all streets and easements not shown on the map. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.17 COMMON INTEREST SUBDIVISIONS AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS

Sections:
16.17.010    Purpose and applicability.
16.17.020    Application requirements for common interest subdivisions.
16.17.030    Property improvement standards for common interest subdivisions.
16.17.040    Application requirements for airspace subdivisions.
16.17.050    Property improvement standards for airspace subdivisions.
16.17.060    Required findings for condominium conversions.
16.17.070    Property improvement standards for condominium conversions.
16.17.080    Condominium conversion limit procedure.
16.17.090    Exceptions to chapter.

16.17.010 Purpose and applicability.
As further described in the definitions section, Section 16.26.035, airspace subdivisions differ from common interest subdivisions in that they do not share interest in a common area within the map boundaries. Instead, airspace subdivisions divide property ownership into three-dimensional spaces, often stacked upon one another. Airspace condominiums in residential zoning districts are not included in this category and are instead regulated by the common interest subdivision standards described above and in Sections 16.17.020 and 16.17.030. Airspace subdivisions are not allowed within residential zoning districts and are intended to serve mixed use, multi-story buildings within all commercial zoning districts. (Ord. 1507 § 3(16), 2007)

16.17.020 Application requirements for common interest subdivisions.
In addition to application submittal requirements for tentative maps provided in Chapter 16.10, the following additional information is required in order to complete an application submittal:
A. Common interest subdivisions are subject to the city’s architectural review process and require a separate application for architectural review. The information required for the architectural review application can be found on the city checklist for architectural review applications and is available at the community development counter. In summary, a development plan that includes the following information will be required:
    1. A site plan with proposed building footprints with property boundaries. All dimensions shall be clearly labeled.
    2. Proposed building elevations with dimensions and, where pertinent, floor plans shall be provided.
    3. A grading and site drainage plan in compliance with the city’s flood damage prevention regulations and the city’s waterways management plan.
    4. Parking stalls, driveways and associated public improvements shall be provided and clearly dimensioned in accordance with the city’s parking and driveway standards.
    5. A list of property statistics, including any proposed exceptions, shall be provided on the plans. The statistics shall identify how the project complies with private and common open space and recreation standards as listed in Section 16.17.030.
    6. A landscape plan.
    7. Commonly owned parcels or easements and methods of maintenance (association) shall be clearly identified on the plans.
B. Any other information deemed necessary by the community development director. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.17.030 Property improvement standards for common interest subdivisions.
A. Common Open Space. There shall be provided in each project of five or more units a minimum of one hundred square feet of qualifying open space per unit for projects in the R-3 or R-4 zones and one hundred fifty square feet for projects in the R-2 zone. To qualify, open space shall have a minimum dimension in every direction of ten feet for open space provided at ground level or six feet for open space provided on a balcony or elevated deck, and must be located outside the street yard required by zoning regulations. Common open space need not be located with each unit. (Ord. 1507 § 3(18), 2007)

16.17.040 Application requirements for airspace subdivisions.
In addition to application submittal requirements for tentative maps provided in Chapter 16.10, the following additional information is required in order to complete an application submittal:
A. The tentative map shall provide a cross-sectional drawing showing how the proposed building or buildings are to be divided into ownership boundaries.
B. Airspace subdivisions are subject to the city’s architectural review process and require a separate application for architectural review. The information required for the architectural review application can be found on the city checklist for architectural review applications and is available at the community development counter. In summary, a development plan that includes the following information will be required:
    1. A site plan with proposed building footprints with property boundaries. All dimensions shall be clearly labeled.
    2. Proposed building elevations with dimensions and floor plans.
    3. Parking stalls, driveways and associated public improvements shall be provided and clearly dimensioned in accordance with the city’s parking and driveway standards.
    4. A list of property statistics, including any proposed exceptions, shall be provided on the plans. The statistics shall include a list of property development standards such as floor area ratio, coverage, height, and setbacks.
    5. Location of easements to allow all lots to access the public right-of-way.
    6. Any other information deemed necessary by the community development director. (Ord. 1507 § 3(20), 2007)

16.17.050 Property improvement standards for airspace subdivisions.
A. All tentative maps creating airspace lots, as defined by Section 16.26.035, shall be required to incorporate a deed restriction which ensures the following:
    1. Air space lots shall have access to appropriate public rights-of-way by means of one or more easements or other entitlements to use, in a form satisfactory to the public works director and chief building official.
    2. Parking requirements, inclusionary housing requirements, building code requirements, all other applicable property development standards required by the zoning regulations, and any other technical code requirements affecting the development of the property, shall be determined for the air space lots as if all lots in the air space subdivision were merged into the same lot.
B. Individual buildings that are subdivided by an airspace map shall be reviewed as a single building for purposes of the building code, zoning code, and general plan policies. Property development standards including, but not limited to, density, lot coverage, floor area ratio, parking, height, and setbacks shall be calculated as if the subdivided building were within one lot. (Ord. 1507 § 3(22), 2007)

16.17.060 Required findings for condominium conversions.
That:
A. Any existing deed-restricted affordable housing units shall remain at affordable rates for the remainder of the recorded agreement; or
B. An equivalent number of new units comparable in affordability and amenities to those being converted are being created as part of the new project; and that low- or moderate-income persons will not be displaced by the proposed conversion. (Ord. 1507 § 3(24), 2007)

16.17.070 Property improvement standards for condominium conversions.
A. Minimum Project Size. Condominium conversion shall not be allowed for projects consisting of less than five residential units.
B. Building and Zoning Regulations. Conversion projects shall substantially comply with the city’s building and housing codes and zoning regulations in effect on the date the conversion project is approved.
C. Smoke Detectors. Each living unit shall be provided with approved smoke detectors mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes.
D. Fire Protection Systems. All fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers and other fire protection appliances shall be maintained in operable condition at all times and shall comply with current city standards.
E. Utility Metering. The consumption of gas, electricity and water within each unit shall be separately metered and there shall be circuit breakers and shutoff valves for each unit.
F. Storage. Each dwelling unit shall have provision for at least two hundred cubic feet of enclosed, weatherproof, and lockable private storage space, exclusive of cabinets and closets within the unit. This space shall be for the sole use of the unit owner. The minimum opening shall be two and one-half feet by four feet and the minimum height shall be four feet.
G. Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided in each unit, or in common laundry space. Common facilities shall consist of at least one washer and dryer for each ten units or fraction thereof.
H. Parking. The number of parking spaces shall be as provided in the zoning regulations. Spaces for the exclusive use of occupants of each unit shall be so marked. Visitor parking and special stopping zones, if any, shall also be marked.
I. Refurbishing and Restoration. All structures, common areas, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas and facilities, if defective, shall be refurbished and restored to a safe and usable condition. All deficiencies shall be corrected prior to recordation of a final map.
J. Open Space/Recreation. All condominium conversions shall be subject to the private, common and total open space requirements and recreation facilities listed in Section 16.17.030(B) through (E). (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.17.080 Condominium conversion limit procedure.
A. Annual Limit. The city shall not approve conversion projects in any one calendar year resulting in more units being converted than one-half the number of multifamily rental dwellings added to the city’s housing stock during the preceding year. The number of multifamily rental units added in one year shall be determined as follows: From January 1st through December 31st, the total number of multifamily rental units given a final building inspection and occupancy permit minus the number of such units demolished, removed from the city, or converted to nonresidential use.
B. Filing Period. Applications for conversion may be filed during the months of January and February only. No action shall be taken on applications during this period. In order to be accepted by the city for processing, the application must be deemed complete by February 28th. Applications not deemed complete by February 28th shall be rejected until the following year.
C. Project Ranking. 
    1. If applications on file at the end of the filing period would, when approved, convert more dwelling units than allowed under subsection A of this section, the planning commission shall rank the applications according to the following point criteria:
        a. The fractions of tenants not objecting to conversion: deduct one point for each percentage point of objecting tenants. Applicants shall survey tenants and provide tenants an opportunity to respond with a postage-paid envelope addressed to the applicable project planner at the city.
        b. Provision of private open space with each dwelling: ten points for every unit that exceeds minimum square feet of qualifying private open space (by at least twenty-five square feet) for a maximum of fifty points. Deduct ten points for every unit that falls below (by at least twenty-five square feet) the minimum private open space standards. No points for projects that meet standards.
        c. Project meets or exceeds current parking standards: five points deducted for every parking space below minimum standards, five points added for every parking space above minimum requirements up to twenty-five points.
        d. Provision of common open space that meets or exceeds criteria: ten points for every additional one hundred square feet of qualifying and usable common open space above minimum requirements, for a maximum of fifty points).
        e. Provision of common recreation amenities that meet or exceed criteria: ten points for high-quality recreation amenities that exceed minimum size requirements by at least two hundred square feet per project.
        f. Provision of units which low-income and moderate-income families can afford: twenty points given for each moderate deed-restricted affordable unit proposed in the project; twenty-five points for each low-income unit for a maximum of one hundred points.
        g. Provision for energy savings: projects that contain significant solar energy installations capable of supplying at least fifty percent of the project’s energy demand shall receive twenty points.
        h. Age of existing apartments: one point for each year an apartment project has been occupied as rental apartments.
        i. Discretionary ranking: project quality, design features or overall neighborhood character and compatibility may allow the planning commission to add or deduct up to fifty points.
    2. The planning commission’s evaluation shall be a recommendation to the council, which may act on conversion projects based on its own findings, within the numerical limits established under subsection A of this section.
D. Time Limits for Actions. The results of the planning commission’s evaluation should be transmitted to the council by June 30th. The council shall approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny each conversion application by June 1st. If the applications on file at the end of the filing period would not exceed the year’s limit, they shall be forwarded directly to the council, which shall act on the applications by May 31st.
E. Maps. Maps required by the California Subdivision Map Act need not be prepared until an application for conversion has been approved. The tentative map application shall be accompanied by the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, articles of incorporation, bylaws and contracts for the maintenance, management or operation of any part of the condominium conversion project, which would be applied on behalf of any and all owners of the condominium units within the project. In addition to the requirements of Civil Code Section 1355 and any requirements which might be imposed by the city consistent with these regulations, the organizational documents shall include provisions concerning the conveyance of units; the assignment of parking; an agreement for common area maintenance, including facilities and landscaping, an estimate of initial fees anticipated for such maintenance, an indication of responsibilities for maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit. The covenants, conditions and restrictions document shall include a reference to an attached, updated property condition report. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.17.090 Exceptions to chapter.
A. Conversions. Exceptions to the condominium conversion regulations may only be approved by the city council under request by the subdivider when in accordance with the findings noted in subsection C of this section. Exceptions may only be granted to the property improvement standards and not the affordable housing requirements or tenant notification provisions.
B. New Common Interest Subdivisions. Exceptions to the property improvements standards for new common interest subdivisions may be approved by the applicable hearing body (hearing officer, planning commission, or city council) and are subject to the findings noted in subsection C of this section.
C. Findings for Exceptions. 
    1. There are circumstances of the site, such as size, shape or topography, distinct from land in the same zoning, or compliance would be completely infeasible because of the location or site design.
    2. The required property improvement standards would decrease the size or number of units within the project resulting in a significant loss of entitlement. (Note: a loss of one or more density units allowed by density standards or reductions in the floor area of units that still allow for a reasonable floor space may not be considered a significant loss of entitlement. For the purpose of these regulations, a reasonable floor area for a one-bedroom unit is considered to be approximately nine hundred square feet while a reasonable floor area for a two-bedroom unit is considered to be one thousand two hundred square feet.)
    3. The exception will not constitute a grant of special privilege; an entitlement inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity with the same zoning.
    4. No feasible alternative to authorizing the exception would satisfy the intent of the city policies and regulations. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.18 GENERAL SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:
16.18.010    Purpose and applicability.
16.18.020    General design requirements.
16.18.030    Lot dimensions.
16.18.040    Location of lot lines.
16.18.050    Depth-width relationship.
16.18.060    Flag lots (deep lot subdivision).
16.18.070    Multiple frontages.
16.18.080    Street layout and alternative design standards.
16.18.090    Sample street layouts for alternative consideration.
16.18.100    Access restrictions.
16.18.110    Alleys.
16.18.120    Street names.
16.18.130    Hillside subdivisions.
16.18.140    Location of development.
16.18.150    Agricultural buffers.
16.18.155    Natural resource preservation—Creeks, wetlands and native habitats.
16.18.160    Energy conservation.
16.18.170    Easements for solar access.

16.18.010 Purpose and applicability.
This chapter establishes standards for the design and layout of divisions of land. These standards apply to subdivisions and conditional certificates of compliance in addition to all other applicable requirements of the municipal code. The purpose of the standards is to ensure, through careful site evaluation and design, the creation of new parcels that are compatible with existing neighborhoods, the natural environment, health and safety of city residents, and are consistent with the policies of the general plan and the community design guidelines. Standards for the physical design of streets and associated public improvements can be found in the city engineering standards, a document maintained by the city public works department. Subdivision design principles can be found in Chapter 5.2 of the city’s community design guidelines. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.020 General design requirements.
The design of lots shall be based on intended use, topography, natural resources and access requirements. Lots which are impractical for intended uses due to terrain, location of natural features, inadequate access, frontage, or developable area, or other physical limitations will not be approved.
A. Grading. Natural contours shall be preserved in new subdivisions to the greatest extent possible. Pad development prior to design approval of structures shall be prohibited unless directly associated with public improvements and required drainage. Retaining walls greater than three feet in height, 2:1 slopes or other significant landform alterations are strongly discouraged.
B. Access and Neighborhood Connections. Consistent with General Plan Land Use Element Policies 2.1.4, 2.1.5 and 2.2.6, new subdivisions shall be integrated with existing subdivisions. All subdivisions shall have a street and sidewalk pattern that promotes neighborhood and community cohesiveness. There should be continuous sidewalks or paths of adequate width, connecting neighborhoods with each other and with public and commercial services to provide continuous pedestrian paths throughout the city. Where applicable, it may be necessary to provide safe routes to school at locations other than major roadways. Where new subdivisions that are adjacent to open space, public schools, adjacent street systems or other public spaces, adequate pedestrian (or pedestrian and vehicular) access shall be provided from the new subdivision to the public spaces. In some cases, it may be necessary to gain easements through existing private property and such costs shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.030 Lot dimensions.
Except as otherwise approved as part of a specific plan, planned development zoning, or common interest subdivision, each lot shall have the minimum area and dimensions indicated in Table 3 for the zone in which it is located.

Zone standards 
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| Zone |  Min. Lot Area  | Min. Width (feet) | Min. Depth (feet) | Min. Street Frontage |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| OS   | 5 acres         | 200               | 200               | 20                   |   
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| R-1  | 6,000           | 50                | 90                | 20                   |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| R-2  | 5,000           | 50                | 80                | 20                   |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| R-3  | 5,000           | 50                | 80                | 20                   |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| R-4  | 5,000           | 50                | 80                | 20                   |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| O    | 5,000           | 50                | 80                | 20                   |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| PF   | 6,000           | 60                | 90                | 40                   |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| C-N  | 6,000           | 60                | 90                | 40                   |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| C-R  | 9,000           | 60                | 100               | 40                   |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| C-T  | 9,000           | 60                | 100               | 40                   |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| C-C  | 6,000           | 60                | 90                | 40                   |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| C-D  | 3,000           | 25                | 50                | 15                   |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| C-S  | 9,000           | 60                | 100               | 40                   |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| M    | 9,000           | 60                | 100               | 40                   |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
| Exceptions:                                                                           |
| 1. Lots within common interest subdivisions, as defined in Chapter 16.17,             |
| may have any size or shape, except in the R-1 zone where subdivisions must            |
| meet the lot size and shape standards described in the table above. In the            |
| R-1 zone, variable lot sizes may be allowed through planned development zoning,       |
| consistent with Chapters 17.50 and 17.62.                                             |
| 2. In residential subdivisions, corner lots shall have a minimum area fifteen         |
| percent greater than otherwise required, and shall be ten feet wider than             |
| otherwise required.                                                                   |
| 3. See specific requirements for flag lots in Section 16.18.060.                      |
| 4. Minimum lot area calculations shall not include the area between creek             |
| banks as described in the open space element and zoning regulations.                  |
| 5. Residential lots sloped sixteen percent or greater must be increased in            |
| size to meet minimum density requirements to allow at least one density unit          |
| per lot in accordance with zoning regulations, Section 17.16.010.                     |
+------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------------+
(Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.040 Location of lot lines.
A. Side lot lines should generally be perpendicular to the street on straight streets, or radial to the street on curved streets, unless another angle would provide better building orientation for solar exposure or more lot area to the south of the likely building site.
B. Lot lines shall be located within appropriate physical locations, such as the top of creek banks, at appropriate topographical changes (top or bottom of slopes, etc.) or at locations which clearly separate existing and proposed land uses. Lot lines shall not be configured to maximize development capacity at the cost of illogical lot patterns.
C. Contiguous with existing zoning boundaries.
D. On corner lots, the lot lines adjacent to streets shall be rounded in accordance with the radius approved at the street intersection to the satisfaction of the city engineer.
E. No lot shall be divided by a taxing district boundary. City, county, school, other district, or other taxing agency boundary lines may not divide a lot. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.050 Depth-width relationship.
Lots with a ratio of depth-to-width greater than three shall not be permitted unless there is adequate assurance that a deep lot subdivision (a flag lot subdivision) will not occur or that deep lot subdivision and subsequent development will be accomplished without detriment to adjacent properties. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.060 Flag lots (deep lot subdivision).
Flag lots may be approved for subdividing deep lots where development would not be feasible with the installation of a standard street, either alone or in conjunction with neighboring properties, or where justified by topographical conditions. Such subdivisions shall conform to the following:
A. The accessway serving the flag lot(s) shall not be included in the determination of required lot area for any lot.
B. The original lot shall have frontage on a dedicated street of at least the minimum dimensions required by these regulations (Table 3, Section 16.18.030) for the zone in which it is located, separate from the accessway required to rear lots.
C. The accessway (access lot, not driveway width) to the rear shall be at least twenty feet wide for residential and conservation/open space zones, and forty feet wide for commercial zones (except the C-D zone, which is fifteen feet). Driveway width and paving shall be determined by the city parking and driveway standards and is subject to approval of the community development department director based on use, distance, number of parking spaces and/or units served.
D. Accessway driveways greater than three hundred feet in length and driveways for most commercial subdivisions may be required to provide two-way vehicle access and fire truck access and shall provide appropriate turnaround areas for standard vehicles to exit the driveway in a forward motion without performing more than two turning maneuvers.
[IMAGE: <16.18.060.png>]
E. Each lot shall have yards as required by the zoning regulations. A landscape area with sufficient width to plant screening shrubs and trees (minimum of eight feet) shall be reserved between the access driveway (and any required turnaround areas) and existing or proposed residential structures.
F. For each residence served by a flag lot driveway, one additional off-street parking space shall be provided. The parking space may not be within the street yard or in tandem to other required parking spaces.
G. Where surrounding residential development exists on adjacent parcels, new parcels served by flag lots may be declared as “sensitive sites” by the community development department. A sensitive site shall require architectural review to review the proposed development design and protect adjacent properties from overlook, encroachment of solar access, and adequate noise protection and privacy.
H. The lot farthest from the street shall own the accessway in fee. Other lots using the accessway shall have an access easement over it. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.070 Multiple frontages.
Single-family residential lots with frontage on more than one street, other than an alley, are discouraged, except for corner lots or where topography makes a single frontage impractical. The city may require the release of access rights on one frontage which shall be noted on the subdivision map. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.080 Street layout and alternative design standards.
Street construction specifications, dimensions, and alternative standards can be found in the city’s engineering standards. The city encourages the use of alternative standards in order to reduce construction costs, provide flexibility and minimize right-of-way widths, pavement widths, turnaround dimensions and intersection curb radii. It is also the intent of this code section to maintain safety standards, provide for more pedestrian-friendly street environments, afford appropriate access for bicyclists, and facilitate implementation of the general plan.
The circulation and street pattern of the proposed subdivision shall conform to the circulation element of the general plan, and shall:
A. Logically relate to the existing streets in the area adjoining the proposed subdivision; and
B. Enable access to future land division and use of adjoining undivided property; and
C. Accommodate pedestrians and bicyclists, consistent with the city’s pedestrian plan and the bicycle transportation plan; and
D. Accommodate public transit facilities; and
E. Be designed to meet city engineering standards to the satisfaction of the public works director, with regard to street cross-sections, length, corner radii, intersection offset, turning space, slope, sight triangles, lighting, signalization, etc.
F. In order to implement general plan policy, streets should be designed with the following considerations:
    1. Streets shall be no wider than the minimum width needed to accommodate the typical and usual vehicular mix that the street will serve (including necessary fire access).
    2. Residential streets may be built at a variety of widths, depending on their function and hierarchy in the street system.
    3. The street design shall facilitate the use of alternative transportation modes: riding transit, biking, or walking. Streets should be designed with all users in mind, including bicyclists and pedestrians (nonmotorized travel).
    
    [IMAGE: <16.18.080a.jpg>]
    4. If streets are more than two lanes, they should be divided by planted medians to appear more like two one-way streets.
    5. Where cul-de-sacs and other dead-end streets hinder connectivity they should be avoided. Short loops and cul-de-sacs are acceptable as long as higher-order streets (arterials, collectors) offer many interconnections and direct routing.
    6. All streets, except for alleys and roads in rural areas or adjacent to natural settings such as parks, should have vertical curbs. A vertical curb clearly distinguishes the space allocated for the automobile from the space provided for pedestrians and people in wheelchairs. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.090 Sample street layouts for alternative consideration.
The following graphics are intended to serve as alternative scenarios for street layouts. These standards do not represent adopted street standards and the city engineering standards describe specific dimension requirements; however, the following alternatives are encouraged and may be utilized upon approval by the public works director on a case-by-case basis:
[IMAGE: <16.18.080b.png>]
[IMAGE: <16.18.080c.png>]
(Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.100 Access restrictions.
Dedication of access rights may be required by the city to control access from adjoining property to public streets. Access restrictions shall be clearly shown on the final map. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.110 Alleys.
The city may require dedication and improvement of alleys to serve as rear access to parcels in industrial, commercial, and residential subdivisions. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.120 Street names.
Streets which are continuations of the existing streets shall have the same names. Streets which are not continuations or which have significantly changed alignments shall have names that do not duplicate or closely resemble any other street names. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.130 Hillside subdivisions.
A. Slope-Density Reduction. In sloping terrain, the overall residential density of a subdivision shall be reduced with increasing slope as provided in the zoning regulations, Section 17.16.010. This shall be done by increasing the size of the lots or by designating a sufficient area for permanent open space. On lots sloped sixteen percent or greater, the lot size shall provide the density for at least one unit value according to the zoning regulations, Section 17.16.010, Table 1. As an option, an area equal to the area required to meet the density requirements may be dedicated as open space in order to reduce the minimum lot size. The open space area shall be either dedicated to the city or protected by a perpetual open space agreement at the option of the city.
B. Hillside Lot Configuration. Increasing lot sizes is the preferred approach in areas of uniform topography. In areas of variable topography the preferred approach is to have substantially larger lots or open space use for the steepest areas, drainage swales, rock outcrops, or shallow soils. Approval of the scheme of lot sizes and open areas shall be at the sole discretion of the city. Open space areas to be maintained for density reduction shall not be counted towards fulfillment of parkland requirements, nor shall the city or subdivider be obligated to provide or maintain any recreational facilities in such areas.
C. Hillside Grading. Subdivisions shall be designed to keep grading and terracing of hillsides to an absolute minimum, consistent with hillside protection policies in the land use and open space elements of the general plan.
D. Grading Design. The design and approach to grading on hillside areas shall be consistent with the open space element of the general plan and utilize the following techniques:
    1. Keep a low profile and conform to the natural slopes;
    2. Minimize grading on individual lots; generally, locate houses close to the street; minimize the grading of visible driveways;
    3. Include planting which is compatible with native hillside vegetation and which provides a visual transition from developed to open areas;
    4. The grading plan shall ensure that development near or on portions of a hill or mountain do not cause, or make worse, natural hazards (such as erosion, sedimentation, fire, or water quality concerns);
    5. Plans shall include erosion and sediment control practices including temporary vegetation sufficient to stabilize disturbed areas;
    6. The grading plan shall maintain the character and visual quality of the adjacent hill or mountain resource;
    7. Land alterations should be minimized by: keeping cuts and fills to a minimum; limiting grading to the smallest practical area of land; limiting land exposure to the shortest practical amount of time; replanting graded areas to ensure establishment of plant cover before the next rainy season; and creating grading contours that blend with the natural contours on-site or look like contours that would naturally occur. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.140 Location of development.
Subdivisions shall be designed so that development:
A. Is prohibited within areas with natural and cultural resources and provides buffers for these areas as identified in the open space element of the general plan.
B. Is appropriately planned around hazardous areas with a high potential for flooding, seismic risks, land instability, air traffic, excessive exposure to electromagnetic fields, and fire.
C. Is prohibited within areas beyond the urban reserve or development limit line. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.150 Agricultural buffers.
[IMAGE: <16.18.150.png>]
(Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.155 Natural resource preservation—Creeks, wetlands and native habitats.
Consistent with general plan policy within the city’s land use and open space elements, new public or private developments adjacent to the lake, creeks, and wetlands must respect the natural environment and incorporate the natural features as project amenities. The following guidelines shall be incorporated into all residential and commercial subdivisions:
A. Creeks and their corridors are to be preserved as open space, and creek corridors are to be maintained in essentially a natural state to protect the community’s water quality, wildlife diversity, and aesthetic value.
B. Developments along creeks should include public access across the development site to the creek and along the creek; provided, that wildlife habitat, public safety, and reasonable privacy and security of the development can be maintained.
C. Sensitive habitat, creek corridors and creek setback areas should be protected by preserving such resource areas and associated habitat buffers through easements. Subdivision parcel lines or easements shall be located to optimize resource protection. If the resource area is within a proposed open space parcel or easement, allowed uses and maintenance responsibilities within that parcel or easement should be clearly defined prior to map approval.
[IMAGE: <16.18.155.png>]
(Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.160 Energy conservation.
All subdivisions shall provide opportunities for passive or natural heating and cooling opportunities to each of the proposed lots, where determined by the reviewing body to be feasible, except for condominium conversion of existing structures where no new structures are added. Such opportunities may include, but are not limited to:
A. Siting of structures or building envelopes to take optimum advantage of passive cooling and heating opportunities.
B. Adjusting building setback lines to promote the optimum spacing of structures to create adequate solar access.
C. Orienting the longest dimension of each lot within thirty degrees of south, unless the subdivider demonstrates that for certain lots:
    1. The lots are large enough to allow proper building orientation and maximum feasible control of solar exposure by the lot owner, regardless of lot orientation. Properly oriented building envelopes shall be established for lots smaller than one acre;
    2. Buildings will be constructed as part of the subdivision project (as in condominium or planned development) and the buildings themselves will be properly oriented with adequate solar exposure;
    3. Topography makes variations from the prescribed orientation desirable to reduce grading or tree removal or to take advantage of a setting which favors early morning or late afternoon exposure, or where topographical conditions make solar energy infeasible;
    4. The size of the subdivision in relation to surrounding streets and lots precludes desirable lot orientation. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.18.170 Easements for solar access.
A. In order to provide for the maximum feasible use of solar energy within subdivisions, the city may require establishment of easements for some or all of the lots to protect access to sunlight. Such easements shall be established on each parcel for the benefit of neighboring parcels within the subdivision. Such easements will not be required when:
    1. A plan for building construction and landscaping is approved in conjunction with the subdivision approval, and the plan will provide an acceptable level of solar exposure, as provided in the energy element of the general plan; or
    2. The size and shape of the parcels together with the yard and height restrictions of the zoning regulations will allow subsequent development of each parcel in a way which will not eliminate acceptable solar exposure for neighboring parcels within the subdivision; or
    3. The subdivision is a condominium conversion.
B. Where required, solar access easements shall protect solar exposure during the period from ten a.m. to two p.m. Pacific Standard Time on the winter solstice, unless topographical conditions or other overriding design considerations make protection of some other, equivalent time interval more desirable. They shall be recorded concurrent with recordation of the subdivision map.
    1. The burdens and benefits of the solar easement shall be transferable and run with the land to subsequent grantees of the original grantor(s) and grantee(s).
    2. The description of the easement shall include:
        a. A plan and orthographic view of the easement area in relation to lot lines, together with notations on the maximum height of structures or vegetation which may occupy the easement area;
        b. A written description specifying the easement as a plane limiting the height of structures or vegetation, such plane beginning at a line clearly defined in relation to ground elevation and lot line location, and extending upward at a specific angle (altitude) in a specific direction (azimuth);
        c. The restrictions placed on vegetation, structures or other objects which would impair or obstruct passage of sunlight through the easement; and
        d. Any terms or conditions under which the easement may be revised or terminated.
    3. The establishment of solar easements is not intended to result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by structures under zoning in force at the time the easement is established. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.20 PHYSICAL IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES

Sections:
16.20.010    General requirements.
16.20.020    Required improvements.
16.20.030    Preparation and form of improvement plans.
16.20.040    Grading plan.
16.20.050    Plan check fees.
16.20.060    Commencement of improvements.
16.20.070    Inspection of improvement work.
16.20.080    Coordination of improvement work.
16.20.090    Improvements waived.
16.20.100    Oversizing improvements.
16.20.110    Reimbursement.
16.20.120    Improvement agreement.
16.20.130    Form, filing, and terms of improvement agreement.
16.20.140    Minimum agreement provisions.
16.20.150    Additional agreement provisions.
16.20.160    Improvement security required.
16.20.170    Form, filing, and term of improvement security.
16.20.180    Labor and materials.
16.20.190    Liability for alterations or changes.
16.20.200    Release of improvement security—Assessment district proceedings.
16.20.210    Release of improvement security—Completion of work.
16.20.220    Withholding building permits.
16.20.230    Acceptance of improvements.
16.20.240    Deferral of improvements for parcel maps.

16.20.010 General requirements.
All improvements shall conform to these regulations and the subdivision standards. Improvement plans shall be completed by the subdivider prior to the acceptance of the final map for filing. Improvement work, including grading, shall not be commenced until plans for all such work have been approved by the city community development department in conjunction with the public works department. All improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of and to the satisfaction of the city. Improvements not completed shall be guaranteed or bonded for, prior to filing the final subdivision map.
For remainder parcels, the timing of the payment of fees associated with any deferred improvements is to be treated in the same way as the current law on improvements. However, the deferral of fees does not apply if the designated remainder or omitted parcel is included within the boundaries of a benefit assessment district or community facilities district. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.020 Required improvements.
Improvements to be installed by the subdivider, in accordance with the subdivision standards codified in this title, are listed in the city’s engineering standards within the city’s uniform design criteria.
Required improvements may include, but are not limited to:
A. Full-width street improvements by grading, base preparation and paving including curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bike or pedestrian paths and associated landscaping (street trees, parkways and medians). The city may require such improvements on both sides of the street.
B. Bus stops and benches.
C. Storm drainage, erosion and flood-control facilities.
D. Street name signs and other traffic control signs.
E. A water system for domestic service and fire protection shall be provided to each lot of the proposed subdivision. The water system shall include all facilities necessary for the conveyance of water from the nearest point of adequate supply to a meter vault at the front of each lot. For condominium projects, a separate meter shall be provided to each condominium unit, unless an alternative system is approved by the utilities director in conjunction with the community development director, and shall be subject to the following requirements:
    1. Each building shall have a separate city water meter.
    2. The condominium owners’ association shall be the responsible entity for receiving and paying the city water and sewer bill. The condominium owners shall be jointly and severally responsible for the payment of the city water and sewer bill.
    3. Each condominium unit shall have a separate submeter, which will be the property and responsibility of the condominium owners’ association. The condominium owners’ association agreement shall include provisions for the reading of the submeters and the proper division of the city water and sewer bill among the condominium owners.
EXCEPTION: Nonresidential air-space condominiums that have no potential for water use or water using fixtures within the air-space will not be required to have a submeter.
F. A sanitary sewer system shall be provided, including sewer laterals extended to each lot. Condominium units may be allowed to share a common sewer lateral; provided, that it meets city standards and plumbing code requirements. Sewer laterals need not be provided to lots which will be solely in perpetual open space use. All public sewer mains shall be located within a dedicated city street or within a recorded easement of adequate width, as determined by the utilities engineer, and in consideration of the sewer size and depth.
G. Recycled water mains and services may be required, when it is determined that the amount of water needed for irrigation and the project’s proximity to the recycled water distribution system justifies its use. The utilities director has the authority to require the use of recycled water for irrigation and other uses within a development. A project may be required to include recycled water main extensions along and/or through the development when such main line extensions are consistent with the adopted recycled water master plan.
H. Electric power, gas, cable television and telephone services for each lot or condominium unit.
I. Fire hydrants.
J. Streetlights. (Ord. 1501 § 2, 2007)

16.20.030 Preparation and form of improvement plans.
A. Improvement plans shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer and shall show full details of all improvements required to be installed by the provisions of these regulations, and of all other improvements proposed to be installed by the subdivider within any street, alley, pedestrian way, easement or other public area or right-of-way. Full details shall include cross-sections, profiles, estimated costs and specifications. Preliminary plans may be submitted prior to the final plans to allow time for checking and correction.
B. The form, layout, scale and other particulars of the plans, and the number of copies to be provided, shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city public works department. Defined requirements can be found within the city engineering standards, uniform design criteria. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.040 Grading plan.
A grading plan and specifications prepared substantially in accordance with the preliminary grading plan approved as part of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall be submitted as part of the improvement plans. A permit must be obtained in accordance with the provisions of the grading regulations, as set forth in Chapter 70 in the Appendix of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.050 Plan check fees.
At the time of the submission of the final improvement plans, the subdivider shall pay a fee for plan checking, in an amount established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.060 Commencement of improvements.
Prior to the commencement of construction or installation of any improvements within any street, alley, path, easement or other public area or right-of-way, improvement plans shall have been approved by the public works director or designee. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.070 Inspection of improvement work.
All improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of the city public works department and the subdivider shall cause all such improvement work to be inspected at all times as the city public works department may establish. The subdivider shall pay an inspection fee in an amount equal to that established by council resolution. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.080 Coordination of improvement work.
All work and improvements contemplated by and performed under the provisions of these regulations shall be accomplished so as to coordinate and minimize interference with other private or public development and to minimize its threat to public safety. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.090 Improvements waived.
The council may waive all or a portion of the improvements which would otherwise be required if the subdivision map is for the purpose of consolidating existing lots and unsubdivided parcels, eliminating abandoned streets or alleys, or adjusting boundaries, when there is not public need for such improvements. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.100 Oversizing improvements.
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, it may be required that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision be of a supplemental size, capacity, or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and that the improvement be dedicated to the public. If such condition is imposed, provision for reimbursement to the subdivider, in the manner provided by the Subdivision Map Act, shall be contained in the subdivision improvement agreement entered into pursuant to these regulations prior to any work being undertaken. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.110 Reimbursement.
A. Eligibility. Whenever improvements are required to be installed adjacent to property other than that being developed or in greater size or capacity than that required for the development of the property under consideration, the developer of the improvements may be eligible for reimbursement if the following conditions are satisfied:
    1. The city and developer agree that the improvements significantly benefit and serve property that is not within the subdivision or site development area;
    2. The city and developer enter into a reimbursement agreement in a form approved by the city attorney; and
    3. The developer submits evidence of the actual costs of the improvements described in the reimbursement agreement.
        a. Evidence shall be provided in the form of receipted bills, canceled checks, or contracts.
        b. Evidence shall be submitted within sixty days of the city’s acceptance of the improvements. Failure to timely submit evidence shall void the reimbursement agreement.
B. Conditions of Reimbursement Payments. Whenever property develops where:
    1. Improvements have been installed by the developer of an adjoining or nearby property;
    2. The improvements directly benefit the property currently being developed;
    3. An agreement for reimbursement has been entered into by the city and developer who installed these improvements;
    4. Not more than fifteen years have elapsed since the execution of the reimbursement agreement; and
    5. The original developer has submitted satisfactory documentation. The city will attempt to collect from the benefiting party, prior to the issuance of the development permits, a prorated share of the documented cost of improvements described in the reimbursement agreement. Reimbursement will be in accordance with Section 66485 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act as amended from time to time.
C. Payment of Reimbursement. 
    1. When prorated shares of the cost of improvements are collected from the developers of new projects, the money collected shall be paid in accordance with the terms of the agreement. The city shall not be required to reimburse more money than it actually collects.
    2. Reimbursements shall be made only when the city collects money from the developers of new projects, notwithstanding any provision of any law, this code or the reimbursement agreement. Failure or error by the city resulting in funds not being collected will not subject the city to any liability, obligation or debt owed the original developer. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.120 Improvement agreement.
If the required improvements are not satisfactorily completed before a final map is filed, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the city to make all improvements as may be required upon approval of such map. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.130 Form, filing, and terms of improvement agreement.
A. The improvement agreement shall be in writing, shall be approved as to form by the city attorney, and shall be secured and conditioned as provided in this chapter. The agreement shall be recorded simultaneously with the final map.
B. The improvement agreement shall be complete, subject to council approval, and on file with the city public works department before the final map is filed for recording. The term of each improvement agreement filed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall begin on the date of recording and end upon the date of completion of fulfillment of all terms and conditions contained therein to the satisfaction of the council. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.140 Minimum agreement provisions.
The agreement shall include the following provisions as minimum terms and conditions:
A. Mutually agreeable terms to complete all required improvements at the subdivider’s expense;
B. A provision that the subdivider shall comply with all requirements of these regulations, of this code, and of other applicable laws, and with all terms and conditions of required improvement permits;
C. A statement indicating a period of time within which the subdivider shall complete all improvement work;
D. A provision that, if the subdivider fails to complete the work within the specified period of time or any extended period of time that may have lawfully been granted to the subdivider, the city may, at its option, complete the required improvement work and the subdivider and his surety shall be firmly bound, under a continuing obligation, for payment of the full cost and expense incurred or expended by the city in completing such work;
E. Provision for the repair and replacement of defective material and workmanship of the improvements by the subdivider for a period of twelve months after the improvements have been accepted by the council; and
F. A provision guaranteeing payment to the city for all engineering and inspection costs and costs not previously paid and all other incidental costs incurred by the city in enforcing the agreement. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.150 Additional agreement provisions.
The improvement agreement may also include the following provisions and such other additional terms and conditions as may be required upon approval of the tentative map, or as are determined necessary by the council to carry out the intent and purposes of these regulations:
A. Provision for the repair, at the subdivider’s expense, of any damage to public streets or property which may reasonably be expected to result from operations necessary for subdivision improvements required by these regulations, including the importing or exporting of earth for grading purposes;
B. Mutually agreeable terms to acquire public easements which are outside the boundaries of the subdivision, at the subdivider’s expense;
C. Mutually agreeable terms to improve, at some undetermined future date, easements offered and reserved for future public use at the subdivider’s expense; and providing, that such improvements shall be secured by separate security in the manner prescribed in Section 16.20.170 and further providing that the requirements of this provision shall not delay the release of any other improvement security provided pursuant to Section 16.20.210;
D. Provision for reimbursement to be paid the subdivider under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act; and
E. A provision that the subdivider shall provide to the city, prior to the filing of the final map, letters from each utility company indicating that such companies have agreed to install, and will so install, the public utilities necessary to serve the subdivision. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.160 Improvement security required.
The subdivider shall secure the foregoing improvement agreement in an amount determined by the city engineer to be one hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the improvements and any additional act to be performed by the subdivider under the agreement, and such additional amounts as the council may determine necessary to cover the costs, reasonable expenses and fees including reasonable attorneys’ fees which may be incurred by the city in successfully enforcing the agreement. The requirement of the improvement security shall not be waived under any circumstances. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.170 Form, filing, and term of improvement security.
A. The improvement security shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the improvement agreement and shall be in one of the forms provided in the Subdivision Map Act. The form shall be the choice of the city in each improvement agreement. (Improvement security for public utility improvements may be in the form of a letter of assurance from the utility.)
B. Improvement security shall be filed with the city public works department, together with the improvement agreement, before the city accepts the final map for filing. The form of the improvement security shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney.
C. The term of the improvement security, filed pursuant to the provisions of this section to secure the faithful performance of the agreement, shall begin on the date of filing and end upon the date of completion or fulfillment of all terms and conditions of the improvement agreement to the satisfaction of the council. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.180 Labor and materials.
When the improvement security provided pursuant to Section 16.20.170 is a surety bond, it shall be accompanied by a bond for the security of laborers and materials in an amount not less than fifty percent of the estimated cost of the improvements. When the improvement security is a cash deposit or instrument of credit, such security shall include an additional amount necessary for the protection of laborers and material men but in no event less than fifty percent of the estimated cost of the improvements. Security for one hundred percent of the estimated costs, including a factor for inflationary cost increases, may be required. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.190 Liability for alterations or changes.
The liability upon the security given for the faithful performance of the agreement shall include the performance of any changes or alterations in the work; provided, however, that all such changes or alterations do not exceed ten percent of the original estimated cost of the improvement. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.200 Release of improvement security—Assessment district proceedings.
If the required subdivision improvements are financed and installed pursuant to special assessment proceedings, upon the furnishing of the contractor of the faithful performance and payment bond required by the special assessment act being used, the improvement security of the subdivider may be reduced by the council by an amount corresponding to the amount of such bonds furnished by the contractor. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.210 Release of improvement security—Completion of work.
A. Improvement security may be released upon the final completion and acceptance of the work; provided, however, such release shall not apply to the amount of security deemed necessary by the city public works department for the guarantee and warranty period, nor to costs and reasonable expense fees, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, incurred by the city in enforcing the improvement agreement.
B. The council shall accept and certify the satisfactory completion of improvement work prior to any release of improvement security covering such work. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.220 Withholding building permits.
No building permit or similar entitlement of use shall be issued for the development of any lot within a subdivision until all required improvements are substantially completed to the satisfaction of the community development director; provided, however, building permits and entitlements may be issued for the development of a lot designated as a model home site when the community development director determines:
A. The construction of all required improvements has progressed to the extent that completion of and acceptance of the work seems assured to occur within a reasonable period of time; and
B. The development of the model home sites will not conflict with work in progress on the construction of the requirement improvements. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.230 Acceptance of improvements.
After the final parcel map or final map has been recorded, all subdivision improvements properly installed in accordance with previously approved plans and specifications shall be accepted by the council and the subdivider and any other person having an interest in such completion shall be notified in writing by the city clerk of acceptance by the council. At the time of acceptance, the city shall assume maintenance of the improvements except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and the city’s standard specifications. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.20.240 Deferral of improvements for parcel maps.
Improvements required for parcel maps need not be completed until a building permit or other entitlement for development of the parcel(s) is granted by the city, unless the community development director finds that completion of improvements is necessary to protect the public health and safety or is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. If these findings are made, the city may require completion of the improvement requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the parcel map and prior to the issuance of permits for development. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.22 DEDICATIONS

Sections:
16.22.010    General requirements.
16.22.020    Offer to dedicate easements to remain open.
16.22.030    Waiver of direct street access.
16.22.040    Parkland dedication—Requirement.
16.22.050    Parkland dedication—General standards.
16.22.060    Parkland dedication—Exceptions and in-lieu fees.
16.22.070    Parkland dedication—Partial credit for school sites and private open space.
16.22.080    Parkland dedication—Fees in lieu of land dedication.
16.22.090    Parkland dedication—Procedures.
16.22.100    Parkland dedication—Specific plan provisions.
16.22.110    Title insurance for dedication.

16.22.010 General requirements.
The subdivider, as a condition of approval of a tentative map, in conjunction with approval of a parcel or final map, shall grant whatever land or easements the city determines are necessary to fulfill the purposes of these regulations, in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act, the general plan, and adopted standards. Such dedication of parcels or easements and improvements may be required for the following uses:
A. Streets and alleys, including future streets;
B. Private streets (conditional dedication);
C. Pedestrian and bicycle paths;
D. Bus stops;
E. Public utilities;
F. Natural watercourses together with a riparian buffer zone, storm drains and flood-control channels, open space and agricultural resources;
G. Public access, including access for maintenance or fire protection;
H. Protection of scenic and environmentally sensitive lands;
I. Street trees;
J. Parks and recreation facilities;
K. Protection of slope banks, areas subject to flooding, and other potentially hazardous areas;
L. School sites as may be necessary in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act;
M. Sites to be preserved for public use as provided in the Subdivision Map Act;
N. Such other public purposes as the city may deem necessary, provided the amount of property required to be dedicated bears a reasonable relationship to the increased need for public facilities created by the subdivision;
O. Cultural resources. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.22.020 Offer to dedicate easements to remain open.
If, at the time the parcel or final map is approved, any of the easements set out in Section 66477.2 of the California Government Code are rejected, the offers of dedication shall be irrevocable and the council may, by resolution at any later date and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open any of those easements for public use. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.22.030 Waiver of direct street access.
The city may require that any dedication or offer of dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct access rights to such street from any property shown on a final map or parcel map as abutting thereon, and that if the dedication is accepted, such waiver shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of the waiver of direct access. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.22.040 Parkland dedication—Requirement.
As a condition of approval for a residential subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu of dedication, or both, at the option of the city, for park purposes as prescribed in the standards set forth in Sections 16.22.050 through 16.22.100. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.22.050 Parkland dedication—General standards.
A. In order to implement the park and recreation element of the general plan and provide a reasonable amount of space for outdoor public recreation use, each new subdivision shall dedicate land equivalent to five acres for each one thousand residents expected to reside within the subdivision, except as provided in Sections 16.22.060, 16.22.070 and 16.22.100. In some subdivisions additional parkland dedication may be required as a discretionary action if a nexus between the subdivision and the need for additional parkland is justified. In no case shall the requirement exceed ten acres per one thousand residents.
B. The land to be dedicated shall be of sufficient size and suitable topography to meet the local park needs of the immediate and future residents of the subdivision. The expected population of the subdivision shall be determined by the city using the most recent census results for the type and size of dwellings proposed for the subdivision. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.22.060 Parkland dedication—Exceptions and in-lieu fees.
The requirement to dedicate land may be waived when the city determines that:
A. The size of the subdivision, in terms of the number of proposed or potential dwellings, would result in the dedication of a land area less than the minimum area for neighborhood parks recommended in the general plan; or
B. The local park needs of the area to be subdivided have been satisfied, according to the park size and location criteria of the general plan, and further land area would not benefit present and future users of previously established parks; or
C. The subdivision contains fifty or fewer parcels. Units within condominium or cooperative projects shall be considered parcels. In these cases, the subdivider shall pay in-lieu fees as provided in Section 16.22.080. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.22.070 Parkland dedication—Partial credit for school sites and private open space.
A. When the city determines that either a school site dedicated by the subdivider or a private recreation facility approved as part of the subdivision would provide permanent open space and facilities comparable to those customarily found in local parks, up to one-half the parkland dedication or in-lieu fees otherwise required may be waived.
B. The remaining part of the requirement shall be satisfied by the land dedication, in-lieu fees, or both.
C. The city shall determine the extent to which dedicated school sites or private open space fulfills the usual functions of public local parks. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.22.080 Parkland dedication—Fees in lieu of land dedication.
A. When the dedication of land is not required or when land dedication partially fulfills the required contribution of the subdivider to meeting additional local park demand resulting from the subdivision, in-lieu fees shall be paid. The amount of such in-lieu fee shall be the fair market value of the land which otherwise would be required to be dedicated according to Section 16.22.050.
B. The fair market value shall be determined by a qualified, independent appraiser. It shall be based on the portion of the land proposed to be subdivided which is intended for development and shall reflect the market value at the time the tentative map is approved.
C. Fees collected in lieu of land dedication shall be used for creating new parks or enlarging or improving local parks within the city.
D. The requirement for in-lieu fees may be satisfied by the subdivider making improvements to a park, with the approval of the council, when (1) the value of the improvements is equal to the required in-lieu fee, (2) the park is within a reasonable distance of the proposed subdivision and will serve the residents of the proposed subdivision, and (3) the improvements are consistent with the parks and recreation element of the general plan. Such improvements may, but need not be made within a park area dedicated by the subdivider.
E. The council may, by resolution, establish additional criteria for determination and procedures for collection and use of in-lieu fees, including a maximum fee per dwelling, to the extent such additional requirements do not conflict with these regulations or the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.22.090 Parkland dedication—Procedures.
A. At the time of approval of the tentative map, the council shall determine the amount of land to be dedicated and/or fees to be paid by the subdivider.
B. The land shall be dedicated and the fees shall be paid at the time the final subdivision map is filed with the city unless the body which approved the application approves a schedule for deferred dedication, payment of in-lieu fees, or improvement.
C. Open space covenants for private park or recreation facilities shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final subdivision map and shall be recorded at the same time as the final map. Any agreement between the city and school district concerning joint use of school sites for local park purposes, in accordance with Section 16.22.070, shall be executed prior to approval of the final subdivision map.
D. When the council approves the final subdivision map, it shall specify when development of the local park will begin. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.22.100 Parkland dedication—Specific plan provisions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section and Sections 16.22.040 through 16.22.090, the city may require dedication of an entire local park area in conjunction with approval of a single subdivision map when the subdivision and the parkland implement a specific plan with a definite phasing program relating increments of development and provision of public facilities, including parks. In such cases both the subdivision and parkland dedication shall be in accordance with the specific plan. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.22.110 Title insurance for dedication.
Before the final subdivision map is recorded, or if dedication and offers of dedication are supplemented by a separate instrument, before such instrument or instruments are recorded, a policy of title insurance shall be issued for the benefit and protection of the city. Any expense involved in complying with the provisions of this section shall be borne by the subdivider. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.23 EXCEPTIONS, APPEALS, AND APPLICATION RESUBMITTAL

Sections:
16.23.005    Purpose of provisions.
16.23.010    Exception authority.
16.23.020    Required findings and conditions for exceptions.
16.23.030    Exceptions considered with tentative map.
16.23.040    Appeal procedures.
16.23.050    Resubmittal of similar applications.

16.23.005 Purpose of provisions.
This chapter explains the provisions for requesting exceptions to the standards and requirements of the subdivision regulations, and for appealing decisions by the director, the city engineer, or the planning commission to the city council. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.23.010 Exception authority.
The planning commission or city council may authorize exceptions to the requirements or standards imposed by these regulations; provided, however, that no exceptions may be made to any requirements imposed by the Subdivision Map Act; and further provided, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed as altering or conflicting with the powers and duties of the city to approve variances or exceptions from the zoning regulations. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.23.020 Required findings and conditions for exceptions.
A. Before any exception is authorized, all of the following findings shall be made:
    1. That the property to be divided is of such size or shape, or is affected by such topographic conditions, that it is impossible, impractical or undesirable, in the particular case, to conform to the strict application of the regulations codified in this title; and
    2. That the cost to the subdivider of strict or literal compliance with the regulations is not the sole reason for granting the modification; and
    3. That the modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, or be injurious to other properties in the vicinity; and
    4. That granting the modification is in accord with the intent and purposes of these regulations, and is consistent with the general plan and with all applicable specific plans or other plans of the city.
B. In granting any exception, the commission or council shall impose such conditions as are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and assure compliance with the general plan, with all applicable specific plans, and with the intent and purposes of these regulations. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.23.030 Exceptions considered with tentative map.
A. Exception requests shall be filed with the tentative map and shall be processed with the map and acted upon concurrently. Each application shall state fully the nature and extent of the exception requested, the specific reasons for, and the facts relied upon to reach those conclusions.
B. The commission or council shall consider any request for exceptions, and the recommendation on such request, at the same time as it considers the tentative map and shall grant, conditionally grant, or deny the request. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.23.040 Appeal procedures.
Any discretionary decision, determination, or requirement of the community development or public works director, or the planning commission, made pursuant to these regulations may be appealed to the city council as provided in this chapter. The decision of the council shall be final.
A. Who May Appeal. An appeal may be filed by the subdivider or any interested person(s) adversely affected by the action being appealed.
B. Time and Place for Filing. An appeal shall be filed in writing within ten calendar days of the decision that is the subject of the appeal, except where the decision to deny an extension of time pursuant to Section 16.10.155, Time extension for parcel or final maps; such an appeal shall be filed within fifteen calendar days after the decision. If the last applicable calendar day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the last day to appeal shall be on the next business day that City Hall is open. Appeals to the city council shall be filed with the city clerk.
C. Form of Appeal. Appeals shall describe the actions or decisions being appealed and explain the reason for the appeal. Appeal forms for discretionary decisions of the director are available in the community development department. Appeal forms for discretionary decisions of the planning commission are available in the city clerk’s office. Fees for filing appeals shall be in accordance with the city council’s adopted fee schedule.
D. Report and Hearing. When an appeal has been filed, staff in the responsible department will prepare a report on the matter and schedule the item for a public hearing before the applicable hearing body within thirty days of the date the appeal was filed.
E. Action and Findings. After holding a public hearing, the hearing body shall declare its findings within seven days based on the testimony and documents presented at the hearing. The hearing body may sustain, modify, reject, or overrule any part of the decision being appealed based on findings that are consistent with these regulations and the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.23.050 Resubmittal of similar applications.
When any application made pursuant to these regulations has been denied, no new application which is substantially the same shall be filed within one year of the date of the previous denial unless the city council, for good cause, shall grant permission to do so. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.24 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
16.24.010    Generally.
16.24.020    Illegal subdivisions—Notification of community development director required.
16.24.030    Illegal subdivisions—Permit issuance prohibited.

16.24.010 Generally.
Except as otherwise provided in this title, the community development director is authorized and directed to enforce the regulations set out in this title and the Subdivision Map Act for subdivisions within the city. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.24.020 Illegal subdivisions—Notification of community development director required.
Any officer or employee of the city who has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or the regulations set out in this title shall immediately so notify the community development director. Upon receipt of the information, the community development director shall file the notices required by the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.24.030 Illegal subdivisions—Permit issuance prohibited.
No board, commission, officer or employee of the city shall issue any permit, or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property within the city which has been divided, or which resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (Section 66499.34) or of this title, if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the public health or public safety. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Chapter 16.26 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
16.26.010    Generally.
16.26.020    Advisory agency.
16.26.030    Alley.
16.26.035    Airspace subdivision.
16.26.040    Applicant.
16.26.050    Association.
16.26.060    Average cross slope.
16.26.070    Common interest subdivision/condominium.
16.26.080    Condominium conversion.
16.26.090    Day.
16.26.100    Distance.
16.26.110    Environmental impact report.
16.26.120    Final map.
16.26.130    Flag lot.
16.26.140    Flood hazard.
16.26.150    Future street.
16.26.160    General plan.
16.26.170    Geologic hazard.
16.26.180    Lot.
16.26.190    Lot line adjustment.
16.26.200    Lot width.
16.26.210    Lot depth.
16.26.220    Lot line, front.
16.26.230    Lot line, rear.
16.26.240    Lot line, side.
16.26.250    Merger.
16.26.260    Minor subdivision.
16.26.270    Nonresidential subdivision.
16.26.280    Path.
16.26.290    Parcel map.
16.26.300    Private road easement.
16.26.310    Remainder.
16.26.320    Reversion to acreage.
16.26.330    Right-of-way.
16.26.340    Roadway.
16.26.350    Slope.
16.26.360    Specific plan.
16.26.370    Stock cooperative.
16.26.380    Street.
16.26.390    Street tree.
16.26.400    Subdivider.
16.26.410    Subdivision.
16.26.420    Subdivision Map Act.
16.26.430    Tentative map.
16.26.440    Vesting tentative map.

16.26.010 Generally.
For the purposes of the regulations codified in this title, and to supplement the definitions in the Subdivision Map Act, the following words and phrases shall be construed as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.020 Advisory agency.
“Advisory agency” means the community development director, city engineer, or planning commission, as the case may be, which recommends to the council action on certain types of map applications. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.030 Alley.
“Alley” means a public or private way which provides vehicular access to the side or rear of properties whose principal frontage is on a street. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.035 Airspace subdivision.
An “airspace subdivision” for the purposes of these regulations is the three-dimensional subdivision of a commercial zoned property. Because there are no common areas, an airspace subdivision is not a condominium project for purposes of the Subdivision Map Act. Legal agreements recorded with the subdivision define how the lots and uses will function once individual components are sold. “Airspace lots” are defined as a division of the space above or below a lot, or partially above and below a lot, having finite width, length, and upper and lower elevations, occupied by a building or portion thereof. An airspace lot shall have access to appropriate public rights-of-way by means of one or more easements. Minimum lot sizes, lot dimensions, and lot area requirements shall not apply to airspace lots. Parking requirements, setback requirements, building density, floor area ratio, and associated property development standards shall apply and shall be determined as if all lots, buildings or structures in the airspace subdivision were merged into the same lot. (Ord. 1507 § 3(26), 2007)

16.26.040 Applicant.
“Applicant” means the subdivider or his authorized representative. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.050 Association.
“Association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.060 Average cross slope.
“Average cross slope” means the ratio, expressed as a percentage, of the difference in elevation to the horizontal distance between two points on the perimeter of the area whose slope is being determined, with the line along which the slope is being measured running essentially perpendicular to the contours between the points. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.070 Common interest subdivision/condominium.
“Common interest subdivision” includes subdivided lands which include a separate interest in real property combined with an interest in common with other owners. The following types of common interest subdivisions are recognized by the city of San Luis Obispo, consistent with the Davis Sterling Common Interest Development Act:
A. “Condominium project” consists of an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan in sufficient detail to locate all boundaries thereof. The area within these boundaries may be filled with air, earth, or water, or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support. Generally, condominiums are recognized as airspace ownership.
B. “Planned development” means a development (other than a community apartment project, a condominium project, or a stock cooperative) with individual lots having land ownership with either or both of the following features:
    1. The common area is owned either by the association or in common by the owners of the separate interests who possess appurtenant rights to the beneficial use and enjoyment of the common area.
    2. A power exists in the association to enforce an obligation of an owner of a separate interest with respect to the beneficial use and enjoyment of the common area by means of an assessment which may become a lien upon the separate interests in accordance with Section 1367 of the California Civil Code.
    For the purposes of these regulations, planned developments will be subject to condominium requirements and property development standards including lot coverage, density, setbacks, etc., unless accompanied by a planned development rezoning application consistent with Chapter 17.62 of the zoning regulations.
C. “Community apartment project” means a development in which an undivided interest in land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon. For the purposes of these regulations, community apartments will be subject to the same requirements as condominiums.
D. “Stock cooperative” means a development in which a corporation is formed or availed of primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property, and all or substantially all of the shareholders of the corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property, the title to which is held by the corporation. The owners’ interest in the corporation, whether evidenced by a share of stock, a certificate of membership, or otherwise, shall be deemed to be an interest in a common interest development and real estate development for purposes of subdivision (f) of Section 25100 of the Corporations Code. A “stock cooperative” includes a limited equity housing cooperative which is a stock cooperative that meets the criteria of Section 33007.5 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.080 Condominium conversion.
“Condominium conversion” means the conversion of property occupied under tenancies or estates other than condominiums to occupancy as condominiums. (See Chapter 16.17 of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code, Common Interest Subdivisions and Condominium Conversions.)

16.26.090 Day.
“Day” means calendar day. If the end of an interval specified in days falls on a weekend or holiday, the interval shall be deemed to end on the next business day. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.100 Distance.
All distances are measured horizontally unless noted otherwise. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.110 Environmental impact report.
“Environmental impact report” means a detailed statement under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) describing and analyzing the significant environmental effects of a project and discussing ways to mitigate or avoid the effects. The contents of the EIR are described in Article 9, Section 15120 of the State CEQA Guidelines. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.120 Final map.
“Final map” means the recording instrument for a tract map involving five or more parcels or as otherwise defined within the Subdivision Map Act. A final map shall require the components as listed in Section 16.14.050. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.130 Flag lot.
“Flag lot” means a lot predominantly situated behind another lot and having access to a street by means of a narrow portion of the flag lot extending out to the street. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.140 Flood hazard.
“Flood hazard” means a potential danger to life, property or natural resources due to storm water runoff or inundation, including deposition of silt and debris, erosion, or the presence of standing water. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.150 Future street.
“Future street” means real property subject to a yet unaccepted offer of dedication, all or part of which may later be accepted for a street by council resolution and without further action by the owner. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.160 General plan.
“General plan” means the adopted general plan of the city of San Luis Obispo. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.170 Geologic hazard.
“Geologic hazard” means a condition in the earth’s surface, either natural or artificially created, which is potentially hazardous to life, property or natural resources due to possible movement of rock or soil. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.180 Lot.
“Lot” means a parcel of land which is identified by a distinct number or letter on a final map or parcel map recorded in the office of the county recorder, or such parcel shown on a map or survey record complying with approval requirements in effect when it was recorded. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.190 Lot line adjustment.
“Lot line adjustment” involves the adjustment or relocation of existing, legally established lot lines between two or more directly adjacent parcels where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.200 Lot width.
“Lot width” means the sum of the lengths of the front and rear lot lines divided by two. For irregularly shaped lot or lots having more than two side lot lines, lot width shall be determined by drawing two lines perpendicular to one side lot line, one at the narrowest and one at the widest part of the lot, adding the lengths of the two lines, and dividing by two. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.210 Lot depth.
“Lot depth” means the distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.220 Lot line, front.
“Front lot line” means the line which separates the lot from the street. For a corner lot, the line at the shortest street frontage will be the front lot line, unless the latest tract deed restrictions specify another line. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.230 Lot line, rear.
“Rear lot line” means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular or triangular lot, the rear lot line is a line within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of at least ten feet. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.240 Lot line, side.
“Side lot line” means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.250 Merger.
“Merger” means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.260 Minor subdivision.
“Minor subdivision” means a subdivision of four or fewer parcels. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.270 Nonresidential subdivision.
“Nonresidential subdivision” means a subdivision whose intended use is other than residential. Such subdivision shall comply with applicable provisions of these regulations. Subdivisions incorporating both residential and nonresidential uses, either upon the same land area or within different portions of the subdivision, shall comply with applicable provisions of these regulations. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.280 Path.
“Path” means a way designed for use by pedestrians, bicycles or animals and not designed or intended for use by motor vehicles. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.290 Parcel map.
“Parcel map” means the recording instrument for a minor subdivision involving four or fewer parcels. A parcel map shall require the components as described in Section 16.14.050. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.300 Private road easement.
“Private road easement” means an easement recorded in the office of the county recorder, granted to owners of property adjacent to the parcel covered by the easement for access to the adjacent properties. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.310 Remainder.
“Remainder” means that portion of an existing parcel which is not included as part of the subdivided land. The remainder is not considered as part of the subdivision but must be shown on the required maps as part of the area surrounding subdivision development. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.320 Reversion to acreage.
“Reversion to acreage” means the combining of two or more recorded, contiguous lots into a single parcel. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.330 Right-of-way.
“Right-of-way” means a parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, path, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sewer main, storm drain or similar utility or special use. Use of the term “right-of-way,” distinguished from “easement,” shall mean that the area dedicated to the use shall be separate from adjoining lots and shall not be included in the area or dimensions of such lots. Rights-of-way intended for a use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the owner of the parcel(s) on which the right-of-way is established. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.340 Roadway.
“Roadway” means that portion of a street or alley used or intended to accommodate the movement of vehicles. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.350 Slope.
See Section 16.26.060, Average cross slope. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.360 Specific plan.
“Specific plan” means a plan for a designated area of the city, based on the general plan but containing more detailed regulations and programs, as provided in Section 65450 and following of the California Government Code. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.370 Stock cooperative.
“Stock cooperative” means an apartment development in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of an apartment in the development. For the purposes of these regulations, stock cooperatives will be subject to the same requirements as condominiums. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.380 Street.
“Street” means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, way or other name. “Street” does not include a path or alley. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.390 Street tree.
“Street tree” means a tree in a public place, street, special easement or right-of-way adjoining a street. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.400 Subdivider.
“Subdivider” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association which proposes to divide, causes to be divided or divides real property for itself or for others, except employees or representatives of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not subdividers. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.410 Subdivision.
“Subdivision” shall have the meaning as defined in the Subdivision Map Act, including any division for gift or token consideration. According to the Subdivision Map Act:“Subdivision” means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. “Subdivision” includes a condominium project as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. Any conveyance of land to a government agency, public entity or public utility shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of parcels. As used in this section, “agricultural purposes” means the cultivation of food or fiber, or the grazing or pasturing of livestock.
(Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.420 Subdivision Map Act.
“Subdivision Map Act” means the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California and such revisions as may be made by the California Legislature. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.430 Tentative map.
“Tentative map” refers to a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property. Unlike a “parcel map” defined above, a tentative map is not required to be drawn by a registered civil engineer. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

16.26.440 Vesting tentative map.
“Vesting tentative map” refers to a map made which meets the requirements of a tentative map and Chapter 16.12, and has the words “vesting tentative map” printed on it. The vesting tentative map conveys development rights for subdivisions according to Chapter 16.12. (Ord. 1490 § 3 (part), 2006)

Title 17 ZONING REGULATIONS

Chapters:
Article 1.  Enactment, Applicability, and Enforcement
    17.02        Purpose and Applicability of the Zoning Regulations
    17.04        Interpretation of the Zoning Regulations
    17.06        Zones Established and Zoning Map
    17.08        Reserved
Article 2.  Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development and Design Standards
    17.10        Use Regulations
    17.12        Agricultural (AG) Zone
    17.14        Conservation/Open Space (C/OS) Zone
    17.16        Low-Density Residential (R-1) Zone
    17.18        Medium-Density Residential (R-2) Zone
    17.20        Medium-High Density Residential (R-3) Zone
    17.22        High-Density Residential (R-4) Zone
    17.24        Office (O) Zone
    17.26        Neighborhood Commercial (C-N) Zone
    17.28        Community Commercial (C-C) Zone
    17.30        Retail Commercial (C-R) Zone
    17.32        Downtown Commercial (C-D) Zone
    17.34        Tourist Commercial (C-T) Zone
    17.36        Service Commercial (C-S) Zone
    17.38        Reserved
    17.40        Manufacturing (M) Zone
    17.42        Business Park (BP) Zone
    17.44        Reserved
    17.46        Public Facility (PF) Zone
    17.48        Planned Development (PD) Overlay Zone
    17.50        Specific Plan (SP) Overlay Zone
    17.52        Special Focus Area (S-F) Overlay Zone
    17.54        Downtown (D) Overlay Zone
    17.56        Historical Preservation (H) Overlay Zone
    17.58        Mixed-Use (MU) Overlay Zone
    17.60        Special Consideration (S) Overlay Zone
    17.62        Reserved
    17.64        Airport (AOZ) Overlay Zone
    17.66        Reserved
Article 3.  Regulations and Standards Applicable to All Zones
    17.68        Purpose
    17.70        Site Development and General Development Standards
    17.72        Parking and Loading
    17.74        Performance Standards
    17.76        Property Maintenance Standards
    17.78        Flood Damage Prevention
    17.80        Street Regulations
    17.82        Reserved
    17.84        Reserved
Article 4.  Regulations for Specific Land Uses and Activities
    17.86        Regulations for Specific Land Uses and Activities
    17.88        Reserved
    17.90        Reserved
Article 5.  Nonconformities
    17.92        Nonconforming Structures
    17.94        Nonconforming Uses
    17.96        Nonconforming Lots
Article 6.  Permit Procedures
    17.102       General Provisions
    17.104       Permit Application Filing and Processing
    17.106       Development Review
    17.108       Director’s Action
    17.109       Director’s Hearing
    17.110       Minor Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits
    17.112       Reasonable Accommodation
    17.113       Temporary Use Permits
    17.114       Variances
Article 7.  Administration of Zoning Regulations
    17.120       Administrative Responsibility
    17.122       Public Notices and Hearings
    17.124       Amendments—Zoning Regulations and Zoning Map
    17.126       Appeals
    17.128       Development Agreements
    17.130       General Plan Amendments
    17.132       Enforcement
Article 8.  Housing-Related Regulations
    17.138       Inclusionary Housing Requirements
    17.140       Affordable Housing Incentives
    17.142       Downtown Housing Conversion Regulations
    17.144       Residential Growth Management Regulations
    17.146       Residential Occupancy Standards
    17.148       High-Occupancy Residential Use Regulations
Article 9.  Definitions
    17.154       Definitions, Purpose, and Organization
    17.156       Land Use Definitions (Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone)
    17.158       General Definitions
    17.160       Airport Overlay Zone Land Use Definitions (Table 2-24)

Article 1. Enactment, Applicability, and Enforcement

Chapter 17.02 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY OF THE ZONING REGULATIONS

Sections:
17.02.010    Title.
17.02.020    Purpose and authority.
17.02.030    General requirements.
17.02.040    Relationship to prior ordinances and other codes.
17.02.050    General relationship to other regulations.
17.02.060    Relationship to California Environmental Quality Act.
17.02.070    Relationship to design guidelines.
17.02.080    Relationship to specific plans.
17.02.090    Prior rights and violations.
17.02.100    Severability, partial invalidation of the zoning regulations.

17.02.010 Title.
The provisions of this title shall be known and cited as the “city of San Luis Obispo zoning regulations” or “zoning regulations.” (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.02.020 Purpose and authority.
A. Purpose. The zoning regulations are intended to guide the development of the city in an orderly manner, implement the policies of the general plan, protect and enhance the quality of the natural and built environment, promote the public health, safety and general welfare by regulating the use of land and buildings and the location and basic form of structures, and provide the physical, environmental, economic, and social advantages that result from the orderly planned use of land resources.
B. Authority. The zoning regulations are enacted based on the authority vested in the city of San Luis Obispo and its charter, and the state of California, including but not limited to the State Constitution, Planning and Zoning Law (California Government Code Section 65800 et seq.), and the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.02.030 General requirements.
Land or buildings may be used and structures may be erected or altered only in accordance with the regulations in this title. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.02.040 Relationship to prior ordinances and other codes.
The provisions of the zoning regulations, as they existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, are repealed and superseded as provided in the ordinance enacting this title. No provision of the zoning regulations shall validate or legalize any land use or structure established, constructed, or maintained in violation of the zoning regulations as it existed prior to repeal by the ordinance enacting these zoning regulations, except as addressed by nonconformities created by the zoning regulations. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.02.050 General relationship to other regulations.
The regulations of this title and requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to this title shall not supersede any other regulations or requirements adopted or imposed by the city, the state of California, or any federal agency that has jurisdiction by law over uses and development authorized by this title. All uses and development authorized by this title shall comply with all other such regulations and requirements. Where conflict occurs between the provisions of this title and any other city ordinance, title, chapter, resolution, guideline or regulation, the more restrictive provisions shall control, unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.02.060 Relationship to California Environmental Quality Act.
When a project application pursuant to the provisions of the zoning regulations is determined to be subject to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the application shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of the zoning regulations, CEQA (Public Resources Code, Section 21000 et seq.), the CEQA Guidelines (Title 14, California Code of Regulations, Section 15000 et seq.), and any environmental guidelines and other applicable rules adopted by the city. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.02.070 Relationship to design guidelines.
Any design guidelines adopted by the city shall be considered complementary to the development and design standards set forth in the zoning regulations. In the event of any conflict between adopted design guidelines and the provisions of the zoning regulations, the provisions of the zoning regulations shall govern. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.02.080 Relationship to specific plans.
Specific plans are designed to meet the requirements of the State Government Code and the city of San Luis Obispo general plan. All uses, buildings, or structures located within a specific plan area shall comply with the provisions of the applicable specific plan. If such provisions conflict with the zoning regulations, the requirements of the adopted specific plan shall take precedence over the zoning regulations. In instances where the specific plan is silent, the zoning regulations shall prevail. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.02.090 Prior rights and violations.
The enactment of the zoning regulations shall not terminate nor otherwise affect vested land use development permits, approvals, or agreements authorized under the provisions of any ordinance or resolution, nor shall violation of any prior ordinance or resolution be excused by the adoption of the zoning regulations. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.02.100 Severability, partial invalidation of the zoning regulations.
If any portion of the zoning regulations is held to be invalid, unconstitutional, or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the validity, constitutionality, or enforceability of the remaining portions of this title. The council hereby declares that this chapter and each division, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, and portion thereof is adopted without regard to the fact that one or more portions of this chapter may be declared invalid, unconstitutional, or unenforceable. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.04 INTERPRETATION OF THE ZONING REGULATIONS

Sections:
17.04.010    Rules of interpretation.
17.04.020    Procedures for interpretation.
17.04.030    Uses not classified.
17.04.040    Text takes precedence over graphics.

17.04.010 Rules of interpretation.
A. Ambiguity. The director is assigned the responsibility and authority to interpret these regulations, subject to the appeal procedures of Chapter 17.126 (Appeals).
B. Conflict with Public Provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere with or annul any other law or regulation. Where these regulations impose a restriction different from any other law or regulation, the more restrictive shall apply.
C. Conflict with Private Provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between private parties. Where these regulations impose a restriction different from a private agreement, the provisions which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards shall control.
D. Internal Conflicts. Where provisions indicated in this article conflict with provisions of other applicable laws, including these zoning regulations and other adopted ordinances, the more restrictive provision shall prevail.
E. Terminology. When used in this chapter, the following rules apply to all provisions of the zoning regulations:
    1. Language. When used in the zoning regulations, the words “shall,” “must,” “will,” “is to,” and “are to” are mandatory. Regulations containing the word “should” are to be followed unless not doing so will result in better implementation of other zoning regulations or general plan policies; with the overall objective of ensuring that the intent and spirit of the general plan and zoning regulations are followed. “May” is permissive.
    2. Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tense, and the future tense includes the present.
    3. Number. The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the words indicates otherwise.
    4. Conjunctions. “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions shall apply. “Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in any combination. “Either … or” indicates that the connected items and provisions shall apply singly but not in combination. “Includes” and “including” shall mean “including but not limited to.”
    5. Local Reference. “City” as used in the zoning regulations means the city of San Luis Obispo, and all public officials, bodies, and agencies referenced are those of the city unless otherwise stated.
    6. Definitions. All words and terms shall be as defined in the zoning regulations, municipal code, and/or as determined/interpreted by the director.
    7. State Law Requirements. References to applicable provisions of state law (e.g., the California Government Code, Public Resources Code) shall be construed to refer to the applicable state law provisions, as they may be amended from time to time.
F. Number of Days. Whenever the number of days is specified in the zoning regulations, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as provided in the zoning regulations, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days, unless otherwise specified. When the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend or city holiday, time limits shall extend to the end of the next working day.
G. Fractions. Except as otherwise provided, the fractional/decimal results of calculations of one-half (0.5) or greater shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number and fractions of less than one-half (0.5) shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
H. Minimum Requirements. When interpreting and applying the zoning regulations, all provisions shall be considered to be minimum requirements, unless specifically stated otherwise. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.04.020 Procedures for interpretation.
A. Authority of Director to Interpret. Whenever, in the opinion of the director, or at the discretion of the planning commission, there is any question regarding the interpretation of the general plan, a specific plan, or the provisions of the zoning regulations or its application to any specific case or situation that warrants formal interpretation, the director shall interpret the relevant provision of the general plan, specific plan, or zoning regulations by written decision or refer the question to the planning commission for determination.
B. Appeals. Any interpretation of the zoning regulations by the director or planning commission may be appealed in compliance with Chapter 17.126 (Appeals). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.04.030 Uses not classified.
A. Use Not Listed Is Not Allowed. If a use of land is not specifically listed in Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations), the use shall not be allowed, except as provided below.
B. Director’s Determination. Based on the authority granted in Section 17.04.020 (Procedures for Interpretation), the director may determine that a land use that is not listed in Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations) may be allowed. In making this determination, the director shall first make all of the following findings:
    1. The characteristics of, and activities associated with, the use are equivalent to those of one or more of the uses listed in the zone as allowable, and will not involve a greater level of activity, population density, intensity, traffic generation, parking, dust, odor, noise, emissions, or similar impacts than the uses listed in the zone;
    2. The use will meet the purpose/intent of the zone that is applied to the location of the use; and
    3. The use will be consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the general plan and/or any applicable specific plan or planned development.
C. Applicable Standards and Permit Requirements. When the director determines that an unlisted land use is equivalent to a listed use, the unlisted use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use in determining where the use is allowed, what permits are required, and what other standards and requirements of the zoning regulations apply.
D. Uses Not Permitted in the City. Notwithstanding the above, prohibited uses listed in Section 17.10.020(F) (Prohibited Uses), any use not expressly allowed by these zoning regulations, and any other uses determined by the director to have equivalent characteristics and activities to these prohibited uses, shall not be treated as permitted or conditionally permitted uses in any zone of the city. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.04.040 Text takes precedence over graphics.
In case of a conflict between the zoning regulations text and any diagram, illustration, graphic, or image contained in the zoning regulations, the text shall take precedence. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.06 ZONES ESTABLISHED AND ZONING MAP

Sections:
17.06.010    Purpose.
17.06.020    Designation of zones.
17.06.030    Official zoning map.
17.06.040    Uncertainty of boundaries.
17.06.050    Classification of annexed lands and unclassified property.

17.06.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the zones applied to property within the city and to adopt the city’s zoning map. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.06.020 Designation of zones.
A. General. The city is divided into zones to allow for orderly, planned development and to implement the general plan.
B. Base Zone. Every parcel shall have a base zone that establishes the primary type and intensity of land use permitted, along with development regulations for that particular type and intensity of land use.
C. Overlay Zone. An overlay zone supplements the base zone for the purpose of establishing special use or development regulations for a particular area in addition to the provisions of the underlying base zone. In the event of conflict between the base zone regulations and the overlay zone regulations, the provisions of the overlay zone shall apply.
D. Zones Established. All zones shall be listed and appropriately designated on the official zoning map. For purposes of the regulations set out in this title, the following zones are created:
+------+---------------------------------+
|      Table 1-1: Zones Established      |
+------+---------------------------------+
| Residential Zones                      |
+------+---------------------------------+
| R-1  | Low-Density Residential         |
+------+---------------------------------+
| R-2  | Medium-Density Residential      |
+------+---------------------------------+
| R-3  | Medium-High Density Residential |
+------+---------------------------------+
| R-4  | High-Density Residential        |
+------+---------------------------------+
| Nonresidential Zones                   |
+------+---------------------------------+
| AG   | Agricultural                    |
+------+---------------------------------+
| C/OS | Conservation/Open Space         |
+------+---------------------------------+
| O    | Office                          |
+------+---------------------------------+
| PF   | Public Facility                 |
+------+---------------------------------+
| C-N  | Neighborhood Commercial         |
+------+---------------------------------+
| C-C  | Community Commercial            |
+------+---------------------------------+
| C-D  | Downtown Commercial             |
+------+---------------------------------+
| C-R  | Retail Commercial               |
+------+---------------------------------+
| C-T  | Tourist Commercial              |
+------+---------------------------------+
| C-S  | Service Commercial              |
+------+---------------------------------+
| M    | Industrial                      |
+------+---------------------------------+
| Overlay Zones                          |
+------+---------------------------------+
| AO   | Airport Overlay                 |
+------+---------------------------------+
| D    | Downtown Overlay                |
+------+---------------------------------+
| SP   | Specific Plan                   |
+------+---------------------------------+
| H    | Historic Overlay                |
+------+---------------------------------+
| MU   | Mixed-Use Overlay               |
+------+---------------------------------+
| S    | Special Considerations Overlay  |
+------+---------------------------------+
| S-F  | Special Focus Overlay           |
+------+---------------------------------+
| PD   | Planned Development Overlay     |
+------+---------------------------------+
| CBZ  | Cannabis Business Overlay Zone  |
+------+---------------------------------+
(Ord. 1653 § 3, 2018; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.06.030 Official zoning map.
All areas within the city shall be designated within a zone. The boundaries, designations, map symbols and locations of the zones established by the zoning regulations shall be shown upon the map(s) entitled “City of San Luis Obispo Zoning Map” and referred to in the zoning regulations as the zoning map. The official zoning map, which shall depict all duly adopted zones, is as much a part of these regulations as if it were fully contained in this document. The official zoning map shall be maintained by and in the community development department, and for convenience in more easily identifying zone boundaries may be divided into parts. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.06.040 Uncertainty of boundaries.
A. General. Boundaries between zones generally follow lot lines or their extensions, physical features, or contour lines, as noted on the official zoning map. Boundaries adjoining streets shall be assumed to follow the centerlines of streets if such location becomes an issue in the use of private property, as when a street is abandoned. Zones which meet a street centerline shall not be considered “adjacent.”
B. Split Zoning. A split-zoned parcel is a parcel to which two or more base zones apply (which does not include overlay zones). All applicable zoning regulations for each particular zone shall be applied separately for each portion of a parcel that is split-zoned. This includes the front, rear and side setback regulations, regardless of the standard setback definition provided in Chapter 17.158 (General Definitions), as well as any applicable lot coverage regulations.
C. Determination. The location of boundaries which are not readily determined by inspection of the official zoning map shall be determined by the director. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.06.050 Classification of annexed lands and unclassified property.
Any area annexed to the city shall be prezoned consistent with the general plan or zoned C/OS until rezoned after annexation. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.08 RESERVED

Article 2. Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development and Design Standards

Chapter 17.10 USE REGULATIONS

Sections:
17.10.010    Purpose and application.
17.10.020    Use regulations by zone.

17.10.010 Purpose and application.
This chapter identifies those land uses that may be established in conjunction with any buildings, improvements, lots, or premises within the zones established by Chapter 17.06 (Zones Established and Zoning Map). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.10.020 Use regulations by zone.
A. Allowed Uses. Uses within zones shall be regulated as set forth in Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone, subject to subsections B through F of this section and additional regulations specified in the Specific Use Regulations column of Table 2-1. Land uses are defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions). In Table 2-1, symbols shall have these meanings:
+-----+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| A   | The use is allowed as a matter of right.                                       |
+-----+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| MUP | The use requires a minor use permit approved by the director, as provided      |
|     | in Section 17.110.030 (Procedure—Minor Use Permit).                            |
+-----+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| CUP | The use requires a conditional use permit approved by the planning commission, |
|     | as provided in Section 17.110.030 (Procedure—Minor Use Permit).                |
+-----+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| M/A | The use is allowed above the ground floor only. Subject to minor use           |
|     | permit review, the use may be established on the ground floor.                 |
+-----+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
Variations to allowed uses in Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone may be permitted or required by Chapter 17.50: Specific Plan (SP) Overlay Zone, Chapter 17.52: Special Focus Area (S-F) Overlay Zone, and Chapter 17.60: Special Considerations (S) Overlay Zone.
B. Interpretation of Use Listing. 
    1. Director’s Determination. In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the director shall assign the land use or activity to a classification that is substantially similar in character per Section 17.04.030(B) (Director’s Determination). This interpretation procedure shall not be used as a substitute for the amendment procedure as a means of adding new types of uses to a zone.
    2. Uses Not Listed and Not Substantially Similar. Any use not expressly allowed by these zoning regulations is prohibited.
C. Primary and Accessory Uses. Listed uses are primary uses. Accessory uses are allowed only where a primary use is established. An accessory use may be allowed if it is not listed as an allowed use in Table 2-1 for the applicable zone.
D. Airport Land Use Plan and Airport Overlay Zone. See Chapter 17.64 (Airport (AOZ) Overlay Zone) concerning uses that may be allowed within the airport overlay zone.
E. Specific Plan Consistency. See Section 17.02.080 (Relationship to Specific Plans).
F. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited in all zones:
    1. RESERVED;
    2. Drive-through facilities;
    3. Large-scale retail with over 140,000 square feet of gross floor area;
    4. Livestock feed lots;
    5. Mineral extraction and commercial mining;
    6. Onshore support facilities for offshore oil or gas development;
    7. Vacation rentals. See also Section 17.86.160 (Homestay Rentals).
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
|                                                        Table 2-1: Uses Allowed By Zone                                                        |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
|   Key:    |                   A = Allowed; MUP = Minor Use Permit approval required; CUP = Conditional                   |                    |
|           |                                         Use Permit approval required                                         |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| "         |                    M/A = Minor Use Permit approval required on ground floor along street                     | "                  |
|           |                                  frontage, allowed on second floor or above                                  |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
|         Land         |                               Permit Requirement by Zoning District                               |      Specific      |
|         Use          |                                                                                                   |        Use         |
|                      |                                                                                                   |    Regulations     |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| "                    | AG  | C/OS | R1  | R2  | R3  | R4  | PF  |  O  | C-N | C-C | C-R | C-D | C-T | C-S  |  M   |  BP  | "                  |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| AGRICULTURE                                                                                                                                   |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Agricultural         | A   | A    |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Accessory            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Structure            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Animal               | A   | A    |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Husbandry            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Grazing              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Community            | A   | MUP  | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Garden               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Crop                 | A   | A    |     |     |     |     | A   |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP  | MUP  |      |                    |
| Production           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Greenhouse/Plant     | CUP | CUP  |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Nursery,             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Commercial           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| INDUSTRY, MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING, WHOLESALING                                                                                           |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Fuel                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP  | A    |      | See                |
| Dealer               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | also               |
| (propane,            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| etc)                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.74.060          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Laboratory—Medical,  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     | CUP |     |     | A   |     |     | A    | A    | A    | See                |
| Analytical,          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | also               |
| Research,            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| Testing              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.74.060          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Manufacturing—Heavy  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      | CUP  | CUP  | See                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | also               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.74.060          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Manufacturing—Light  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | A    | A    | A    | See                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | also               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.74.060          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Recycling                                                                                                                |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Recycling—Collection |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP |     |     | MUP  | A    |      |                    |
| Facility             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Recycling—Processing |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      | MUP  |      |                    |
| Facility             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Research             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | A    | MUP  | A    | See                |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | also               |
| Development          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.74.060          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Salvage              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      | MUP  |      |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Wrecking             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution                                                                                   |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Outdoor              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP  | MUP  |      |                    |
| Storage              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Personal             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | A    | A    |      |                    |
| Storage              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Warehousing          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | A    | A    | MUP  |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Indoor               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Storage              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Wholesaling          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | A    | A    | MUP  |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Distribution         |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| LODGING                                                                                                                                       |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Bed and              | MUP |      |     |     | CUP | CUP |     |     |     |     | A   | A   | A   |      |      |      | See                |
| Breakfast            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| Establishment        |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.070          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Homeless             |     |      |     |     | CUP | CUP | A   | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP  | CUP  |      | See                |
| Shelter              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.150          |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | and                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | GC                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 65583(a)(4)        |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Hostel               |     |      |     |     | CUP | CUP |     |     |     |     | A   | A   | A   |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Hotels               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | A   | A   | A   | CUP  |      | CUP  |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Motels               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| RV Parks             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | CUP |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC USES                                                                                                                  |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Cultural             |     |      |     |     |     |     | CUP |     |     | A   | A   | A   | CUP |      |      |      |                    |
| Institutions         |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Hospitals and Clinics                                                                                                    |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Clinic               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     | MUP |     | MUP | A   | MUP |     | MUP  |      | MUP  | See                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.36.030(C)       |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | and                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.42.030(A)       |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Hospital             |     |      |     |     |     |     | CUP | CUP |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Park                 |     |      | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A    | A    | A    | Parks              |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | and                |
| Recreation           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Recreation         |
| Facilities           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Commission         |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | review             |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | required           |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Public               |     |      |     |     |     |     | CUP | A   |     | MUP | MUP | M/A | MUP | CUP  |      |      |                    |
| Assembly             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Facilities           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Religious            |     |      | CUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | A   | MUP | MUP | A   | M/A | MUP | MUP  | MUP  |      | See                |
| Assembly             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 42                 |
| Facilities           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | U.S.C.             |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | §§ 2000cc,         |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | et                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | seq.               |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Schools—Colleges     |     |      |     |     |     |     | CUP |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Schools—Primary      |     |      | CUP | CUP | MUP | MUP | CUP | CUP |     | CUP | MUP |     |     | CUP  |      |      | See                |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| Secondary            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.240          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Schools—Trade        |     |      |     |     |     |     | CUP | MUP |     |     |     | CUP |     | MUP  |      | MUP  | In                 |
| Schools              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | the                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | C-D                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | zone,              |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Trade              |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Schools            |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | are                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | not                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | allowed            |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | on                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | the                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | ground             |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | floor              |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Sports               |     |      |     |     |     |     | CUP |     |     |     |     |     |     |      | CUP  |      |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Entertainment        |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Assembly             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Facility             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| RESIDENTIAL USES                                                                                                                              |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| General Residential Housing Types                                                                                        |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Single-Unit          | A   | CUP  | A   | A   | A   | A   |     | A   |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Dwellings,           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Detached             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Multi-Unit           |     |      |     | A   | A   | A   |     | A   |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Residential          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Boarding             |     |      |     |     | CUP | CUP |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP |     |      |      |      | See                |
| House                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Chapter            |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.146             |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Caretaker            | A   | A    | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A    | A    | MUP  |                    |
| Quarters             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Continuing           |     |      | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP |     | MUP |     |     | MUP | MUP |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Care                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Community            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Elderly              |     |      |     |     | MUP | MUP |     | MUP |     |     | M/A | M/A | MUP |      |      |      |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Long                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Term                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Care                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Family               | A   |      | A   | A   | A   | A   |     | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A    | A    |      | See                |
| Day                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| Care                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.100          |
| (Small               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | and                |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | H&SC               |
| Large)               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 1597.40            |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Fraternities         |     |      |     |     | CUP | CUP |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Sororities           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Hospice              |     |      |     | CUP | CUP | MUP | CUP | CUP |     |     | MUP |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| In-Patient           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Facility             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| High                 |     |      | MUP | MUP |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | See                |
| Occupancy            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Chapter            |
| Residential          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.148             |
| Use                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Mobile               |     |      | A   | A   | A   | A   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | See                |
| Home                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | GC                 |
| Park                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 65852.7,           |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 65863.7,           |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 65863.8            |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Residential          | A   |      | A   | A   | A   | A   |     | A   | M/A |     | M/A | M/A | MUP |      |      |      | Multiple           |
| Care                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | state              |
| Facilities—6         |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | statutes           |
| or Fewer             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Residents            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Residential          |     |      | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP |     | MUP |     |     | MUP | MUP |     |      |      |      | Multiple           |
| Care                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | state              |
| Facilities—7         |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | statutes           |
| or More              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Residents            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Supportive           |     |      | A   | A   | A   | A   | MUP | A   | MUP |     | MUP |     |     |      |      |      | See                |
| and/or               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | GC                 |
| Transitional         |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| Housing,             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 65583(a)(5)        |
| with                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| On-                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| or Off-Site          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Services             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| MIXED USES                                                                                                                                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Mixed-use            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | MUP  | CUP  |      | See                |
| Development          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.70.130          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| COMMERCIAL USES                                                                                                                               |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Adult                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | A   |     | A   |      |      |      | See                |
| Entertainment        |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| Businesses           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.030          |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | and                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | GC                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Section            |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 65850.4            |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Animal Care, Sales and Services                                                                                          |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Animal               | CUP |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP  | MUP  |      | Outdoor            |
| Boarding/Kennels     |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | runs               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | and                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | kennel             |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | areas              |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | shall              |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | be                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | allowed            |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | only               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | in                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | the                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | C-S                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | zone.              |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | See                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | also               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.170          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Animal               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     | A   | A   | A   | A   |     | A    | MUP  |      |                    |
| Grooming             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Animal               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP | A   | A   | A   |     | A    |      |      |                    |
| Retail               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Sales                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Veterinary           | CUP |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP  | MUP  |      |                    |
| Services,            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Large                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Animal               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Veterinary           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     | A   | A   | A   | A   | M/A |     | A    |      |      |                    |
| Services,            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Small                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Animal               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Banks and Financial Institutions                                                                                         |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| ATMs                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A    | A    | A    |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Banks                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     | A   |     | A   | A   | A   |     | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  | See                |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| Credit               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.36.030(B)       |
| Unions               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | and                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.40.030(A)       |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Check                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Cashing              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Shops/Payday         |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Loans                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Business             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     | A   |     | A   | A   | M/A |     | A    | A    | A    |                    |
| Services             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Cemetery             |     | CUP  | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP |     |     |     | CUP |     | CUP | CUP  | CUP  |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Commercial           |     |      |     |     |     |     | PC  |     |     | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP  | CUP  | MUP  | See                |
| Recreation—Large     |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| Scale                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.36.030(D)       |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | and                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.110          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Commercial           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP | A   | A   | A   | A   | A    | A    | MUP  |                    |
| Recreation—Small     |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Scale                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Day Care             |     |      | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | A   | A   | A   | A   | M/A | MUP | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  | See                |
| Center               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.100          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Eating and Drinking Establishments                                                                                       |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Bars,                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP  | MUP  |      | See                |
| Live                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | also               |
| Entertainment,       |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.030          |
| Taverns              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | and                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.040          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Restaurant           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | A    | MUP  | MUP  |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Restaurant           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  | See                |
| with                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| Late                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.040          |
| Hour                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | and                |
| Alcohol              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| Service              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.050          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Food and Beverage Sales                                                                                                  |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| General              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     | A   | A   | A   | A   | CUP |      |      |      | See                |
| Market               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.26.030(B)(1)    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Convenience          |     |      |     | MUP | MUP | MUP |     |     | A   | A   | A   | A   | A   | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  | See                |
| Store                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.26.030(B)(1)    |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | and                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.090          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Produce              | MUP | MUP  |     |     |     |     |     |     | A   |     | A   | A   |     | A    |      |      |                    |
| Stand                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Liquor               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | CUP |      |      |      | See                |
| Store                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.26.030(B)(2)    |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | and                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.040          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Food                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | A   |     |     | A    | A    |      |                    |
| Preparation          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Funeral              |     |      |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP |     |     | A   |     |     | MUP  |      |      |                    |
| Parlors              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Interment            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Services             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Instructional        |     |      |     |     |     |     | MUP | CUP | MUP | M/A | A   | M/A | CUP | A    | MUP  |      |                    |
| Services             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Maintenance          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | A    | A    | CUP  |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Repair               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Services             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Offices                                                                                                                  |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Business             |     |      |     |     |     |     | MUP | A   |     | A   | A   | M/A |     | M/A  | MUP  | MUP  | In                 |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | the                |
| Professional         |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | C-S                |
| Offices              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | zone,              |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | a                  |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Minor              |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Use                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Permit             |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | is                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | required           |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | for                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | office             |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | uses               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | on                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | the                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | ground             |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | floor.             |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | See                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | also               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.36.030(B)       |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | and                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.40.030(A)       |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Medical              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     | A   |     | MUP | A   | M/A |     | MUP  |      | MUP  | See                |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| Dental               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.36.030(C)       |
| Offices              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Personal             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     | A   | A   | A   | A   | MUP | A    |      | MUP  |                    |
| Services             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Retail Sales                                                                                                             | See                |
|                                                                                                                          | Sec.               |
|                                                                                                                          | 17.26.030(A),      |
|                                                                                                                          | 17.30.030(A),      |
|                                                                                                                          | 17.32.030,         |
|                                                                                                                          | and                |
|                                                                                                                          | 17.34.030(A)       |
|                                                                                                                          | and                |
|                                                                                                                          | 17.36.030(A)       |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Building             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | A   | A   | A   |     | A    | A    |      |                    |
| Materials            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Services—Indoor      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Building             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP | A   | MUP |     | A    | A    |      |                    |
| Materials            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Services—Outdoor     |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Extended             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP  | MUP  |      |                    |
| Hour                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Retail               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| General              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP | A   | A   | A   | MUP | MUP  |      |      |                    |
| Retail               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Large-Scale          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | CUP | CUP | CUP |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Retail               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Nurseries            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | CUP |     |     | A    | A    |      |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Garden               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Centers              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Theaters             |     |      |     |     |     |     | PC  |     |     | MUP | MUP | MUP |     |      |      | MUP  | Only               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | nonprofit          |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | theaters           |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | are                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | allowed            |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | in                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | the                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | PF                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | zone.              |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | See                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | also               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.030          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Vehicle Sales and Services                                                                                               |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Auto                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP |     | CUP | A    | MUP  |      |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Vehicle              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Sales                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Rental               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Large                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP  | A    |      |                    |
| Vehicle,             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Construction         |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Heavy                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Equipment            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Sales,               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Service,             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Rental               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Service              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP | MUP |     | MUP | A    |      |      | See                |
| Stations             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.250          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Vehicle              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | A    | A    | MUP  |                    |
| Services—Major       |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Repair/Body          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Work                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Vehicle              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | CUP | MUP |     |     | A    | A    | MUP  |                    |
| Services—Minor       |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Repair/Maintenance   |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Vehicle              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP |     | CUP | MUP  | MUP  |      |                    |
| Services—Washing     |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS, AND UTILITIES                                                                                                 |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Airport              |     |      |     |     |     |     | CUP |     |     |     |     |     |     | CUP  | CUP  | MUP  |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Wireless             | MUP | MUP  |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP |     | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  | See                |
| Telecommunications   |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
| Facilities           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.290,         |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 47                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | USC                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 332(c)(7)          |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | of                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | the                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Telecommunications |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Act,               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Pub.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Util.              |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Code               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 7901               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | et                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | seq.,              |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | GC                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 65850.6            |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Freight/Truck        |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | A    | A    | MUP  |                    |
| Terminals            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Light                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | A    | MUP  | MUP  |                    |
| Fleet-Based          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Services             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Media Production                                                                                                         |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Backlots             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  |                    |
| and                  |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Soundstages          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Broadcast            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     | A   |     |     | A   | M/A |     | A    | A    | A    |                    |
| Studios              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Heliport             |     |      |     |     |     |     | CUP | CUP |     |     |     |     |     | CUP  | CUP  |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Parking              |     |      |     |     |     |     | CUP | CUP |     |     | CUP | CUP |     | CUP  | CUP  |      | See                |
| Facilities           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.200          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Public               |     |      |     |     |     |     | CUP |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      | CUP  |                    |
| Safety               |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Facilities           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Transit              |     |      |     |     |     |     | CUP |     |     |     | CUP | CUP |     | MUP  | A    |      |                    |
| Station              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| or Terminal          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Utilities Facilities                                                                                                     | Ground-mounted     |
|                                                                                                                          | equipment          |
|                                                                                                                          | in                 |
|                                                                                                                          | residential        |
|                                                                                                                          | zones              |
|                                                                                                                          | shall              |
|                                                                                                                          | be                 |
|                                                                                                                          | screened           |
|                                                                                                                          | by                 |
|                                                                                                                          | landscaping        |
|                                                                                                                          | to                 |
|                                                                                                                          | the                |
|                                                                                                                          | satisfaction       |
|                                                                                                                          | of                 |
|                                                                                                                          | the                |
|                                                                                                                          | director           |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Facilities           | CUP | CUP  | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP  | CUP  | CUP  | "                  |
| with                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| On-Site              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Staff                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Facilities           | MUP | MUP  | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  | "                  |
| with                 |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| No On-Site           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Staff                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| (unmanned)           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Transmission         | CUP | CUP  | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP  | CUP  | CUP  | "                  |
| Lines                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| SPECIFIC AND TEMPORARY LAND USES                                                                                                              |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Educational          |     |      |     |     | MUP | MUP |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Conferences          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
| Housing              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Homestay             | See Sec. 17.86.160                                                                                |                    |
| Rentals              |                                                                                                   |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Home                 | See Sec. 17.86.140                                                                                |                    |
| Occupation           |                                                                                                   |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Food                 | See Sec. 17.86.120                                                                                |                    |
| Trucks               |                                                                                                   |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Office—Temporary     | See Chapter 17.113                                                                                |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Outdoor              | See Sec. 17.86.190 and Chapter 17.113                                                             |                    |
| Temporary            |                                                                                                   |                    |
| and/or               |                                                                                                   |                    |
| Seasonal             |                                                                                                   |                    |
| Sales                |                                                                                                   |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Parking              |     |      |     |     |     |     | CUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  | See                |
| Facility—Temporary   |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Chapter            |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.113             |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Safe                 |     |      | PC  | PC  | PC  | PC  | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP | CUP  | CUP  |      | See                |
| Parking              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.230          |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Special              |     |      |     |     |     |     | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP | MUP  | MUP  |      | See                |
| Event                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Chapter            |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.113             |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Vending              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     | See Section 17.86.280                                  |                    |
| Machine              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |                                                        |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| CANNABIS ACTIVITY                                                                                                                             |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Specialty            |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  |                    |
| Cultivator           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Small                |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  |                    |
| Cultivator           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Nursery              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Manufacturing        |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  |                    |
| I                    |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Distributor          |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Microbusiness        |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | CUP |     | MUP/ | MUP/ | MUP/ | See                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | CUP  | CUP  | CUP  | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.080(E)(12)   |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | for                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | specific           |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | requirements       |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | per                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | zone.              |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | A                  |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | planning           |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | commission         |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | use                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | permit             |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | is                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | only               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | required           |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | if                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | the                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | microbusiness      |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | includes           |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | a                  |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | retail             |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | storefront         |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | as                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | part               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | of                 |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | the                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | business           |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Testing              |     |      |     |     |     |     |     | CUP |     |     |     |     |     | A    | A    | A    | Director’s         |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | action             |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | required.          |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | See                |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | also               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | Sec.               |
|                      |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      | 17.86.080(E)(9).   |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Retailer             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | MUP  | MUP  | MUP  |                    |
| (Delivery)           |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
| Retailer             |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     | CUP |     | CUP  |      |      |                    |
| (Storefront)         |     |      |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |      |      |                    |
+-----------+----------+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------+------+------+--------------------+
(Ord. 1657 §§ 3, 4, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018: Ord. 1647 § 6 (Exh. C), 2018)

Chapter 17.12 AGRICULTURAL (AG) ZONE

Sections:
17.12.010    Purpose and application.
17.12.020    Development standards.

17.12.010 Purpose and application.
The AG zone is intended to encourage conservation of agricultural lands and continuation of agricultural uses and keeping of livestock where compatible with urban development and where there has been a history of agricultural cultivation and keeping of livestock. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.12.020 Development standards.
The general property development standards for the AG zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-2: AG Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-------------------------+-------------------+----+--------------------------------------+
|                        Table 2-2: AG Zone Development Standards                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------+----+--------------------------------------+
|  Development Standard   |        AG Zone         |        Additional Regulations        |
+-------------------------+-------------------+----+--------------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential     | 1 unit/20 acres        | Each legal lot of record, regardless |
| Density                 |                        | of size, may have 1 dwelling         |
+-------------------------+-------------------+----+--------------------------------------+
| Minimum Parcel Size     | 5 acres                | The minimum parcel size may be       |
|                         |                        | required to be larger than 5         |
|                         |                        | acres as designated by the zone      |
|                         |                        | suffix. For example, AG-20 requires  |
|                         |                        | a minimum parcel size of 20          |
|                         |                        | acres                                |
+-------------------------+-------------------+----+--------------------------------------+
| Minimum Setback                                                                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------+----+--------------------------------------+
| Front                   | 20 feet                |                                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------+----+--------------------------------------+
| Side                    | 20 feet                |                                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------+----+--------------------------------------+
| Rear                    | 20 feet                |                                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------+----+--------------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height | 35 feet                |                                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------+----+--------------------------------------+
| Maximum Impervious      | Parcel <10 acres  | 5% |                                      |
| Surface Area            |                   |    |                                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------+----+--------------------------------------+
| "                       | Parcel ≥ 10 acres | 3% |                                      |
+-------------------------+-------------------+----+--------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.14 CONSERVATION/OPEN SPACE (C/OS) ZONE

Sections:
17.14.010    Purpose and application.
17.14.020    Development standards.

17.14.010 Purpose and application.
A. General Application. The C/OS zone generally will be applied to areas which are most suitable for open space uses because of topography, geology, vegetation, soils, wildlife habitat, scenic prominence, agricultural value, or flood hazards. Land and water areas in the C/OS zone remain in a predominantly natural or undeveloped state generally free of structures.
B. Natural Hazards. The C/OS zone is intended to prevent exposure of urban development to unacceptable risks posed by natural hazards and to protect natural resources from disruptive alterations. To these ends, it is further intended to prevent the subdivision of such lands.
C. Natural and Historic Resources. The C/OS zone provides for the protection and preservation of the community’s natural and historic resources, defines the urban boundary, and provides visual and physical relief from urban development. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.14.020 Development standards.
The general property development standards for the C/OS zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-3: C/OS Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------------------------------------+
|                     Table 2-3: C/OS Zone Development Standards                     |
+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------------------------------------+
|  Development Standard   |     C/OS Zone     |        Additional Regulations        |
+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential     | 1 unit per parcel | The maximum density may be decreased |
| Density                 |                   | based on presence and extent         |
|                         |                   | of environmental resources and/or    |
|                         |                   | hazards. Such density will be        |
|                         |                   | as indicated by the zone designation |
+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Minimum Parcel Size     | 5 acres           | The minimum parcel size may be       |
|                         |                   | required to be larger than 5         |
|                         |                   | acres as designated by the zone      |
|                         |                   | suffix. For example, C/OS-40         |
|                         |                   | requires a minimum parcel size       |
|                         |                   | of 40 acres                          |
+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Minimum Setback         |                   |                                      |
+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Front                   | 20 feet           |                                      |
+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Side                    | 20 feet           |                                      |
+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Rear                    | 20 feet           |                                      |
+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height | 35 feet           |                                      |
+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Maximum Impervious      | <10 acres | 5%    |                                      |
| Surface Area            |           |       |                                      |
+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| "                       | 10+ acres | 3%    |                                      |
+-------------------------+-----------+-------+--------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.16 LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) ZONE

Sections:
17.16.010    Purpose and application.
17.16.020    Development standards.
17.16.030    Additional regulations.

17.16.010 Purpose and application.
The R-1 zone provides for low-density residential development and supporting compatible uses that have locations and development forms that provide a sense of both individual identity and neighborhood cohesion, and that provide private outdoor space for the households occupying individual units. The R-1 zone is intended to preserve existing single-unit neighborhoods, provide for compatible infill development in such areas, and prescribe the overall character of newly subdivided low-density areas. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.16.020 Development standards.
A. General Development Standards. The general property development standards for the R-1 zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-4: R-1 Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-----------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------+
|                      Table 2-4: R-1 Zone Development Standards                      |
+-----------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |        R-1 Zone        |    Additional Regulations    |
+-----------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential Density | 7 units/net acre       | See also Section 17.70.040   |
|                             |                        | (Density)                    |
+-----------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------+
| Maximum FAR                 | 0.4                    | Maximum FAR may be increased |
|                             |                        | up to 0.50 if consistent     |
|                             |                        | with Section 17.16.030(A)    |
|                             |                        | (Requirements and Findings   |
|                             |                        | for FAR Increase in R-1      |
|                             |                        | Zone). See also Section      |
|                             |                        | 17.70.060 (FAR Measurement   |
|                             |                        | and Exceptions)              |
+-----------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks                                                                    |
+-----------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------+
| Front                       | 20 feet                | See also Section 17.76.030   |
|                             |                        | (Front Yard Paving)          |
+-----------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | See Section 17.16.020(B), Table 2-5: R-1 Zone Minimum |
|                             | Interior Side and Rear Setbacks                       |
+-----------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | 10 feet. See Figure 2-1: Street Side Setback on       |
|                             | Corner Lots                                           |
+-----------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height     | 25 feet                | Roof pitches with a slope    |
|                             |                        | of at least 30 degrees       |
|                             |                        | above a horizontal plane     |
|                             |                        | may extend beyond the        |
|                             |                        | maximum height no more       |
|                             |                        | than 30 inches. See also     |
|                             |                        | Sections 17.16.020(B)        |
|                             |                        | (R-1 Zone Minimum Interior   |
|                             |                        | Side and Rear Setbacks)      |
|                             |                        | and 17.70.080 (Height        |
|                             |                        | Measurement and Exceptions)  |
+-----------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 40%                    | See also Section 17.70.120   |
|                             |                        | (Lot Coverage)               |
+-----------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 6,000 square feet      | See also Section 16.18.030   |
|                             |                        | (Lot Dimensions)             |
+-----------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------+Figure 2-1. Street Side Setback on Corner Lots
[IMAGE: <17.16.020_Fig2-1.png>]
B. Interior Side and Rear Setback Standards. The interior side and rear setback standards for the R-1 zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-5: R-1 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks. See also Figure 2-2: R-1 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height.
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|                Table 2-5: R-1 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks                 |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|           Maximum Building Height            |          Minimum Required Setback           |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| A point this high on the roof of a building: | Must be at least this far from the property |
|                                              | line:                                       |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 1—12 feet                                    | 5 feet (minimum setback)                    |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 13—15 feet                                   | 6 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 16—17 feet                                   | 7 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 18—19 feet                                   | 8 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 20—22 feet                                   | 9 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 23—24 feet                                   | 10 feet                                     |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 25 feet                                      | 11 feet                                     |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+Figure 2-2. R-1 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height
[IMAGE: <17.16.020_Fig2-2.png>]
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.16.030 Additional regulations.
A. Requirements and Findings for FAR Increase in R-1 Zone. These regulations are established to encourage development and additions that are compatible with neighborhood character in the R-1 zone. The maximum FAR may be increased from 0.4 to 0.5 if the building design incorporates one of the following:
    1. Single-Story. Buildings limited to one story with a maximum height of fourteen feet to top of a flat roof and twenty feet to the ridge or peak of a sloped roof (with otherwise permitted exceptions allowed). The allowed single story shall not include mezzanines or lofts.
    2. Small Lots. The property is located on a small lot that is less than five thousand square feet in size.
    3. Greater Setbacks. A second-story step back (upper story building setback) of at least five feet along the front façade and second-story side setbacks that are at least three feet greater than the minimum required setback.
    4. Garage Location. Provide a detached garage located behind the main dwelling.
B. High-Occupancy Residential Use. Refer to Chapter 17.148 (High-Occupancy Residential Use Regulations). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.18 MEDIUM-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) ZONE

Sections:
17.18.010    Purpose and application.
17.18.020    Development standards.
17.18.030    Additional regulations.

17.18.010 Purpose and application.
The R-2 zone is intended to provide housing opportunities that have locations and development forms that provide a sense of both individual identity and neighborhood cohesion for the households occupying them, but in a more compact arrangement than in the R-1 zone, and near commercial and public services. The R-2 zone generally will occur as a transition zone between zones of higher and lower residential density and/or adjacent to office (O) zones or neighborhood commercial (C-N) zones. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.18.020 Development standards.
A. General Development Standards. The general property development standards for the R-2 zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-6: R-2 Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------+
|                      Table 2-6: R-2 Zone Development Standards                      |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |       R-2 Zone       |     Additional Regulations     |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential Density | 12 units/net acre    | See also Section 17.70.040     |
|                             |                      | (Density). Regardless          |
|                             |                      | of the density calculation,    |
|                             |                      | at least two density units     |
|                             |                      | shall be allowed on each       |
|                             |                      | parcel; except this shall      |
|                             |                      | not apply to common interest   |
|                             |                      | subdivisions                   |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks                                                                    |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Front                       | 20 feet              | See also Section 17.76.030     |
|                             |                      | (Front Yard Paving)            |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | See Section 17.18.020(B), Table 2-7: R-2 Zone Minimum |
|                             | Interior Side and Rear Setbacks                       |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | 10 feet. See Figure 2-3: Street Side Setback on       |
|                             | Corner Lots                                           |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height     | 35 feet              | See also Sections 17.18.020(B) |
|                             |                      | (Interior Side and Rear        |
|                             |                      | Setback Standards) and         |
|                             |                      | 17.70.080 (Height Measurement  |
|                             |                      | and Exceptions)                |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 50%                  | See also Section 17.70.120     |
|                             |                      | (Lot Coverage)                 |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 5,000 square feet    | See also Section 16.18.030     |
|                             |                      | (Lot Dimensions)               |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------------------+Figure 2-3. Street Side Setback on Corner Lots
[IMAGE: <17.18.020_Fig2-3.png>]
B. Interior Side and Rear Setback Standards. The interior side and rear setback standards for the R-2 zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-7: R-2 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks. See also Figure 2-4: R-2 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height.
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|                Table 2-7: R-2 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks                 |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|           Maximum Building Height            |          Minimum Required Setback           |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| A point this high on the roof of a building: | Must be at least this far from the property |
|                                              | line:                                       |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 1—12 feet                                    | 5 feet (minimum setback)                    |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 13—15 feet                                   | 6 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 16—17 feet                                   | 7 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 18—19 feet                                   | 8 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 20—22 feet                                   | 9 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 23—24 feet                                   | 10 feet                                     |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 25—26 feet                                   | 11 feet                                     |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 27—28 feet                                   | 12 feet                                     |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 29—31 feet                                   | 13 feet                                     |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 32—33 feet                                   | 14 feet                                     |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 34—35 feet                                   | 15 feet                                     |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+Figure 2-4. R-2 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height
[IMAGE: <17.18.020_Fig2-4.png>]
(Ord. 1657 § 5, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.18.030 Additional regulations.
A. High-Occupancy Residential Use. Refer to Chapter 17.148 (High-Occupancy Residential Use Regulations). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.20 MEDIUM-HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-3) ZONE

Sections:
17.20.010    Purpose and application.
17.20.020    Development standards.

17.20.010 Purpose and application.
The R-3 zone is intended primarily to provide housing opportunities for attached dwellings with common outdoor areas and compact private outdoor spaces. The R-3 zone is generally appropriate near employment centers and major public facilities, along transit corridors and nodes, and close to commercial and public facilities serving the whole community. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.20.020 Development standards.
A. General Development Standards. The general property development standards for the R-3 zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-8: R-3 Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
|                            Table 2-8: R-3 Zone Development Standards                            |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |             R-3 Zone             |     Additional Regulations     |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential Density | 20 units/net acre                | See also Section 17.70.040     |
|                             | 18 units/net acre for properties | (Density). Regardless          |
|                             | within an Airport Safety         | of the density calculation,    |
|                             | Zone                             | at least three density         |
|                             |                                  | units shall be allowed         |
|                             |                                  | on each parcel; except         |
|                             |                                  | this shall not apply to        |
|                             |                                  | common interest subdivisions   |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks                                                                                |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Front                       | 10 feet                          | See also Section 17.76.030     |
|                             |                                  | (Front Yard Paving)            |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | See Section 17.20.020(B), Table 2-9: R-3 Zone Minimum             |
|                             | Interior Side and Rear Setbacks                                   |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | 10 feet                          |                                |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height     | 35 feet                          | See also Sections 17.20.020(B) |
|                             |                                  | (Interior Side and Rear        |
|                             |                                  | Setback Standards) and         |
|                             |                                  | 17.70.080 (Height Measurement  |
|                             |                                  | and Exceptions)                |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 60%                              | See also Section 17.70.120     |
|                             |                                  | (Lot Coverage)                 |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 5,000 square feet                | See also Section 16.18.030     |
|                             |                                  | (Lot Dimensions)               |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Edge Condition Requirements | See Section 17.70.050 (Edge Conditions)                           |
+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
B. Interior Side and Rear Setback Standards. The interior side and rear setback standards for the R-3 zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-9: R-3 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks. See also Figure 2-5: R-3 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height.
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|                Table 2-9: R-3 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks                 |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|           Maximum Building Height            |          Minimum Required Setback           |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| A point this high on the roof of a building: | Must be at least this far from the property |
|                                              | line:                                       |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 1—13 feet                                    | 5 feet (minimum setback)                    |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 14—17 feet                                   | 6 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 18—22 feet                                   | 7 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 23—26 feet                                   | 8 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 27—31 feet                                   | 9 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 32—35 feet                                   | 10 feet                                     |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Note: See also Section 17.70.050(D)(2) (Edge Conditions—Standards—Setbacks)                |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+Figure 2-5. R-3 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height
[IMAGE: <17.20.020_Fig2-5.png>]
(Ord. 1657 § 6, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.22 HIGH-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-4) ZONE

Sections:
17.22.010    Purpose and application.
17.22.020    Development standards.

17.22.010 Purpose and application.
The R-4 zone is intended primarily to provide for attached dwellings with common outdoor areas and compact private outdoor spaces, and to accommodate various types of group housing. Further, the R-4 zone intended to allow for dense housing close to concentrations of employment and college enrollment, in the downtown core, along transit corridors and nodes, and in areas largely committed to high-density residential development. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.22.020 Development standards.
A. General Development Standards. The general property development standards for the R-4 zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-10: R-4 Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
|                      Table 2-10: R-4 Zone Development Standards                      |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |       R-4 Zone        |     Additional Regulations     |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential Density | 24 units/net acre     | See also Section 17.70.040     |
|                             |                       | (Density). Regardless          |
|                             |                       | of the density calculation,    |
|                             |                       | at least four density          |
|                             |                       | units shall be allowed         |
|                             |                       | on each parcel; except         |
|                             |                       | this shall not apply to        |
|                             |                       | common interest subdivisions   |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks                                                                     |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Front                       | 10 feet               | See also Section 17.76.030     |
|                             |                       | (Front Yard Paving)            |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | See Section 17.22.020(B), Table 2-11: R-4 Zone Minimum |
|                             | Interior Side and Rear Setbacks                        |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | 10 feet                                                |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height     | 35 feet               | See also Sections 17.22.020(B) |
|                             |                       | (Interior Side and Rear        |
|                             |                       | Setback Standards) and         |
|                             |                       | 17.70.080 (Height Measurement  |
|                             |                       | and Exceptions)                |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 60%                   | See also Section 17.70.120     |
|                             |                       | (Lot Coverage)                 |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 5,000 square feet     | See also Section 16.18.030     |
|                             |                       | (Lot Dimensions)               |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Edge Condition Requirements | See Section 17.70.050 (Edge Conditions)                |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
B. Interior Side and Rear Setback Standards. The interior side and rear setback standards for the R-4 zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-11: R-4 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks. See also Figure 2-6: R-4 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height.
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|                Table 2-11: R-4 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks                |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|           Maximum Building Height            |          Minimum Required Setback           |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| A point this high on the roof of a building: | Must be at least this far from the property |
|                                              | line:                                       |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 1—13 feet                                    | 5 feet (minimum setback)                    |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 14—17 feet                                   | 6 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 18—22 feet                                   | 7 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 23—26 feet                                   | 8 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 27—31 feet                                   | 9 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 32—35 feet                                   | 10 feet                                     |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Note: See also Section 17.70.050(D)(2) (Edge Conditions—Standards—Setbacks)                |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+Figure 2-6. R-4 Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height
[IMAGE: <17.22.020_Fig2-6.png>]
(Ord. 1657 § 7, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.24 OFFICE (O) ZONE

Sections:
17.24.010    Purpose and application.
17.24.020    Development standards.

17.24.010 Purpose and application.
The O zone is intended to provide for a diversity of office uses that meet the needs of private businesses and a range of public administration uses. The O zone is also intended to provide for the continuation of existing, legally established residential uses and the development of new residential uses where such residential uses will be compatible with neighboring offices. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.24.020 Development standards.
A. General Development Standards. The general property development standards for the O zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-12: O Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------------+
|                      Table 2-12: O Zone Development Standards                      |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |      O Zone       |      Additional Regulations      |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential Density | 12 units/net acre | See also Section 17.70.040       |
|                             |                   | (Density). Regardless            |
|                             |                   | of the density calculation,      |
|                             |                   | at least two units shall         |
|                             |                   | be allowed on each parcel;       |
|                             |                   | except this shall not            |
|                             |                   | apply to common interest         |
|                             |                   | subdivisions                     |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks                                                                   |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------------+
| Front                       | 15 feet                                              |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | See Section 17.24.020(B), Table 2-13: O Zone Minimum |
|                             | Interior Side and Rear Setbacks                      |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | 15 feet                                              |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height     | 35 feet           | See also Sections 17.24.020(B)   |
|                             |                   | (Interior Side and Rear          |
|                             |                   | Setback Standards) and           |
|                             |                   | 17.70.080 (Height Measurement    |
|                             |                   | and Exceptions)                  |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 60%               | See also Section 17.70.120       |
|                             |                   | (Lot Coverage)                   |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Floor Area Ratio    | 1.5               | See also Section 17.70.060       |
|                             |                   | (FAR Measurement and Exceptions) |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 5,000 square feet | See also Section 16.18.030       |
|                             |                   | (Lot Dimensions)                 |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------------+
| Edge Condition Requirements | See Section 17.70.050 (Edge Conditions)              |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------------+
B. Interior Side and Rear Setback Standards. The interior side and rear setback standards for the O zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-13: O Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks. See also Figure 2-7: O Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height.
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|                 Table 2-13: O Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks                 |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|           Maximum Building Height            |          Minimum Required Setback           |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| A point this high on the roof of a building: | Must be at least this far from the property |
|                                              | line:                                       |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 1—13 feet                                    | 5 feet (minimum setback)                    |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 14—17 feet                                   | 6 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 18—22 feet                                   | 7 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 23—26 feet                                   | 8 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 27—31 feet                                   | 9 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 32—35 feet                                   | 10 feet                                     |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Note: See also Section 17.70.050(D)(2) (Edge Conditions—Standards—Setbacks)                |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+Figure 2-7. O Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height
[IMAGE: <17.24.020_Fig2-7.png>]
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.26 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (C-N) ZONE

Sections:
17.26.010    Purpose and application.
17.26.020    Development standards.
17.26.030    Additional regulations.

17.26.010 Purpose and application.
The C-N zone is intended to accommodate the establishment and operation of small-scale, pedestrian-oriented, and low-impact retail sales and personal services businesses primarily for the convenience of people in surrounding residential areas, to meet the frequent shopping needs of people living nearby. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.26.020 Development standards.
A. General Development Standards. The general property development standards for the C-N zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-14: C-N Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-----------------------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
|                      Table 2-14: C-N Zone Development Standards                      |
+-----------------------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |      C-N Zone       |      Additional Regulations      |
+-----------------------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential Density | 12 units/net acre   | See also Section 17.70.040       |
|                             |                     | (Density)                        |
+-----------------------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks                                                                     |
+-----------------------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| Front                       | 10 feet                                                |
+-----------------------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | See Section 17.26.020(B), Table 2-15: C-N Zone Minimum |
|                             | Interior Side and Rear Setbacks                        |
+-----------------------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | 10 feet                                                |
+-----------------------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height     | 35 feet             | See also Sections 17.26.020(B)   |
|                             |                     | (Interior Side and Rear          |
|                             |                     | Setback Standards) and           |
|                             |                     | 17.70.080 (Height Measurement    |
|                             |                     | and Exceptions)                  |
+-----------------------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 75%                 | See also Section 17.70.120       |
|                             |                     | (Lot Coverage)                   |
+-----------------------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Floor Area Ratio    | 2.0                 | See also Section 17.70.060       |
|                             |                     | (FAR Measurement and Exceptions) |
+-----------------------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 6,000 square feet   | See also Section 16.18.030       |
|                             |                     | (Lot Dimensions)                 |
+-----------------------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
| Edge Condition Requirements | See Section 17.70.050 (Edge Conditions)                |
+-----------------------------+---------------------+----------------------------------+
B. Interior Side and Rear Setback Standards. The interior side and rear setback standards for the C-N zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-15: C-N Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks. See also Figure 2-8: C-N Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height.
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|                Table 2-15: C-N Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks                |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|           Maximum Building Height            |          Minimum Required Setback           |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| A point this high on the roof of a building: | Must be at least this far from the property |
|                                              | line:                                       |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 1—13 feet                                    | 5 feet (minimum setback)                    |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 14—17 feet                                   | 6 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 18—22 feet                                   | 7 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 23—26 feet                                   | 8 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 27—31 feet                                   | 9 feet                                      |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 32—35 feet                                   | 10 feet                                     |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Note: See also Section 17.70.050(D)(2) (Edge Conditions—Standards—Setbacks)                |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+Figure 2-8. C-N Zone Minimum Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height
[IMAGE: <17.24.020_Fig2-8.png>]
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.26.030 Additional regulations.
A. Maximum Retail Sales Building Size in the C-N Zone. A retail sales use in the C-N zone shall not exceed a gross floor area of two thousand square feet for each establishment, or a combined floor area of fifteen thousand square feet for all retail sales establishments within a shopping center. Exceptions to the floor area limitations above require minor use permit approval to ensure consistency with policies of the General Plan Land Use Element and compatibility with surrounding uses.
B. Food and Beverage Sales in the C-N Zone. 
    1. General Markets and Convenience Stores. General markets and convenience stores with a gross floor area under three thousand square feet are allowed by right. Such uses with a gross floor area exceeding three thousand square feet may be approved by a minor use permit.
    2. Liquor Stores. Liquor stores shall be limited to three thousand square feet of gross floor area, subject to a minor use permit. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.28 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (C-C) ZONE

Sections:
17.28.010    Purpose and application.
17.28.020    Development standards.

17.28.010 Purpose and application.
The C-C zone is intended to accommodate a wide range of retail sales and personal services that serve community-wide needs within the context of distinctive, pedestrian-oriented shopping centers which may accommodate larger-scale uses not appropriate in the downtown core. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.28.020 Development standards.
The general property development standards for the C-C zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-16: C-C Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
|                       Table 2-16: C-C Zone Development Standards                       |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |       C-C Zone        |      Additional Regulations      |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential Density | 36 units/net acre     | See also Section 17.70.040       |
|                             |                       | (Density)                        |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks                                                                       |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Front                       | 5 feet                                                   |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | No setback required unless adjacent to zone with minimum |
|                             | setback requirement, in which case the adjoining         |
|                             | setback shall be as provided in the zone of adjacent     |
|                             | lot. Lots separated by streets or other rights-of-way    |
|                             | are not considered adjacent. If more than one zone       |
|                             | is adjacent, the largest setback shall be required       |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | 5 feet                                                   |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height     | 35 feet               | See also Section 17.70.080       |
|                             |                       | (Height Measurement and          |
|                             |                       | Exceptions)                      |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 75%                   | See also Section 17.70.120       |
|                             |                       | (Lot Coverage)                   |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Floor Area Ratio    | 2.0                   | See also Section 17.70.060       |
|                             |                       | (FAR Measurement and Exceptions) |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 6,000 square feet     | See also Section 16.18.030       |
|                             |                       | (Lot Dimensions)                 |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Edge Condition Requirements | See Section 17.70.050 (Edge Conditions)                  |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.30 RETAIL COMMERCIAL (C-R) ZONE

Sections:
17.30.010    Purpose and application.
17.30.020    Development standards.
17.30.030    Additional regulations.

17.30.010 Purpose and application.
The C-R zone is intended to accommodate a wide range of retail sales, business, personal, and professional services, as well as recreation, entertainment, transient lodging, and limited residential uses. The land uses allowed in this zone will generally serve the entire community and the region, as well as tourists and travelers. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.30.020 Development standards.
The general property development standards for the C-R zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-17: C-R Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
|                       Table 2-17: C-R Zone Development Standards                       |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |       C-R Zone        |      Additional Regulations      |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential Density | 36 units/acre         | See also Section 17.70.040       |
|                             |                       | (Density)                        |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks            |                                                          |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Front                       | No setback required unless adjacent to zone with minimum |
|                             | setback requirement, in which case the adjoining         |
|                             | setback shall be as provided in the zone of adjacent     |
|                             | lot. Lots separated by streets or other rights-of-way    |
|                             | are not considered adjacent. If more than one zone       |
|                             | is adjacent, the largest setback shall be required       |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | "                                                        |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | "                                                        |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height     | 45 feet               | See also Section 17.70.080       |
|                             |                       | (Height Measurement and          |
|                             |                       | Exceptions)                      |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 100%                  | See also Section 17.70.120       |
|                             |                       | (Lot Coverage)                   |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Floor Area Ratio    | 3.0                   | In the Downtown, as mapped       |
|                             |                       | in the General Plan Land         |
|                             |                       | Use Element, a site that         |
|                             |                       | receives transfer of development |
|                             |                       | credit for open space protection |
|                             |                       | may have a FAR of up to          |
|                             |                       | 4.0. See also Section 17.70.060  |
|                             |                       | (FAR Measurement and Exceptions) |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 9,000 square feet     | See also Section 16.18.030       |
|                             |                       | (Lot Dimensions)                 |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Edge Condition Requirements | See Section 17.70.050 (Edge Conditions)                  |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.30.030 Additional regulations.
A. Maximum Retail Sales Building Size in the C-R Zone. 
    1. No retail sales establishment (commercial building) shall exceed 60,000 square feet of gross floor area, unless excepted by subsection (A)(2) of this section or for nonconforming structures per Chapter 17.92 (Nonconforming Structures).
    2. An applicant may request a retail sales building larger than sixty thousand square feet, but in no case larger than one hundred forty thousand square feet through the conditional use permit process. In granting a request for a retail sale establishment of up to one hundred forty thousand square feet of gross floor area, the planning commission shall be required to make all of the following findings:
        a. The proposed use will serve the community, in whole or in significant part, and the nature of the use requires a larger size in order to function;
        b. The building in which the use is to be located is designed in discrete elements that respect the scale of development in the surrounding area; and
        c. The new building is designed in compliance with the city’s design guidelines for large-scale retail projects. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.32 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL (C-D) ZONE

Sections:
17.32.010    Purpose and application.
17.32.020    Development standards.
17.32.030    Additional regulations.

17.32.010 Purpose and application.
The C-D zone is intended to accommodate a wide range of retail sales, service, and entertainment uses that respond to community-wide and regional market demands, and to provide opportunities for a variety of housing types, including affordable workforce housing. The C-D zone applies to the city’s pedestrian-oriented central business district, where the historical pattern of development creates limitations on building form and the ability for individual businesses to provide on-site parking. Ground floor, street-fronting uses generally will be limited to those that attract frequent pedestrian traffic. The C-D zone is intended to maintain, enhance, and extend the desirable characteristics of the downtown, and to accommodate carefully integrated new development. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.32.020 Development standards.
The general property development standards for the C-D zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-18: C-D Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
|                        Table 2-18: C-D Zone Development Standards                         |
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |         C-D Zone          |     Additional Regulations      |
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential Density | 36 units/net acre         | See also Section 17.70.040      |
|                             |                           | (Density)                       |
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks                                                                          |
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Front                       | No setback required unless adjacent to zone with minimum    |
|                             | setback requirement, in which case the adjoining            |
|                             | setback shall be as provided in the zone of adjacent        |
|                             | lot. Lots separated by streets or other rights-of-way       |
|                             | are not considered adjacent. If more than one zone          |
|                             | is adjacent, the largest setback shall be required          |
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | "                                                           |
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | "                                                           |
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height     | 50 feet                   | Maximum height may be increased |
|                             |                           | up to 75 feet with the          |
|                             |                           | provision of defined community  |
|                             |                           | benefits, as set forth          |
|                             |                           | in Section 17.32.030(E)         |
|                             |                           | (Maximum Building Height        |
|                             |                           | in C-D Zone). See also          |
|                             |                           | Section 17.70.080 (Height       |
|                             |                           | Measurement and Exceptions)     |
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Minimum Building Height     | 2 stories                 | The minimum building height     |
|                             |                           | shall be 2 stories adjacent     |
|                             |                           | to all street frontages         |
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 100%                      | See also Section 17.70.120      |
|                             |                           | (Lot Coverage)                  |
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Maximum Floor Area Ratio    | 3.0—maximum allowed for buildings up to 50 feet in          |
|                             | height                                                      |
|                             | 3.75—maximum allowed for buildings approved greater         |
|                             | than 50 feet in height                                      |
|                             | 4.0—maximum allowed for approved buildings over 50          |
|                             | feet in height with transfer of development credits         |
|                             | for open space protection or historic preservation          |
|                             | See also Section 17.70.060 (FAR Measurement and Exceptions) |
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 3,000 square feet         | See also Section 16.18.030      |
|                             |                           | (Lot Dimensions)                |
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Edge Condition Requirements | See Section 17.70.050 (Edge Conditions)                     |
+-----------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------------+
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.32.030 Additional regulations.
A. Maximum Retail Sales Building Size in the C-D Zone. 
    1. No retail sales establishment (commercial building) shall exceed 60,000 square feet of gross floor area, unless excepted by subsection (A)(2) of this section or for nonconforming structures per Chapter 17.92 (Nonconforming Structures).
    2. An applicant may request a retail sales building larger than sixty thousand square feet, but in no case larger than one hundred forty thousand square feet through the conditional use permit process. In granting a request for a retail establishment of up one hundred forty thousand square feet of gross floor area, the planning commission shall make all of the following findings:
        a. The proposed use will serve the community, in whole or in significant part, and the nature of the use requires a larger size in order to function;
        b. The building in which the use is to be located is designed in discrete elements that respect the scale of development in the surrounding area; and
        c. The new building is designed in compliance with the city’s design guidelines for large-scale retail projects.
B. Limitations on New Driveways. Although residential uses are encouraged in the C-D zone, it is not the intent of the city to ensure that parking is provided on site for residential uses. Therefore, there is no guarantee of parking availability, either on site or off site, for downtown residential projects. On-site parking may be considered inappropriate at certain downtown locations where the pedestrian experience would be harmed by vehicle ingress and egress across the sidewalk. In order to maintain pedestrian orientation and the continuity of sidewalks within the C-D zone, the installation of new driveway approaches is subject to the director’s action. When new driveway approaches are proposed in conjunction with an application for review by the architectural review commission, a separate planning application shall not be required. In order to approve the new driveway approach, the review authority shall make at least one of the following findings:
    1. The proposed driveway approach will not harm the general health, safety, and welfare of people living or working in the vicinity of the project site because the number of vehicles expected to use the driveway is limited (fewer than ten spaces) and there are no other alternatives, such as service alleys, to provide vehicle access to the site.
    2. The proposed driveway approach is located along a nonarterial street and will not significantly alter the character of the street or pedestrian circulation in the area in consideration of the characteristics of pedestrian flow to and from the project site and surrounding uses.
    3. The proposed driveway approach is a shared facility and provides efficient access to more than a single project in a way that eliminates the need for additional driveways.
    4. The proposed driveway approach provides access to public parking.
C. Residential Required. All new commercial developments in the C-D zone shall include housing, unless the city makes one of the following findings:
    1. Housing is likely to jeopardize the health, safety, or welfare of residents or employees; or
    2. All of the findings listed for Variances in Section 17.114.040 (Required Findings).
D. C-D Zone—Required Findings for Ground Floor Offices. These regulations recognize the city’s objective to encourage a pedestrian-oriented and lively street front along all properties in the C-D zone, and that office uses on the ground floor do not contribute to achieving this objective, given that office uses typically have more limited hours of operation than retail or dining establishments. Thus, no ground floor office use in the C-D zone shall be permitted unless the review authority can make the following findings:
    1. As conditioned, the proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of persons living or working at the site or in the vicinity because the proposed use will provide both retail sales and services consistent with surrounding uses.
    2. The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan Policy 4.20.1 because the nature of the business includes an office that has frequent client visits which accommodate “walk-in” service for the community, and also provides visible retail merchandise, thereby benefiting from and contributing to pedestrian traffic.
E. Maximum Building Height in the C-D Zone. 
    1. Intent of Allowing Height Increases in the C-D Zone. These regulations are established to allow for buildings higher than fifty feet in the C-D zone to encourage creative building design, mixed-use developments, and accommodation of additional residential units in the downtown core; provided, that such taller buildings, through discretionary review processes, contribute defined community benefits and further the goals of the downtown core as stated in the Land Use Element of the General Plan.
    2. Requirements for All Buildings Higher Than Fifty Feet. All buildings in the C-D zone proposed to be higher than fifty feet shall comply with all of the following performance standards:
        a. The project shall include housing at a minimum residential density unit value of twenty-four units per acre. The average floor area of dwellings within the project shall be one thousand square feet or less. Group housing projects shall demonstrate that the proposed building meets or exceeds the population density that would otherwise be achieved by this standard.
        b. The applicant shall demonstrate that:
            i. The project is designed to achieve at least a Silver rating on the LEED-CS or NC checklist (or equivalent measure) (LEED certification is not required but is encouraged); or
            ii. The project is designed to achieve a minimum value of fifty points on the GreenPoint rated new home multifamily checklist.
        c. No more than thirty-three percent of the site area at the storefront level may be used for private parking facilities.
        d. Lots shall conform to the minimum size and dimension requirements provided in Title 16, Subdivisions.
        e. To approve an increase in height above fifty feet, the planning commission shall make the following finding: The public benefits associated with the project significantly outweigh any detrimental impacts from the additional height. In weighing potential public benefits, the planning commission shall consider objectives related to affordable and workforce housing, mode split, historic preservation, and open space preservation to be especially important.
        f. The planning commission may grant minor exceptions to the specific requirements listed in this section, and provided a finding is made that, despite the exception, the project is consistent with the intent of this chapter and Land Use Element Policy 4.20 (Design Principles).
    3. Additional Requirements for Buildings up to Sixty Feet. The planning commission may approve building height up to sixty feet if it determines that the project includes at least two community benefits from subsection (E)(5) of this section (Community Benefits Policy Objectives), with no more than one being from the same lettered subsection. Of the community benefits, at least one affordable and workforce housing objective shall be chosen.
    4. Additional Requirements for Buildings up to Seventy-Five Feet. The planning commission may approve building height up to 75 feet if it determines that the project includes at least three community benefits from subsection (E)(5) of this section (Community Benefits Policy Objectives), with no more than one being from the same lettered subsection. Of the community benefits, at least one affordable and workforce housing objective shall be chosen.
    5. Community Benefits Policy Objectives. The intent of the following policy objectives is to ensure that buildings taller than fifty feet proposed in the C-D zone include features that meet the specific policy objectives outlined for tall buildings in the general plan (including, but not limited to, Land Use Element Chapter 4.0). A variety of objectives are listed to ensure that proposed project features are appropriate for the site and surroundings, and to allow for a wide range of possible project types. Regardless of the number of objectives proposed, the planning commission shall determine that the overall project is consistent with the general plan, including goals and policies for view preservation, historical resource preservation, solar access, and architectural character.
        a. Affordable and Workforce Housing. 
            i. The project provides affordable housing, in compliance with city standards, at the rate of five percent for low-income households, or ten percent for moderate-income households, as a percentage of the total number of housing units built (no in-lieu fee option).
            ii. The project qualifies for, and utilizes, a density bonus in compliance with the city’s affordable housing incentives (Chapter 17.140).
            iii. The project includes residential density greater than or equal to thirty-six units per acre and the average floor area of units is one thousand square feet or less. Group housing projects shall show that the proposed building meets or exceeds the population density that would otherwise be achieved by this objective.
        b. Pedestrian Amenities. 
            i. The project provides a major pedestrian connection between Higuera Street and the Creekwalk, Monterey Street and the Creekwalk, Higuera Street and Marsh Street, or at another acceptable mid-block location.
            ii. The project provides open space in the form of a significant public plaza, where:
                (a) The minimum area of any public plaza shall be seven thousand five hundred square feet; and
                (b) The public plaza is owned, operated, and maintained by the developer or property manager in accordance with an approved maintenance plan to be reviewed and approved by the director; and
                (c) Each part of the public plaza shall be accessible from other parts of the open space without leaving the open space area; and
                (d) The public plaza shall be on the ground level and directly accessible from the sidewalk, and be accessible to persons with disabilities; and
                (e) The public plaza shall be open to the public, without charge, each day of the year, except for temporary closures for necessary maintenance or public safety; and
                (f) At a minimum, the following elements shall be included within the open space: trees and landscaping, seating, bicycle racks, trash and recycling receptacles, and signage that include hours of operation; and
                (g) The public art requirement is met by providing the art on site (no in-lieu fee option).
        c. View Access and Preservation. 
            i. The project provides a public viewing deck or decks, or similar feature, to provide significant free public access to views of surrounding natural features such as, but not limited to, Cerro San Luis.
            ii. The project improves and dedicates land within the downtown core for publicly owned open space with street-level views of hillside resources, consistent with Land Use Element Policies 4.10 (Open Places and Views) and 4.20.4 (Building Height).
        d. Historic Preservation (Off Site). Where there are no historic resources on the project site, the project provides for the permanent preservation of a building off site within the downtown historic district or Chinatown historic district that is listed in the city’s inventory of historical resources through the recordation of a historic preservation agreement.
        e. Mode Split. The project provides for the permanent mode shift towards alternative transportation for building occupants through a transportation demand management program that achieves modal split objectives of Circulation Element Policy 1.7.1 (Encourage Better Transportation Habits). Prior to the issuance of building permits, a covenant agreement shall be recorded that discloses the required transportation demand management provisions. This agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder to provide constructive notice to all future owners of the property of any ongoing programmatic requirements.
        f. Open Space Preservation. The project provides for the permanent preservation of open space land in the city’s greenbelt through land dedication, the recordation of a conservation easement, or other recognized preservation method, to the approval of the city.
        g. Zero Net Energy. The project provides one hundred percent of total building energy load measured as kilowatt per square foot through solar panels, wind turbines, or other renewable sources.
        h. Common Garbage Facility. The project provides a common garbage storage and compacting facility of adequate size and in an appropriate location to accommodate the needs of the project and all adjacent properties or other grouping of users acceptable to the city.
        i. Other Policy Objectives. The project directly implements specific and identifiable city objectives as set forth in the general plan, the downtown concept plan, or other key policy document, to the approval of the planning commission. (This subsection may be used to meet requirements for one policy objective.)
    6. Application Requirements. Planning applications submitted for new buildings over fifty feet in height shall include the following additional items to assist the review authority in the analysis and decision-making process:
        a. Viewshed Analysis. A written and graphic viewshed analysis from various perspectives. The analysis shall identify visual resources within the viewshed of the project and indicate how the design of the project addresses those views from each perspective. Specific attention shall be given to views from adjacent publicly owned gathering spaces, such as Mission Plaza.
        b. Solar Shading Analysis. A written and graphic solar shading analysis showing the effects of shading on its surroundings between ten a.m. and three p.m. on the winter solstice, summer solstice and vernal or autumnal equinox. The analysis shall compare shading caused by the project to the city’s solar access standards (Conservation Open Space Element Table 2).
        c. Parking Demand Management—Trip Reduction Programs. A verifiable parking demand management program and a trip reduction program to reduce resident/employee dependence on single-occupant vehicle trips, subject to the approval of the public works director.
        d. Three-Dimensional Digital Model. A complete three-dimensional digital model of the proposed building, consistent with the specifications for the city’s baseline 3-D digital model of the downtown core and suitable for display on the city’s website.
        e. Solid Waste Management Plan. A solid waste management plan to show how the project meets or exceeds the city’s solid waste guidelines, subject to the approval of the utilities director. If any exceptions to the solid waste guidelines are requested, the plan shall include a written explanation and justification.
        f. Green Building Plan. A written green building plan to indicate how the project complies with performance standards for energy efficiency.
        g. Emergency Services Access Plan. A written and graphic plan created in consultation with the city’s fire marshal to show how access to upper floors for emergency response personnel will be provided.
        h. Public Safety Plan. A security plan created in consultation with the Police Department for all proposed buildings that include publicly accessible areas such as parking garages, courtyards, public stairways, elevators, and decks. The security plan will identify the locations of 911 capable phones in parking areas, establish rules and regulations for public use of courtyards and decks, and establish time frames for private security patrols to be in place.
        i. Utilities Infrastructure Analysis. A registered engineer’s evaluation of existing utilities infrastructure and recommendations to ensure that the project will have adequate water pressure for domestic use and fire flows and that the collection system in the area surrounding the project is sufficient to meet the project’s impact.
        j. Building Code Analysis. A building code analysis specifying the building’s allowable area, occupancy class, occupancy load, and construction type.
F. C-D Zone Visual Study—Buildings Higher than Thirty Feet. 
    1. Planning applications submitted for new buildings in the C-D zone shall include a visual study if the new building meets the following criteria:
        a. The building is over thirty feet in height; and
        b. The building is:
            i. Within one hundred fifty feet of existing or planned publicly owned gathering sites, and
            ii. Within view of existing or planned publicly owned gathering sites or the building will be located at the intersection of public streets within the C-D zone.
    2. The visual study shall determine whether the project will:
        a. Materially obstruct views of distant hills from surrounding properties; and/or
        b. Create an adverse visual impact on existing or planned publicly owned gathering sites by materially obstructing views of nearby public open spaces, historic resources, city landmarks, or protected natural resources; and/or create adverse shade and shadow effects during times of the day when a gathering site is anticipated to be most used.
    3. Should the study identify adverse impacts, the study shall identify measures to substantially reduce or eliminate these impacts. (Ord. 1657 § 8, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.34 TOURIST COMMERCIAL (C-T) ZONE

Sections:
17.34.010    Purpose and application.
17.34.020    Development standards.
17.34.030    Additional regulations.

17.34.010 Purpose and application.
The C-T zone is intended to provide accommodations and services for the traveling public and implement General Plan Land Use Policies 3.6.1 and 3.6.2 to promote San Luis Obispo as an attractive place for short-term stays, as well as an attractive destination for long-term visitors, with conference and visitor-serving facilities that have a low impact upon the environment and upon existing land forms and landscapes, and that provide low-impact visitor activities and low-impact means of transportation. Integration of visitor-serving uses with other types of uses is encouraged. Visitor-serving uses are especially appropriate where such uses have already concentrated. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.34.020 Development standards.
The general property development standards for the C-T zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-19: C-T Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
|                      Table 2-19: C-T Zone Development Standards                       |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |       C-T Zone       |      Additional Regulations      |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential Density | 12 units/net acre    | See also Section 17.70.040       |
|                             |                      | (Density)                        |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks                                                                      |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Front                       | 10 feet                                                 |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | No setback unless adjacent to zone with minimum setback |
|                             | requirement, in which case the adjoining setback        |
|                             | shall be as provided in zone of adjacent lot. Lots      |
|                             | separated by streets or other rights-of-way are not     |
|                             | considered adjacent. If more than one zone is adjacent, |
|                             | the largest setback shall be required                   |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | 10 feet                                                 |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height     | 45 feet              | See also Section 17.70.080       |
|                             |                      | (Height Measurement and          |
|                             |                      | Exceptions)                      |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 75%                  | See also Section 17.70.120       |
|                             |                      | (Lot Coverage)                   |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Floor Area Ratio    | 2.5                  | See also Section 17.70.060       |
|                             |                      | (FAR Measurement and Exceptions) |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 9,000 square feet    | See also Section 16.18.030       |
|                             |                      | (Lot Dimensions)                 |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Edge Condition Requirements | See Section 17.70.050 (Edge Conditions)                 |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.34.030 Additional regulations.
A. Maximum Retail Sales Building Size in the C-T Zone. No retail sales establishment (commercial building) shall exceed forty-five thousand square feet of total gross floor area, unless excepted for nonconforming structures by Chapter 17.92 (Nonconforming Structures). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.36 SERVICE COMMERCIAL (C-S) ZONE

Sections:
17.36.010    Purpose and application.
17.36.020    Development standards.
17.36.030    Additional regulations.

17.36.010 Purpose and application.
The C-S zone is intended to provide for a wide range of service and manufacturing uses to meet local needs and some demands of the region, including services, limited retail, and other business service uses that may be less appropriate in the city’s other commercial zones. The C-S zone is also intended to accommodate certain storage, transportation, wholesaling, and light manufacturing uses. The C-S zone is intended to be applied primarily to areas that have more public exposure on arterial streets than areas reserved for manufacturing uses. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.36.020 Development standards.
The general property development standards for the C-S zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-20: C-S Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-----------------------------+-------------------+-------------------------------------+
|                      Table 2-20: C-S Zone Development Standards                       |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+-------------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |     C-S Zone      |       Additional Regulations        |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential Density | 24 units/net acre | See also Section 17.70.040          |
|                             |                   | (Density)                           |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks                                                                      |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Front                       | Where no building adjoins, 5 feet (requirement          |
|                             | for parking lots and signs)                             |
|                             | Buildings ≤ 20 feet in height: 10 feet                  |
|                             | Buildings > 20 feet in height: 15 feet                  |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | No setback unless adjacent to zone with minimum         |
|                             | setback requirement, in which case the adjoining        |
|                             | setback shall be as provided in zone of adjacent        |
|                             | lot. Lots separated by streets or other rights-of-way   |
|                             | are not considered adjacent. If more than one           |
|                             | zone is adjacent, the largest setback shall be          |
|                             | required                                                |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | Where no building adjoins, 5 feet (requirement          |
|                             | for parking lots and signs)                             |
|                             | Buildings ≤ 20 feet in height: 10 feet                  |
|                             | Buildings > 20 feet in height: 15 feet                  |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height     | 35 feet           | See also Section 17.70.080          |
|                             |                   | (Height Measurement and Exceptions) |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 75%               | See also Section 17.70.120          |
|                             |                   | (Lot Coverage)                      |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Maximum Floor Area Ratio    | 1.5               | See also Section 17.70.060          |
|                             |                   | (FAR Measurement and Exceptions)    |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 9,000 square feet | See also Section 16.18.030          |
|                             |                   | (Lot Dimensions)                    |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Edge Condition Requirements | See Section 17.70.050 (Edge Conditions)                 |
+-----------------------------+-------------------+-------------------------------------+
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.36.030 Additional regulations.
A. Maximum Retail Building Size in the C-S Zone. No retail establishment (commercial building) shall exceed sixty thousand square feet of gross floor area, unless excepted for nonconforming structures per Chapter 17.92 (Nonconforming Structures).
B. Offices in the C-S Zone. The approval of an office facility in the C-S zone shall require that the review authority find that:
    1. The project will be compatible with existing and allowed land uses in the area; and
    2. The project will not preclude industrial or service commercial uses in areas especially suited for these uses when compared with offices.
C. Medical Services in the C-S Zone. The approval of a medical office, dental office, or clinic in the C-S zone shall require that the review authority find that:
    1. The proposed medical service is compatible with surrounding land uses;
    2. The proposed medical service is located along a street designated as an arterial or commercial collector in the circulation element; and
    3. The project will not preclude service commercial uses in areas especially suited for these uses when compared with medical services.
D. Commercial Recreational in the C-S Zone. The approval of a commercial recreational facility in the C-S zone shall require that the review authority to find that:
    1. The proposed use will serve the community, in whole or in significant part;
    2. The project will be compatible with existing and allowed land uses in the area; and
    3. The project will not preclude other industrial or service commercial uses in areas especially suited for these uses when compared with recreational facilities. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.38 RESERVED

Chapter 17.40 MANUFACTURING (M) ZONE

Sections:
17.40.010    Purpose and application.
17.40.020    Development standards.
17.40.030    Additional regulations.

17.40.010 Purpose and application.
The M zone is intended to provide for assembly, fabrication, and other manufacturing activities in addition to those allowed in the C-S zone, and for limited sales and services to local consumers. The M zone is intended to be applied primarily to areas served by, but with limited or no frontage on, arterial streets. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.40.020 Development standards.
The general property development standards for the M zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-21: M Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
|                       Table 2-21: M Zone Development Standards                        |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |        M Zone        |      Additional Regulations      |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Residential Density | 24 units/net acre    | See also Section 17.70.040       |
|                             |                      | (Density)                        |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks                                                                      |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Front                       | Where no building adjoins, 5 feet (requirement for      |
|                             | parking lots and signs)                                 |
|                             | Buildings ≤ 20 feet in height: 10 feet                  |
|                             | Buildings > 20 feet in height: 15 feet                  |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | No setback unless adjacent to zone with minimum setback |
|                             | requirement, in which case the adjoining setback        |
|                             | shall be as provided in zone of adjacent lot. Lots      |
|                             | separated by streets or other rights-of-way are not     |
|                             | considered adjacent. If more than one zone is adjacent, |
|                             | the largest setback shall be required                   |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | Where no building adjoins, 5 feet (requirement for      |
|                             | parking lots and signs)                                 |
|                             | Buildings ≤ 20 feet in height: 10 feet                  |
|                             | Buildings > 20 feet in height: 15 feet                  |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Height              | 35 feet              | See also Section 17.70.080       |
|                             |                      | (Height Measurement and          |
|                             |                      | Exceptions)                      |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 75%                  | See also Section 17.70.120       |
|                             |                      | (Lot Coverage)                   |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Floor Area Ratio    | 1.5                  | See also Section 17.70.060       |
|                             |                      | (FAR Measurement and Exceptions) |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 9,000 square feet    | See also Section 16.18.030       |
|                             |                      | (Lot Dimensions)                 |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
| Edge Condition Requirements | See Section 17.70.050 (Edge Conditions)                 |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------------------+
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.40.030 Additional regulations.
A. Offices in the M Zone. The approval of an office facility in the M zone shall require that the review authority find that:
    1. The project will be compatible with existing and allowed land uses in the area; and
    2. The project will not preclude industrial or service commercial uses in areas especially suited for these uses when compared with offices.
B. Performance Standards. See also Chapter 17.74: Performance Standards. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.42 BUSINESS PARK (BP) ZONE

Sections:
17.42.010    Purpose and application.
17.42.020    Development standards.
17.42.030    Additional regulations.

17.42.010 Purpose and application.
The BP zone is intended to provide for research and development, light manufacturing, and business services in a campus setting with high-quality design of public and private facilities. The BP zone standards apply to properties outside of specific plan areas. Where the Airport Area Specific Plan, Margarita Area Specific Plan, and any other specific plans apply to properties zoned BP, the applicable specific plan standards shall govern. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.42.020 Development standards.
The general property development standards for the BP zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-22: BP Zone Development Standards.
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
|                         Table 2-22: BP Zone Development Standards                         |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |         BP Zone          |      Additional Regulations      |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks                                                                          |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Front                       | Where no building adjoins, 10 feet (requirement for         |
|                             | parking lots and signs)                                     |
|                             | Buildings: 16 feet                                          |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | Where no building adjoins, 5 feet (requirement for          |
|                             | parking lots and signs)                                     |
|                             | No building setback unless adjacent to zone with minimum    |
|                             | setback requirement, in which case the adjoining            |
|                             | setback shall be as provided in zone of adjacent            |
|                             | lot. Lots separated by streets or other rights-of-way       |
|                             | are not considered adjacent. If more than one zone          |
|                             | is adjacent, the largest setback shall be required          |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | Where no building adjoins, 10 feet (requirement for         |
|                             | parking lots and signs)                                     |
|                             | Buildings: 16 feet                                          |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Height              | 45 feet                  | See also Section 17.70.080       |
|                             |                          | (Height Measurement and          |
|                             |                          | Exceptions)                      |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 75%                      | See also Section 17.70.120       |
|                             |                          | (Lot Coverage)                   |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Floor Area Ratio    | Warehousing, Storage and | See also Section 17.70.060       |
|                             | Distribution Uses: 1.0   | (FAR Measurement and Exceptions) |
|                             | All Other Uses: 0.6      |                                  |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 9,000 square feet        | See also Section 16.18.030       |
|                             |                          | (Lot Dimensions)                 |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Edge Condition Requirements | See Section 17.70.050 (Edge Conditions)                     |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.42.030 Additional regulations.
A. Medical Services in the BP Zone. The approval of a medical office, dental office, or clinic in the BP zone shall require that the review authority find that:
    1. The proposed medical service is compatible with surrounding land uses;
    2. The proposed medical service is located along a street designated as an arterial or commercial collector in the circulation element; and
    3. The project will not preclude service commercial uses in areas especially suited for these uses when compared with medical services. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.44 RESERVED

Chapter 17.46 PUBLIC FACILITY (PF) ZONE

Sections:
17.46.010    Purpose and application.
17.46.020    Development standards.
17.46.030    Additional regulations.

17.46.010 Purpose and application.
The PF zone is intended to provide for a wide range of public, cultural, and quasi-public uses that meet the needs of city and county residents. Public uses are those conducted by governmental or nonprofit agencies. However, the PF zone also accommodates compatible private and commercial uses which, within the overall guidance of the general plan, provide a public benefit. The zone is further intended to protect neighboring private uses from potentially incompatible public uses. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.46.020 Development standards.
The general property development standards for the PF zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-23: PF Zone Development Standards. See also Section 16.18.030 (Lot Dimensions) for minimum lot dimensions.
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
|                         Table 2-23: PF Zone Development Standards                         |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
|    Development Standard     |         PF Zone          |      Additional Regulations      |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Setback                                                                           |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Front                       | No setback unless adjacent to zone with minimum setback     |
|                             | requirement, in which case the adjoining setback            |
|                             | shall be as provided in zone of adjacent lot. Lots          |
|                             | separated by streets or other rights-of-way are not         |
|                             | considered adjacent. If more than one zone is adjacent,     |
|                             | the largest setback shall be required                       |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Interior Side and Rear      | "                                                           |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Corner Lot—Street Side      | "                                                           |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Building Height     | 35 feet                  | Maximum height may be increased  |
|                             |                          | up to 50 feet for city-owned     |
|                             |                          | facilities, as set forth         |
|                             |                          | in Section 17.46.030 (Additional |
|                             |                          | Regulations). See also           |
|                             |                          | Section 17.70.080 (Height        |
|                             |                          | Measurement and Exceptions)      |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Lot Coverage        | 60%                      | See also Section 17.70.120       |
|                             |                          | (Lot Coverage)                   |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Maximum Floor Area Ratio    | For a parcel adjacent to a C-D zone: 2.0                    |
|                             | For a parcel adjacent to any zone other than C-D:           |
|                             | 1.0                                                         |
|                             | See also Section 17.70.060 (FAR Measurement and Exceptions) |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Area            | 6,000 square feet        | See also Section 16.18.030       |
|                             |                          | (Lot Dimensions)                 |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Edge Condition Requirements | See Section 17.70.050 (Edge Conditions)                     |
+-----------------------------+--------------------------+----------------------------------+
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.46.030 Additional regulations.
A. Maximum Building Height in PF Zone. These regulations are established to allow for city buildings higher than thirty-five feet in the PF zone to encourage creative building design and meet critical community needs; provided, that such taller buildings, through discretionary review processes, contribute defined community benefits and can be found to be compatible with adjacent buildings and the surrounding environment as a whole.
B. Findings and Requirements to Approve Building Height Increase. The approval of a building height above thirty-five feet shall require approval of major development review (see Chapter 17.106: Development Review). In addition to the criteria associated with major development review (Section 17.106.050: Application Review), the approval of a building height above thirty-five feet shall require that the review authority also find: The public benefits associated with the project significantly outweigh any detrimental impacts from the additional height. In weighing potential public benefits, the planning commission shall consider objectives related to common parking facilities, economic vitality, historic preservation, and open space preservation to be especially important. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.48 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) OVERLAY ZONE

Sections:
17.48.010    Purpose and application.
17.48.020    Allowed uses.
17.48.030    Development standards.
17.48.040    Phasing.
17.48.050    Preliminary development plan required.
17.48.060    Mandatory project features.
17.48.070    Process for approval.
17.48.080    Final development plan.
17.48.090    Amendment to final development plan.
17.48.100    Revocation of PD zoning.

17.48.010 Purpose and application.
A. Purpose. The PD overlay zone is intended to provide for flexibility in the application of zoning standards for proposed development. The purpose is to allow consideration of innovation in site planning and other aspects of project design—and more effective design responses to site features, land uses on adjoining properties, and environmental impacts—than the development standards of the underlying zone would produce without adjustment. The city expects each planned development project to be of significantly higher design quality, including more effective and attractive pedestrian orientation, environmental sensitivity, affordable housing, and the more efficient use of resources, than would be achieved through conventional design practices and standards. Planned development (PD) zoning shall be approved only in conjunction with derived long-term community benefits and where the project can help achieve the vision, goals, and policies of the general plan.
B. Application. The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all projects within the PD overlay zone. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.48.020 Allowed uses.
Any use or combination of uses allowed by Section 17.10.020 (Use Regulations By Zone) within the underlying zone may be established within the PD overlay zone, subject to any additional limitations on specific land uses provided by the overlay as adopted. No PD overlay zone shall allow a land use that is not allowed in the underlying zone, or by the general plan, or any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.48.030 Development standards.
A. Minimum Lot Area Required. The minimum lot area of a PD overlay zone shall be one-half of a contiguous acre.
B. General Plan Compliance. The preparation, review, and approval of a PD overlay zone shall require strict compliance with the general plan and any applicable specific plan.
C. Relationship of PD Overlay Zone to Underlying Zone. 
    1. Planning Permit Requirements. Development and new uses within the PD overlay zone shall obtain the permits required by Section 17.10.020 (Use Regulations By Zone) for the underlying zone.
    2. Site Planning and Project Development Standards. Development and new land uses within the PD overlay zone shall comply with all applicable development standards of the underlying zone, except as specifically modified, waived, or augmented by the PD overlay zone.
D. Deviation from Development Standards. The application of the PD overlay zone to property may include the adjustment or modification, where necessary and justifiable, of any applicable development standard of this title (e.g., building height, floor area ratio, parcel size, parking, setbacks, etc.) or of the city’s subdivision regulations. The maximum density as allowed by cross-slope percent may be adjusted but shall not exceed the maximum density allowed in the average cross-slope category zero through fifteen percent for the applicable zone.
E. Qualifying Community Benefits. Each proposed project shall comply with Section 17.48.060 (Mandatory Project Features). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.48.040 Phasing.
A. Timing of Rezoning. Application of the PD overlay zone shall occur simultaneously with the approval of a specific project through the planned development process as set forth in Section 17.48.070 (Process for Approval).
B. Phasing. If the construction of the planned development is to occur in phases, the open space and common facilities shall be developed and made available in proportion to the number of dwelling units or nonresidential floor area occupied during any given stage. At no time during construction of the project shall the density of developed land exceed the overall density established in the final development plan. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.48.050 Preliminary development plan required.
In addition to any application requirements set forth in Chapter 17.104 (Permit Application Filing and Processing), an application for planned development shall be made to the community development department and shall consist of a preliminary development plan, to include:
A. A legal description of the total site involved;
B. A statement of the objectives to be achieved by the planned development through the particular approach to be used by the applicant;
C. A schedule indicating the approximate dates when construction of the development or stages of the development are to be started and completed;
D. A quantified description of the total number and type of dwelling units, parcel sizes, coverage, modified and natural open space, grading, residential densities, and areas devoted to nonresidential uses;
E. Identification of portions of the development which would otherwise require a variance, and reason for the deviation from normal standards;
F. A site plan and supporting maps, drawn to a suitable scale and clearly labeled, showing if applicable:
    1. Existing site conditions, including contours, vegetation and water courses;
    2. Proposed lot designs;
    3. Location and floor area of existing and proposed buildings or outlines of areas within which buildings may be located;
    4. Location and size of all areas to be conveyed or reserved as common open spaces or for public or semi-public uses;
    5. Existing and proposed circulation system of arterial, collector and local streets; off-street parking, loading, and emergency access areas; points of access to public rights-of-way; proposed ownership of circulation routes;
    6. Existing and proposed sidewalks and paths;
    7. Existing and proposed utility systems, including sanitary sewer, storm drainage, water, electricity, gas and telephone;
    8. A general landscape plan; and
    9. A general grading plan.
G. Information on land area adjacent to the proposed development, indicating important relationships between the proposal and surrounding land uses, circulation systems, public facilities and natural features; and
H. Any additional information which may be required by the director to evaluate the character and impact of the planned development. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.48.060 Mandatory project features.
The planning commission may recommend, and the council may approve, a rezoning to apply the PD overlay zone only for a project that incorporates a minimum of three of the following four features:
A. A minimum of twenty-five percent of the residential units within the project are affordable to households of very low-, low-, or moderate-income households. (See Chapter 17.140: Affordable Housing Incentives for incentives provided for affordable housing development, including density bonuses and possible fee waivers.)
B. The project will achieve greater energy efficiency than standard developments through the incorporation of green building techniques, scoring at least a Silver rating on the LEED or other equivalent rating system, or achieving zero-net energy use.
C. The project will preserve, enhance, and/or create a significant natural feature with a minimum open space area of one-quarter acre.
D. The project will provide a substantial public amenity, for example, a significant public plaza, a public park, or a similar improved open space feature, including provisions for guaranteed long-term maintenance not at the expense of the city. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.48.070 Process for approval.
A. Planning Commission Recommendation. After giving notice as provided in Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings), the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the application. The planning commission may recommend approval, approval subject to certain modifications, or denial of the application. The decision of the planning commission shall be in the form of a recommendation to the council and shall be rendered in writing, stating all modifications or conditions to be reflected in the final development plan.
B. Actions of the Council. After giving notice as provided in Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings), the council shall hold a public hearing on the application and the recommendations of the planning commission. The council may approve, approve subject to certain modifications, or deny the proposal. The decision of the council shall be rendered in writing, stating all modifications or conditions to be reflected in the final development plan. If it approves or conditionally approves the preliminary development plan, the council shall approve the rezoning and the official zone map shall be amended to indicate approval of the planned development.
C. Decision and Findings. Following a public hearing, the planning commission may recommend, and the council may approve or disapprove a rezoning to apply the PD overlay zone in compliance with this section. The council may approve a rezoning to apply the PD overlay zone only after first making all of the following findings:
    1. The project is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan;
    2. The proposed land use is allowed within the applicable underlying zone;
    3. The project complies with all applicable provisions of these zoning regulations other than those modified by the PD rezoning;
    4. The approved modifications to the development standards of these zoning regulations are necessary and appropriate to accommodate the superior design of the proposed project, its compatibility with adjacent land uses, and its successful mitigation of environmental impacts;
    5. The project complies with all applicable city design guidelines;
    6. All affected public facilities, services, and utilities are adequate to serve the proposed project;
    7. The location, size, site planning, building design features, and operating characteristics of the project are highly suited to the characteristics of the site and surrounding neighborhood, and will be compatible with the character of the site and the land uses and development intended for the surrounding neighborhood by the general plan;
    8. The site is adequate for the project in terms of size, configuration, topography, and other applicable features;
    9. The proposed community benefits directly implement objectives of the general plan;
    10. The community benefits proposed do not principally benefit the project or occupants of the project, but rather provide a district or area-wide benefit within San Luis Obispo;
    11. The site has appropriate access to public streets with adequate capacity to accommodate the quantity and type of traffic expected to be generated by the use; and
    12. The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the proposed project will not, in the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity of the proposed use, or detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.48.080 Final development plan.
A. Within two years of approval or conditional approval of the development plan, the applicant shall file with the community development department a final development plan. At his/her discretion and for good cause, the director may extend the time for filing the final development plan for a period or periods not exceeding a total of three years.
B. The final development plan shall include those items from Section 17.48.050 (Preliminary Development Plan Required) which describe the proposal, including division of land, type and location of all buildings and improvements, and so on, but it need not include information on existing conditions.
C. The director shall review and take action on the final development plan within thirty days of filing. He/she shall approve it upon finding that it is in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan as approved or modified by the council. Upon approval of the final development plan, the director shall add the number of the planned development to the official zone map (for example, PD [9999]). Subsequently, all grading, construction, and landscaping shall comply with the approved final development plan.
D. The final development plan may consist of final subdivision maps, building construction plans, grading plans, and so on that would normally be submitted in the course of development, and need not be a separate submittal. The director shall determine the extent to which any additional documentation of development plans is required.
E. No land division may be undertaken, and no construction begun within an area zoned PD until a final development plan has been approved. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.48.090 Amendment to final development plan.
A. Minor differences in substantial conformance between the approved development plan and construction plans may be allowed by the director, as authorized and defined in Section 17.102.020(D) (Legislative Actions) and Chapter 17.108 (Director’s Action).
B. Written requests for amendments to a final development plan may be approved by the planning commission after a public hearing, notice of which has been given as provided in Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings). Amendments shall be limited to changes in the size and position of buildings; the number, area or configuration of lots; landscape treatment; phasing, and the like.
C. Amendments may not include changes in proposed use, overall density, or overall configuration of the land uses and circulation features. Changes to these aspects may be accomplished only by reapplication and submittal of a new preliminary development plan.
D. Amendments to large office PD ordinances approved by the council prior to June 2003 may be approved under subsection B of this section to allow changes in proposed use, provided those uses are determined by the planning commission to be consistent with the general plan.
E. These procedures apply whether or not all or part of the development has been built. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.48.100 Revocation of PD zoning.
If a final development plan is not carried out in the time specified in the development plan or within an approved extension period, the planning commission and council may remove the PD designation according to the usual procedure for city-initiated rezoning. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.50 SPECIFIC PLAN (SP) OVERLAY ZONE

Sections:
17.50.010    Purpose and application.
17.50.020    Allowed uses and development standards.
17.50.030    Additional regulations.

17.50.010 Purpose and application.
The specific plan (SP) overlay zone is established to implement Sections 65450 through 65457 of the California Government Code. As provided for in the Government Code, a specific plan is designed to provide for flexibility, innovative use of land resources and development, a variety of housing and other development types, and an effective and safe method of pedestrian and vehicular circulation. The SP overlay zone is intended to translate the provisions of an adopted specific plan into regulations for the subsequent development of land. The SP overlay zone will be applied to areas for which a specific plan has been adopted or where the general plan calls for a specific plan prior to development. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.50.020 Allowed uses and development standards.
A. Allowed Uses. 
    1. Prior to Specific Plan Adoption. Prior to adoption of a specific plan, areas in the SP overlay zone shall comply with the use provisions of the C/OS zone.
    2. Post Specific Plan Adoption. Once a specific plan has been adopted, uses shall be as provided in the applicable specific plan.
B. General Development Standards. Density, FAR, height, setbacks, lot coverage, parking, and any other listed development standards shall be as provided in the applicable specific plan. If the specific plan does not contain explicit provisions on these items, they shall be provided as required for the underlying zone. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.50.030 Additional regulations.
Other development features explicitly contained in the applicable specific plan, such as landscaping, building siting and form, and circulation, shall be as provided in the specific plan. Where a specific plan is silent with regard to particular development standards, the provisions of the underlying zone shall govern. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.52 SPECIAL FOCUS AREA (S-F) OVERLAY ZONE

Sections:
17.52.010    Purpose and application.
17.52.020    Allowed uses.
17.52.030    Development standards.

17.52.010 Purpose and application.
Special focus (S-F) areas are those areas identified explicitly in the general plan as areas that present opportunities for customized land use approaches and/or special design implementation to enhance the use and conditions in these areas and to achieve development potential consistent with general plan land use policies. The S-F overlay zone is intended to translate the provisions of General Plan Land Use Element Chapter 8 (Special Focus Areas) into regulations for the subsequent development of land. The S-F overlay zone will be applied to areas identified in Chapter 8 as special focus areas, where the General Plan Land Use Element calls for special design concepts. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.52.020 Allowed uses.
A. General. All uses within the special planning areas shall adhere to the requirements of the underlying zone and the provisions for each of the respective special planning areas, as described in Chapter 8 of the Land Use Element.
B. Land Use Element Policies for Specific Uses. New uses that the director determines are consistent with and expressly allowed by the Land Use Element for a special focus area shall be considered allowed uses and not require a Use Permit in the applicable S-F overlay zone area. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.52.030 Development standards.
A. Development Objectives. All development within any S-F overlay zone shall adhere to the requirements of the underlying zone and the provisions for each respective special focus planning area, as described in Chapter 8 of the Land Use Element. In addition, development objectives within each S-F overlay zone shall be interpreted by the review authority to achieve the development objectives of the applicable special focus area. Where provisions of the underlying zone and Land Use Element Chapter 8 conflict, Land Use Element policies shall take precedence.
B. Adopted Area Plan. Where an adopted area plan applies to an area with an S-F overlay zone, all projects shall comply with the provisions and regulations of the area plan.
C. Conflicts. Development features explicitly contained in an applicable area plan or Land Use Element policy for a particular S-F overlay, such as landscaping, building siting and form, and circulation, shall be as provided in the applicable area plan or Land Use Element policy. Where the area plan or Land Use Element is silent with regard to particular development standards, the provisions of the underlying zone shall govern. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.54 DOWNTOWN (D) OVERLAY ZONE

Sections:
17.54.010    Purpose and application.
17.54.020    Allowed uses and development standards.
17.54.030    Required findings.

17.54.010 Purpose and application.
A. Purpose. The downtown (D) overlay zone is intended to implement the vision of downtown and the community’s urban center as articulated in the General Plan Land Use Element, which serves as the cultural, social, entertainment, and political center of the city for its residents, as well as home to those who live in its historic neighborhoods.
B. Application. Application of the D overlay zone may be initiated by the council or planning commission and may only be applied to properties within the vicinity of the downtown core, as identified in the General Plan Land Use Element. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.54.020 Allowed uses and development standards.
A. Consistent with Underlying Zoning. Where an application is consistent with the use and development standards of the underlying zone, no additional process or procedure beyond that which is generally required for the application shall apply.
B. Apply C-D Zoning Standards. Within the D overlay zone, an applicant may request to apply C-D zoning regulations for the subject property. In granting a request to apply C-D zoning regulations within the D overlay zone, major development review approval shall be required (see Chapter 17.106: Development Review). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.54.030 Required findings.
In addition to the criteria associated with major development review (Section 17.106.050: Application Review), the approval of any project in the D overlay zone shall require that the review authority find:
A. That the project conforms with the purpose, intent, and provisions of the downtown core as stated in the Land Use Element of the General Plan; and
B. That the project conforms to the C-D zone development standards and consistent with applicable standards identified in the downtown design chapter of the community design guidelines; and
C. That the project furthers the vision, principles, and goals of the Downtown Concept Plan; and
D. That the project’s location, size, height, operations, and other significant features will be compatible with and will not adversely affect or further degrade adjacent properties, the surrounding neighborhood, or the public health, welfare, and safety; and
E. That the project provides for an arrangement of uses, buildings, structures, open spaces and other improvements that are compatible with the scale and character of the adjacent properties and surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.56 HISTORICAL PRESERVATION (H) OVERLAY ZONE

Sections:
17.56.010    Purpose and application.
17.56.020    Allowed uses.
17.56.030    Development standards.
17.56.040    Review procedures.

17.56.010 Purpose and application.
A. Purpose. The H overlay zone is established to identify parcels, areas, or structures that are architecturally or historically important, and may be eligible for benefits offered through the city’s historical preservation program.
B. Application. The H overlay zone may be applied to areas with any of the following characteristics:
    1. The property is within an area where buildings with pre-1941 architectural styles create a recognizable character.
    2. The property or area contains structures which are good or excellent examples of pre-1941 architecture, were designed by eminent architects or designers, or are community architectural landmarks.
    3. The property or area contains structures that are included in the city’s master list of historical resources.
    4. The property, area, or structure was owned or occupied by someone who had a significant role in the history of the city, region, state, or nation. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.56.020 Allowed uses.
Uses shall be regulated as provided in the underlying zone. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.56.030 Development standards.
Property development standards shall be as established by the underlying zone. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.56.040 Review procedures.
Chapter 14.01 establishes the review procedures for development applications for properties within the H overlay zone. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.58 MIXED-USE (MU) OVERLAY ZONE

Sections:
17.58.010    Purpose and application.
17.58.020    Allowed uses.
17.58.030    Development and design standards.
17.58.040    Additional regulations.

17.58.010 Purpose and application.
A. Purpose. The mixed-use (MU) overlay zone, in combination with any other zone, requires a mix of residential and nonresidential uses on the same site where mixed-use development would otherwise be at the discretion of the property owner. The primary purpose of the MU overlay zone is to provide a means for the city to identify areas where the public health, safety, and welfare will be enhanced by requiring that all allowed development be in the form of mixed-use projects, where ground floor street frontages are occupied by retail, business, or personal services uses and residential uses are located above or to the rear of a site. The MU overlay zone is intended to promote a compact city, to provide additional housing opportunities—including affordable housing opportunities—which is the first priority, and to reduce vehicle travel by providing services, jobs, and housing in proximity. The city desires the safety provided by having residential components in commercial areas.
B. Application. 
    1. General. The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all new development projects, but shall not apply to additions to existing buildings, expansion of an existing use, or change of use.
    2. Initiation. Application of the MU overlay zone may be initiated by the council or planning commission to ensure that mixed residential and commercial uses will be included when certain parcels are developed or redeveloped, or by a property owner. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.58.020 Allowed uses.
Each land use proposed on a site subject to the MU overlay zone shall be authorized in compliance with the permit requirements of Section 17.10.020 (Use Regulations By Zone) that apply to the underlying zone, except that new mixed-use projects that the director determines are consistent with the standards of this section shall not require a minor or conditional use permit for mixed uses. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.58.030 Development and design standards.
Property development standards shall be those of the underlying zone, except that the application of the MU overlay zone to a property may include establishing a higher height limit than the underlying zone to more effectively accommodate the residential component of a mixed-use project. Any such request for a higher height limit shall be set forth in the subject application and shall be reviewed by the applicable review authority as part of the overall application. Proposed development and new land uses shall also comply with all applicable provisions of Section 17.70.130 (Mixed-Use Development). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.58.040 Additional regulations.
A. Ordinance Contents. An ordinance adopting an MU overlay zone shall specify the following items and may include any other standard that would further the purpose and intent of this chapter:
    1. The types of uses which are required or allowed to be combined;
    2. Any standards for the uses’ locations or their relationships to each other; and/or
    3. Any issues specific to the site or the intended combination of uses which must be resolved by the design of the project. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.60 SPECIAL CONSIDERATION (S) OVERLAY ZONE

Sections:
17.60.010    Purpose and application.
17.60.020    Allowed uses.
17.60.030    Development standards.
17.60.040    Required findings.

17.60.010 Purpose and application.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the S overlay zone is, in combination with any zone, to require additional discretionary review before particular uses may be established or development initiated, as identified in the adopting ordinance or plan for each individual S overlay zone. This requirement is intended to ensure compatibility of the use and development with its surroundings, or conformance with the general plan, or to determine if a proposed development solves problems such as noise exposure, flood hazard, airport hazard, or slope instability which are particularly severe on a given site. Such development review may also be used to protect areas of historic resources, indigenous cultural resources, scenic or ecological sensitivity, wildlife habitat, or wildland fire hazard.
B. Application. 
    1. S Overlay Zone Initiation. Application of the S overlay zone may be initiated by the council or planning commission to ensure that specific site features are considered during future project development, or by a property owner.
    2. Ordinance Contents. The ordinance adopting the S overlay zone shall specify the considerations to be addressed, which of the findings listed in Section 17.60.040 (Required Findings) will be required for project approval, and any additional findings or regulations. Each S overlay shall have a unique name and identifying number. The overlay number indicated in the ordinance shall be shown on the official zone map. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.60.020 Allowed uses.
A. Where Adopting Ordinance Identifies Use. Where an S overlay adopting ordinance identifies a particular land use of concern and directs approval of a minor use permit for such particular use, upon change or establishment of such use, a minor use permit shall be required for that use.
B. Where Adopting Ordinance Is Silent on Use. Where the S overlay zone adopting ordinance is silent with regard to uses of concern, any allowed or conditionally allowed use in the underlying zone may be established. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.60.030 Development standards.
A. Development Review. Unless otherwise specified in the S overlay adopting ordinance, all new construction projects and additions to existing buildings shall be subject to minor development review approval (see Chapter 17.106: Development Review).
B. Conditions and Standards. In order to fulfill the intent of these regulations, in approving a project within the S overlay zone, the review authority may establish conditions relating to improvements, building location, access, etc., which are more restrictive than provided in the underlying zone. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.60.040 Required findings.
A. Primary Finding Required for All Projects. In addition to the findings and criteria associated with a minor use permit or minor development review, as applicable, the review authority shall also find that the project is compliant with the adopting ordinance applicable to the relevant S overlay.
B. Project-Specific Findings. In addition to the finding required in subsection A (Primary Finding Required for All Projects) of this section, the review authority shall also make the related applicable findings listed in this section. Not all findings listed in this section shall apply for each overlay. In determining which findings from this list shall apply, the director shall consider the language in the S overlay adopting ordinance, applicable plan, and General Plan Land Use Element policies.
    1. General Plan Policy. Where the S overlay zone is applied to implement a specific general plan policy, the approval of any project in the applicable S overlay zone shall require that the review authority find that the project conforms with the purpose, intent, and provisions of the general plan policy for which the S overlay zone was applied.
    2. Compatibility with Surroundings—Nonresidential Projects. Where the S overlay zone is applied to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, neighborhoods, or conditions, the approval of any project in the S overlay zone shall require that the review authority find:
        a. That the project will enhance the built environment in the surrounding context or will perform a function or provide a service that is essential or beneficial to the community;
        b. That the project’s location, size, height, operations, and other significant features will be compatible with and will not adversely affect or further degrade adjacent properties, the surrounding neighborhood, or the public health, welfare, and safety;
        c. That the project provides for an arrangement of uses, buildings, structures, open spaces and other improvements that are compatible with the scale and character of the adjacent properties and surrounding neighborhood; and
        d. That the project substantially conforms with the purpose, intent, and provisions of the general plan, any applicable area plan or specific plan, and applicable community design guidelines.
    3. Compatibility with Surroundings—Residential and Mixed-Use Projects. For all multi-unit residential housing and mixed-use developments where at least two-thirds of the square footage consists of residential, the use shall not be subject to subsection (B)(2) (Compatibility with Surroundings: Nonresidential Projects) of this section. For such projects, the provisions of Section 17.110.070 (Required Findings) shall apply.
    4. Noise Exposure. Where the S overlay zone is applied to prevent exposure of sensitive receptors to harmful noise levels, the approval of any project in the S overlay zone shall require that the review authority find that the project demonstrates consistency with maximum interior and exterior noise limits as indicated in Chapter 9.12 (Noise Control) by providing noise analysis, construction details, or other information deemed necessary by the director to verify conformance with maximum noise limits, or will adequately address potential impacts related to noise exposure.
    5. Flood Hazard. Where the S overlay zone is applied to minimize impacts from flood hazards, the approval of any project in the S overlay zone shall require that the review authority find that the project demonstrates avoidance of flood hazards or will adequately address potential impacts related to flood hazards.
    6. Airport Hazard. Where the S overlay zone is applied to ensure a project avoids significant airport hazards, the approval of any project in the S overlay zone shall require that the review authority find that the project demonstrates avoidance of airport hazards or will adequately address potential impacts related to airport hazards.
    7. Hillsides/Slope Instability. Where the S overlay zone is applied to ensure development is appropriately designed in hillside areas, the approval of any project in the S zone shall require that the review authority find:
        a. That the project is designed and will be developed to preserve to the greatest extent practicable the natural features of the land, including the existing topography and landscaping; and
        b. That the project is designed and will be developed to be consistent with the community design guidelines for hillside development.
    8. Historical or Cultural Resource Sensitivity. Where the S overlay zone is applied to avoid significant impacts to historical resources, the approval of any project in the S zone shall require that the review authority find that the project is designed and will be developed to be consistent with the community design guidelines for historical resource preservation and applicable requirements of Chapter 14.01.
    9. Scenic or Ecological Sensitivity. Where the S overlay zone is applied to avoid significant impacts to scenic or ecologically sensitive areas, the approval of any project in the S zone shall require that the review authority find:
        a. That the project is designed and will be developed to preserve to the greatest extent practicable the natural features of the land, including the existing topography and habitats; and
        b. That the project demonstrates avoidance of scenic or ecological sensitivity impacts or will adequately address potentially significant impacts related to scenic or ecological sensitivity. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.62 RESERVED

Chapter 17.64 AIRPORT (AOZ) OVERLAY ZONE

Sections:
17.64.010    Purpose and intent.
17.64.020    Applicability.
17.64.030    Procedures.
17.64.040    Development standards and uses.
17.64.050    Airport overlay zone.
17.64.060    Airspace protection.
17.64.070    Noise.
17.64.080    Overflight notice.
17.64.090    Open land.

17.64.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the airport overlay zone is to:
A. Implement the city’s general plan policies to ensure that all land uses within the airport overlay zone (AOZ) are consistent with the State Aeronautics Act, state law, Federal Aviation Administration Regulations, and guidance of the California Airport Land Use Planning Handbook;
B. Ensure that land uses and development within the airport overlay zone (AOZ) are compatible with existing and future airport operations;
C. Prohibit the establishment of incompatible uses and further expansion of incompatible uses which could detrimentally affect long-term economic vitality of the airport; and to avoid or minimize exposure of persons to potential hazards associated with current and future airport operations.
D. Prohibit development, uses, or any installations or activities which could represent a hazard to existing and future flight operations.
E. Recognize unique constraints and considerations which apply to properties potentially affected by airport operations by establishing regulations and review criteria for land use and development which apply specifically to properties within the airport overlay zone (AOZ).
F. Recognize the boundary of the San Luis Obispo County regional airport land use plan (ALUP) within the city limits by establishment of an airport overlay zone (AOZ). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.64.020 Applicability.
Regulations in this chapter shall apply to all uses, activities, and existing and proposed development on properties within safety zones S-1b, S-1c, and S-2 designated in the ALUP. Should an override action be taken, the city shall ensure that development is consistent with direction in the State Aeronautics Act, the FAA regulations, and guidance provided in the Caltrans Division of Aeronautics Airport Land Use Planning Handbook. New development and land uses within the runway protection zone and S-1a ALUP safety zones shall be consistent with provisions of the ALUP.
A. Specific Plans. For properties located within the AOZ which also are located within specific plans, development regulations, standards, and policies shall be followed per respective specific plans. In cases where policies or standards are not provided within the specific plan, the policies and standards within this chapter will apply in addition to other applicable zoning regulations, general plan, or other standards and regulations that apply to the project or land use. In no case will a land use, activity, or development be allowed to violate the airspace protection standards of Section 17.64.060 (Airspace Protection).
B. Existing Development and Land Uses. Nonconforming uses and structures shall comply with airspace protection standards of Section 17.64.060 (Airspace Protection), which prohibit any activities that pose a risk to flight operations within the airport overlay zone (AOZ). Existing land uses that are not consistent with the airport overlay zone (AOZ) are nonconforming uses and may continue, but may not expand more than 10 percent beyond the permitted project size at the time of adoption of the AOZ. No increase in density for nonconforming residential land uses is permitted. Nonconforming uses shall comply with zoning regulations Chapters 17.92 (Nonconforming Structures) and 17.94 (Nonconforming Uses) provisions for expiration of nonconforming status and proposed changes in land use which do not conform to the AOZ.
Development or land uses shall be considered “existing” if one of the following conditions is met:
    1. A vesting tentative map has been approved and has not expired or all discretionary approvals have been obtained and have not expired.
    2. Building permits have been issued and have not expired.
    3. The structures and site development have been legally established and physically exist. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.64.030 Procedures.
A. Approval. All ministerial and discretionary actions within the airport overlay zone shall be reviewed for consistency with this chapter prior to approval.
B. Mandatory Findings for Approval. When a project or activity is subject to discretionary actions requiring a public hearing or notice, the applicable review authority shall make all of the following findings, as applicable:
    1. The project or use complies with the noise compatibility policies of the airport overlay zone (AOZ).
    2. The project or use complies with residential and nonresidential density standards in Table 2-24: Airport Overlay Zone (AOZ)—Maximum Allowed Persons.
    3. The project or use complies with Table 2-24 of the applicable airport overlay zone.
    4. The project or use complies with the airspace protection policies of the airport overlay zone.
    5. The project or use complies with the overflight policies of the airport overlay zone.
C. Amendments. Other than general plan, specific plan, or zoning regulations changes addressed through a previous referral to the San Luis Obispo County regional airport land use commission (ALUC), or any action to overrule any determination of the ALUC, proposed general plan land use amendments, zoning amendments, and specific plan amendments that impact density or intensity of development within the airport overlay zone (AOZ) shall be referred to the airport land use commission for a determination of compatibility with the adopted airport land use plan.
D. Overrule Provisions. Should the San Luis Obispo County airport land use commission (ALUC) update the San Luis Obispo County regional airport land use plan (ALUP), the city council of the city of San Luis Obispo shall review the updated ALUP and either make changes to applicable general plan sections, zoning, and implementing ordinances, or the council may, pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 21676(b), overrule the ALUC. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.64.040 Development standards and uses.
Land use compatibility standards are intended to minimize the risk to people and property on the ground as well as to people in an aircraft in the event of an accident or emergency landing occurring outside the airport boundary.
A. Allowable Uses and Nonresidential Density. Table 2-24 lists the uses that are appropriate in the airport land use plan safety zones S-1b, S-1c and S-2. Table 2-24 includes maximum density standards for the safety zones listed above which shall be calculated in accordance with the following method:
    1. Nonresidential Density Calculation. 
        a. Calculations of nonresidential density shall be based on the requirements of Section 17.72.030 (Required Parking Spaces), with the assumption of 1.3 occupants per space and gross parcel size including adjacent roads to centerline of the right-of-way. Nonresidential density shall be calculated prior to reductions for shared use, trip reduction, bicycle, etc. In determining allowed persons per acre, all fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
        b. Example—Proposed Development. Two office buildings, each two stories and containing twenty thousand square feet of floor area per building. Site size is three net acres. Counting the adjacent road to centerline of the right-of-way, three and one-half acres gross. The number of people on the property is assumed to equal 1.3 times the number of parking spaces.
        c. The average usage intensity would therefore be calculated as follows:
            i. 40,000 sq. ft. floor area x 1.0 parking space per 300 sq. ft. = 134.
            ii. 134 parking spaces x 1.3 persons per space = 174 persons per acre.
            iii. 174 persons/3.5 acres gross site size = 50 persons per acre average for the site.
    2. Exceptions. Subject to approval of an administrative use permit, the director may determine another method of density calculation is appropriate based on the particular characteristics of the proposed use and/or development. The method of calculation shall remain consistent with recommended methodologies of Appendix G of the California Airport Land Use Planning Handbook.
B. Airport Land Use Plan and Airport Overlay Zone (AOZ). Development and uses within airport land use plan safety zones S-1b, S-1c, and S-2 are subject to requirements of this chapter. Development and uses within the runway protection zone (RPZ) and ALUP area S-1a shall be consistent with provisions of the ALUP. Most areas within the airport overlay zone (AOZ) are located within specific plan areas. Areas within the AOZ which are located in specific plans designated with SP zoning shall follow regulations within their respective specific plans.
C. Interpretation of Use Listing. The director, subject to the appeal procedures of Chapter 17.126 (Appeals), shall determine whether uses which are not listed shall be deemed allowed or allowed subject to use permit approval in a certain zone that are consistent with the State Aeronautics Act with guidance from the California Airport Land Use Planning Handbook. This interpretation procedure shall not be used as a substitute for the amendment procedure as a means of adding new types of uses to Table 2-24.
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|                        TABLE 2-24—AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE (AOZ)—MAXIMUM ALLOWED PERSONS                        |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|                             (Areas within ALUP and outside specific plan areas)                             |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|                 Land Use                  |   Maximum Allowed Persons per   |         Specific Use          |
|                                           |      Acre (ALUP—Figure 13)      |     and Noise Regulations     |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
| "                                         | RPZ  | S-1a | S-1b | S-1c | S-2 | "                             |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
| AGRICULTURE                                                                                                 |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Crop production                       | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Grazing                               | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Greenhouse/plant nursery,             | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | commercial                            |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Community gardens                     | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Livestock feed lot                    | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
| INDUSTRY, MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING, WHOLESALING                                                         |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Bakery, wholesale                     | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Furniture and fixtures                | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | manufacturing, cabinet                |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
|   | shop                                  |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Industrial research and               | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | development                           |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Laboratory—Medical, analytical,       | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | research, testing                     |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Laundry, dry cleaning                 | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | plant                                 |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Manufacturing—Heavy                   | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Manufacturing—Light                   | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Petroleum product storage             | ALUP | ALUP | ALUP | UZ   | UZ  | Hazardous materials—17.74.060 |
|   | and distribution                      |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Photo and film processing             | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | lab                                   |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Printing and publishing               | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Recycling facilities—Collection       | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | and processing facility               |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Recycling facilities—Scrap            | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | and dismantling yard                  |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Recycling facilities—Small            | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | collection facility                   |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Storage—Personal storage              | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | facility                              |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Storage yard                          | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | Hazardous materials—17.74.060 |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Warehousing, indoor storage           | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Wholesaling and distribution          | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
| LODGING                                                                                                     |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Bed and breakfast inn                 | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Homeless shelter                      | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Hostel                                | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Hotel, motel                          | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Recreational vehicle (RV) park accessory            | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | to hotel, motel                                     |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Vacation rental                       |      |      |      |      |     | 17.10.020(F)                  |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
| RECREATION, EDUCATION, AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES                                                             |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Club, lodge, private meeting          | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | hall                                  |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Commercial recreation                 | ALUP | ALUP | ALUP | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | facility—Indoor                       |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Commercial recreation                 | ALUP | ALUP | ALUP | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | facility—Outdoor                      |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Educational conferences               | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Fitness/health facility               | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Golf course                           | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Library, museum                       | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Library, branch facility              | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Night club                            | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Park, playground                      | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Public assembly facility              | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Religious facility                    | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | School—Boarding school,               | ALUP | ALUP | ALUP | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | elementary, middle, secondary         |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | School—College, university            | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | campus                                |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | School—College, university—Satellite  | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | classroom facility                    |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | School—Elementary, middle,            | ALUP | ALUP | ALUP | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | secondary                             |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | School—Specialized education/training | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Special event                         | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Sports and active recreation          | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | facility                              |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Sports and entertainment              | ALUP | ALUP | ALUP | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | assembly facility                     |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Studio—Art, dance, martial            | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | arts, music, etc.                     |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Theater                               | ALUP | ALUP | ALUP | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Theater—Drive-in                      | ALUP | ALUP | ALUP | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
| RESIDENTIAL USES                                                                                            |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Boarding/rooming house,               | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | dormitory                             |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Caretaker quarters                    | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Convents and monasteries              | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Fraternity, sorority                  | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | High occupancy residential            | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | use                                   |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Home occupation                       | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Live/work units                       | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Mixed-use project                     | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Mobile home as temporary              | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU—17.64.020(B)             |
|   | residence at building                 |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
|   | site                                  |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Mobile home park                      | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Multifamily dwellings                 | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU—17.64.020(B)             |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Residential care facilities—6         | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | or fewer residents                    |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Residential care facilities—7         | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | or more residents                     |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Residential hospice facility          | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Rest home                             | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Single-family dwellings               | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU—17.64.020(B)             |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Secondary dwelling units              | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Work/live units                       | ALUP | ALUP | UZ1  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
| RETAIL SALES                                                                                                |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Auto and vehicle sales                | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | and rental                            |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Auto parts sales, with                | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | installation                          |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Auto parts sales, without             | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | installation                          |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Bakery, retail                        | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Bar/tavern                            | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Building and landscape                | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | materials sales, indoor               |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Building and landscape                | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | materials sales, outdoor              |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Construction and heavy                | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | equipment sales and rental            |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Convenience store                     | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Extended hour retail                  | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Farm supply and feed store            | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Fuel dealer (propane,                 | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | Hazardous materials—17.74.060 |
|   | etc.)                                 |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Furniture, furnishings,               | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | and appliance stores                  |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | General retail—2,000 sf               | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | or less                               |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | General retail—More than              | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | 2,000 sf, up to 15,000                |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
|   | sf                                    |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | General retail—More than              | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | 15,000 sf, up to 45,000               |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
|   | sf                                    |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | General retail—More than              | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | 45,000 sf, up to 60,000               |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
|   | sf                                    |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | General retail—More than              | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | 60,000 sf, up to 140,000              |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
|   | sf                                    |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Groceries, specialty foods            | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Liquor store/alcohol sales            | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Mobile home, RV, and boat             | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | sales                                 |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Office-supporting retail,             | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | 2,000 sf or less                      |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Office-supporting retail,             | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | more than 2,000, up to                |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
|   | 5,000 sf                              |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Wine tasting room—Off                 | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | site                                  |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Outdoor temporary and/or              | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | seasonal sales                        |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Produce stand                         | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Restaurant                            | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Restaurant with late hour             | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | alcohol service                       |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Outdoor BBQ/grill, accessory          | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | to restaurant                         |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Service station (see also             | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | “vehicle services”)                   |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Vending machine                       | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Warehouse stores—45,000               | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | sf or less gfa                        |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Warehouse stores—more                 | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | than 45,000 sf gfa                    |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
| SERVICES—BUSINESS, FINANCIAL AND PROFESSIONAL                                                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | ATMs                                  | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Banks and financial services          | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Business support services             | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Medical service—Clinic,               | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | laboratory, urgent care               |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Medical service—Doctor                | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | office                                |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Medical service—Extended              | ALUP | ALUP | ALUP | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | care                                  |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Medical service—Hospital              | ALUP | ALUP | ALUP | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Convalescent hospital                 | ALUP | ALUP | ALUP | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Office—Accessory                      | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Office—Business and service           | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Office—Government                     | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Office—Processing                     | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Office—Production and                 | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | administrative                        |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Office—Professional                   | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Office—Temporary                      | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Photographer, photographic            | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | studio                                |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
| SERVICES—GENERAL                                                                                            |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Catering service                      | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Cemetery, mausoleum, columbarium      | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | 17.64.070(A)(2)(d)            |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Copying and quick printer             | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | service                               |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Day care—Day care center              | ALUP | ALUP | ALUP | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | (child/adult)                         |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Day care—Family day care              | ALUP | ALUP | ALUP | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | home (small/large)                    |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Equipment rental                      | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Food bank/packaged food               | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | distribution center                   |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Maintenance service, client           | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | site services                         |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Mortuary, funeral home                | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | 17.64.070(A)(2)(d)            |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Personal services                     | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Personal services—Restricted          | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Public safety facilities              | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Public utility facilities             | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Repair service—Equipment,             | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | large appliances, etc.                |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Residential support services          | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Social service organization           | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Vehicle services—Repair               | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | and maintenance—Major                 |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Vehicle services—Repair               | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | and maintenance—Minor                 |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Vehicle services—Carwash              | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Veterinary clinic/hospital,           | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | boarding, large animal                |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Veterinary clinic/hospital,           | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | boarding, small animal,               |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
|   | indoor                                |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Veterinary clinic/hospital,           | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | boarding, small animal,               |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
|   | outdoor                               |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
| TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS                                                                           |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Airport                               | ALUP | ALUP | FAA  | FAA  | FAA |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Ambulance, taxi, and/or               | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | limousine dispatch facility           |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Antennas and telecommunications       | ALUP | ALUP | FAA  | FAA  | FAA | Airspace protection—17.64.060 |
|   | facilities                            |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Media production—Broadcast            | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | studio                                |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Media production—Backlots/outdoor     | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  | NSLU                          |
|   | facilities and soundstages            |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Heliport                              | ALUP | ALUP | FAA  | FAA  | FAA |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Parking facility                      | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Parking facility—Multi-level          | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Parking facility—Temporary            | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Railroad facilities                   | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Transit station or terminal           | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Transit stop                          | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Truck or freight terminal             | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Water and wastewater treatment        | ALUP | ALUP | 200  | UZ   | UZ  |                               |
|   | plants and services                   |      |      |      |      |     |                               |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   | Key:        |            | NSLU = Noise Sensitive Land Use (if within 60 db CNEL                        |
|   |             |            | contour—Figure 13—See requirements of Section 17.64.070)                     |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   |             |            | UZ = as allowed in underlying zone or specific plan                          |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
|   |             |            | UZ1 = These uses not allowed within 10,000 feet from                         |
|   |             |            | the end of primary runway 11-29 for a width of 1,000                         |
|   |             |            | feet on an extension of runway centerline; and are                           |
|   |             |            | not allowed within 4,000 feet from the end of the existing                   |
|   |             |            | secondary runway 7-25 for an area 1,000 feet wide on                         |
|   |             |            | an extension of the runway centerline.                                       |
+---+-------------+------------+------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------------------------------+
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.64.050 Airport overlay zone.
The safety zone boundaries described within the airport overlay zone are consistent with the adopted San Luis Obispo County regional airport land use plan. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.64.060 Airspace protection.
A. Airspace Protection. Airspace protection standards are intended to reduce the risk of harm to people and property resulting from an aircraft accident by preventing the creation of land use features and prohibition of any activities that can pose hazards to the airspace used by aircraft in flight. Airspace protection standards regarding obstruction and hazards to air navigation are defined in the airport land use plan and apply to land uses and development within the airport overlay zone as summarized below:
    1. Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace. Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR Part 77) and Public Utility Code (PUC) Section 21659 require that structures not penetrate the airspace protection surfaces of the airport without a permit from the California Department of Transportation or a determination by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) that the object does not constitute a hazard to air navigation or would not create an unsafe condition for air navigation. The airspace surrounding an airport is divided into segments called “imaginary surfaces,” which identify height limits for objects that require further study by the FAA to avoid creating hazards to air navigation. Structures that have the potential to be considered an obstruction by the FAA shall be subject to the provisions listed in subsections (A)(1)(a) through (c) of this section:
        a. Proponents of a project shall file a notice of construction or alteration (Form 7460-1) with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) if a proposed structure is more than two hundred feet above ground level or may exceed one foot in height for every one hundred feet from the edge of the nearest point on the runway for a distance up to twenty thousand feet. Filing Form 7460-1 with the FAA will initiate an aeronautical study that will ensure a proposed structure does not constitute a hazard to air navigation or would not create an unsafe condition for air navigation, including impeding any en route or terminal (airport) instrument procedures as per the United States Standard for Terminal Instrument Procedures (TERPS) described in FAA Order 8260.3B (Code of Federal Regulations Section 77.29, Evaluating Aeronautical Effect).
        b. Approvals for such projects may include the requirement for an avigation easement, marking or lighting of the structure, or modifications to the structure. The avigation easement shall be consistent with the form and content of Exhibit H1 in Appendix H of the California Airport Land Use Planning Handbook.
        c. Building permits shall not be issued for a project until a determination of no hazard has been issued by the FAA and any conditions in that determination are met.
    2. Other Flight Hazards Prohibited. Any activities within the airport overlay zone (AOZ) which could pose a hazard to flight operations, including but not limited to the following:
        a. Glare or distracting lights that could be mistaken for airport lights;
        b. Sources of dust, heat, steam, or smoke that may impair pilot vision, or light shows, or laser shows or spotlights;
        c. Any emissions that may cause thermal plumes or other forms of unstable air that generate turbulence within the flight path;
        d. Sources of electrical interference with aircraft communications or navigation;
        e. Features that create an increased attraction for wildlife that may be hazardous to airport operations such as attraction of birds to the extent of creating a significant hazard of bird strikes (examples are outdoor storage or disposal of food or grain, or large, artificial water features; this provision is not intended to prevent enhancement or protection of existing wetlands or the mitigation of wetlands impacts). Features which may pose these risks shall be reviewed for consistency with the FAA’s Advisory Circular 150/5200-33B, Hazardous Wildlife Attractants on or Near Airports; and
        f. Entails installation, construction, or enlargement of a structure that constitutes an obstruction to air navigation through penetration of FAA Part 77 surfaces except as may be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.64.070 Noise.
A. Airport Related Noise. Noise compatibility standards are intended to prevent the establishment of noise-sensitive land uses in portions of the airport environ that are exposed to significant levels of aircraft noise. Where permitted within the airport overlay zone (AOZ), the following noise-sensitive land uses shall comply with applicable noise exposure criteria:
    1. Noise analysis from the Airport Master Plan Environmental Impact Report (2006), or subsequent noise analysis used to update the airport master plan, shall be used for mapping of the long-term noise impact of the airport’s aviation activity, which includes future planned facilities development depicted in the FAA-approved airport layout plan. These noise contours are shown in Figure 2-29 (Airport Noise Contours).
        a. New Residential Development. New residential uses within the sixty dB CNEL contour as depicted in Figure 2-29 (Airport Noise Contours) shall demonstrate consistency with maximum noise levels by providing noise analysis, construction details, or other information deemed necessary by the director to verify conformance with maximum interior noise levels.
    2. Interior Noise Levels Not to Exceed Forty-Five dB CNEL. For the following noise-sensitive land uses, aircraft-related interior noise levels shall not exceed 45 dB CNEL (with windows closed):
        a. Living or sleeping areas of single or multi-unit residences;
        b. Hotels and motels;
        c. Hospitals and nursing homes;
        d. Places of worship, meeting halls, and mortuaries; and
        e. Schools, libraries and museums.
    3. Interior Noise Levels Not to Exceed Fifty dB CNEL. For the following noise-sensitive land uses, aircraft-related interior noise levels shall not exceed fifty dB CNEL (with windows closed):
        a. Office environments;
        b. Eating and drinking establishments; and
        c. Other miscellaneous commercial facilities. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.64.080 Overflight notice.
Aircraft overflight standards are intended to provide overflight notification for land uses near the San Luis Obispo County regional airport. It shall be the responsibility of all owners of property offered for sale or for lease within the airport overlay zone (AOZ) to provide a disclosure prior to selling or leasing property in San Luis Obispo as specified in the airport land use plan.
All discretionary actions shall include a condition of approval requiring all owners of property offered for sale or for lease within the airport overlay zone to provide the aforementioned disclosure prior to selling or leasing property. For new residential land uses, the overflight notification shall be recorded and appear with the property deed. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.64.090 Open land.
A. Open Land. Open land areas are intended to increase the chances of a pilot successfully landing an aircraft in an emergency situation where they are unable to reach the runway. The city has identified properties to contain open land areas as follows:
    1. Airport Area Specific Plan: two hundred fifty acres on the Chevron property with two areas specifically improved to meet ALUC standards; and a three-hundred-foot-wide strip adjacent to Buckley Road (twenty-four acres) on the Avila Ranch site;
    2. Margarita Area Specific Plan: two open land areas amid clustered development;
    3. Laguna Lake public park open area: outside of AOZ but within the approach surface;
    4. Brughelli property easement south of Buckley Road;
    5. San Luis Ranch Specific Plan area, west of Highway 101 and south of Dalidio Drive;
    6. City open space areas within the airport overlay zone.
Where open space or conservation easements have been obtained and the topography supports it, the city shall not allow uses to be established that conflict with their availability to be used as a landing option in the event of an emergency. Where easements have yet to be obtained, the city shall explore opportunities to incorporate the requirement for open land as part of the discretionary approval process. Open land areas shall be consistent with ALUP direction for size, orientation, and topography.
[IMAGE: <17.64.090_Fig2-29.png>]
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.66 RESERVED

Article 3. Regulations and Standards Applicable to All Zones

Chapter 17.68 PURPOSE

Sections:
17.68.010    Purpose.

17.68.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prescribe development and site regulations that apply, except where specifically stated, to development in all zones. These standards shall be used in conjunction with the standards for each zone established in Article 2 (Zone, Allowable Uses, and Development and Design Standards). In any case of conflict, the standards specific to the zone shall override these regulations. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.70 SITE DEVELOPMENT AND GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Sections:
17.70.010    Accessory structures.
17.70.020    Reserved.
17.70.030    Creek setbacks.
17.70.040    Density.
17.70.050    Edge conditions.
17.70.060    FAR measurement and exceptions.
17.70.070    Fences, walls, and hedges.
17.70.080    Height measurement and exceptions.
17.70.090    Hillside development standards.
17.70.095    Incentives related to new all-electric buildings.
17.70.100    Lighting and night sky preservation.
17.70.110    Lot area.
17.70.120    Lot coverage.
17.70.130    Mixed-use development.
17.70.140    Public art requirements for private development.
17.70.150    Rooftop uses.
17.70.160    Satellite dish antenna.
17.70.170    Setbacks.
17.70.180    Showers, lockers, and changing rooms.
17.70.190    Pools and pool equipment—Location.
17.70.200    Trash enclosure standards.
17.70.210    Vision clearance triangle at intersections.
17.70.220    Water-efficient landscape standards.

17.70.010 Accessory structures.
A. Purpose. 
    1. Regulations on accessory structures are established to provide a distinction between nonhabitable accessory structures (e.g., garage, storage shed, shop building) and accessory living spaces (e.g., secondary dwelling units, guest quarters, office, pool house, etc.). These regulations establish standards which prevent the conversion of accessory structures into unpermitted living space to ensure that such structures are not used as separate dwelling units.
    2. Unpermitted conversion of accessory structures is detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare of the community.
B. Applicability. 
    1. Application. This section shall apply to:
        a. New Structures. All new structures, as defined in the building code, located on the same site as the primary structure or use to which it is accessory, including, but not limited to, garages, carports, porte-cocheres, sheds, workshops, gazebos, greenhouses, cabanas, trellises, play structures, aviaries, covered patios, etc.
        b. Decks and Patios. Decks and patios that are 30 inches above the ground elevation, excluding aboveground pools.
    2. Exclusion. This section shall not apply to legally established dwellings, accessory dwelling units as defined in Section 17.156.004 (A Definitions), and guest quarters as defined in Section 17.158.018 (G Definitions). Accessory structures that include habitable space, as defined by the California Building Code, shall be regulated by Section 17.86.020 (Accessory Dwelling Units and Guest Quarters).
C. Development Standards. 
    1. General Development Standards. Accessory structures shall conform to all applicable zoning regulations such as height, yards, parking, building coverage, etc.
    2. Incidental Use. The use of an accessory structure is incidental, and subordinate to the use of the principal structure, or to the principal land use of the site.
    3. Form. Accessory structures may consist of detached structures or additions to primary structures.
    4. No Bathing Facilities. No bathing facilities (e.g., shower, bathtub) may be installed. Plans submitted for a building permit may not include spaces within a bathroom designed for the later addition of bathing facilities.
    5. Limit on Total Number in Residential Zones. In residential zones, no more than three accessory structures shall be permitted per lot, only one of which may include a habitable accessory structure such as an accessory dwelling unit or guest quarters.
D. Process Requirements. 
    1. Building Permit. Development of an accessory structure shall require approval of a building permit from the city’s building division.
    2. Design Review. Plans submitted for a building permit shall be reviewed for consistency with the city’s community design guidelines and general development requirements of the zoning regulations.
    3. Owners Agreement with the City. Prior to the issuance of construction permits, a covenant agreement shall be recorded that discloses the structure’s approved floor plan and status as an “accessory structure” which cannot contain living space, including bathing facilities or a kitchen. This agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder to provide constructive notice to all future owners of the property. The covenant agreement also may contain authorization for annual inspections, and to allow the city upon reasonable time and notice to inspect the premises for compliance with the agreement and to verify continued compliance with requirements of this section and Health and Safety Codes. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.020 Reserved.
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.030 Creek setbacks.
A. Purpose. Creek setbacks are intended to:
    1. Protect scenic resources, water quality, and natural creekside habitat, including opportunities for wildlife habitation, rest, and movement;
    2. Further the restoration of damaged or degraded habitat, especially where a continuous riparian habitat corridor can be established;
    3. Allow for natural changes that may occur within the creek corridor;
    4. Help avoid damage to development from erosion and flooding; and
    5. Enable implementation of adopted city plans.
B. Waterways Subject to Setbacks. Creek setback requirements shall apply to all creeks as defined in the General Plan Open Space Element and shown on that element’s creek map, and only to those creeks.
C. Measurement of Creek Setbacks. Creek setbacks shall be measured from the existing top of bank (or the future top of bank resulting from a creek alteration reflected in a plan approved by the city), or from the edge of the predominant pattern of riparian vegetation, whichever is farther from the creek flow line (Figure 3-1: Creek Setbacks). Top of bank determination shall be consistent with California Department of Fish and Wildlife where state or federal jurisdictional areas apply. The director or natural resources manager may determine the predominant pattern of riparian vegetation, where the edge of the vegetation varies greatly in a short length along the creek, in a way unrelated to topography (e.g., the director will not base the setback line on individual trees or branches extending out from the channel or on small gaps in vegetation extending toward the channel). Where riparian vegetation extends over a public street, no creek setback is required on property which is on the side of the street away from the creek.
D. Plan Information. The location of top of bank and of riparian vegetation shall be shown on all project plans subject to city approval. The location of these features is subject to confirmation by the director, based on observation of actual conditions and, as needed, the conclusions of persons with expertise in hydrology, biology, or geology.
E. Creek Setback Dimensions. Different setback dimensions are established in recognition of different lot sizes and locations of existing structures for areas within the city in comparison with areas that may be annexed, and in response to different sizes of the creek channels and tributary drainage areas.
    1. Creeks within the 1996 City Limits. Along all creeks within the city limits as of July 1, 1996, the setback shall be twenty feet, except as provided in subsections (E)(3), (E)(4), and G of this section. Where the city limit follows a creek, the setback on the side within the 1996 city limits shall be twenty feet, and the setback on the annexed side shall be as provided in subsection (E)(2) of this section.
    2. Creeks in Areas Annexed After 1996. Along any creek in an area annexed to the city after July 1, 1996, the following setbacks shall be provided, unless a specific plan or development plan approved by the council provides a larger or smaller setback, consistent with the purpose of these zoning regulations and with general plan policies:
        a. Fifty-Foot Setbacks. The setback along the following shall be fifty feet: San Luis Obispo Creek (all of main branch); San Luis Obispo Creek East Fork, from San Luis Obispo Creek (main branch) to the confluence with Acacia Creek; and Stenner Creek.
        b. Thirty-Five-Foot Setbacks. The setback along the following shall be thirty-five feet: Prefumo Creek; Froom Creek; Brizziolari Creek; San Luis Obispo Creek East Fork tributary, from the confluence with Acacia Creek to Broad Street (Highway 227); Acacia Creek and its tributaries west of Broad Street (Highway 227); and the segment of the tributary of Acacia Creek which flows generally parallel to and on the easterly side of Broad Street (Highway 227), from Broad Street to Fuller Road.
        c. Twenty-Foot Setbacks. The setback along all creeks except those listed in subsections (E)(2)(a) and (E)(2)(b) of this section shall be twenty feet. (Informational map is available in the community development department.)
    3. Additional Upper Story Setbacks. Where the zone allows more than two stories, an additional ten-foot step back (upper story building setback) shall be provided beginning at the third story level. The upper story step back shall be provided along all building elevations with creek-facing frontage.
    4. Larger Setbacks. To mitigate potentially significant environmental impacts in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act, or to implement adopted city plans, when approving a discretionary application the city may require setbacks larger than required by subsections (E)(1) and (E)(2) of this section, or further limitations on the items which may be placed within setbacks. Also, other city regulations may restrict or prevent development in a floodway or floodplain.
    5. Prior Approvals. Where the city has explicitly approved a creek setback smaller than required by this section prior to adoption of these regulations, that smaller setback shall remain in effect so long as the approval is in effect.
F. Improvements Prohibited within Setbacks. The following shall not be placed or constructed within a creek setback, except as provided in subsection G of this section:
    1. Structures larger than one hundred twenty square feet;
    2. Paving;
    3. Parking lots;
    4. Fire pits, barbeques, and other open flames;
    5. Mechanical equipment;
    6. In nonresidential zones, areas used for storing or working on vehicles, equipment, or materials.
G. Exceptions to Creek Setbacks. 
    1. Replacement Structures. Where a structure lawfully existed on or before October 3, 1996, within a creek setback required by this section, the provisions of this section shall apply. This part is not intended to allow replacement of paving that existed on or before October 3, 1996, with new paving or a building, unless a discretionary approval is obtained in compliance with subsection (G)(4) of this section.
        a. Any structure built in replacement of such a structure may occupy the same footprint, within the creek setback, as the previous structure, without obtaining a discretionary exception. See also Section 17.70.170(D)(1)(b) (Reduced Front or Street Side Setback for New Structure Providing Additional Creek Setback).
        b. Additional floor area shall not be added to the encroaching part of the structure (e.g., by adding stories).
        c. The part of a structure that is nonconforming due solely to the creek setback encroachment may be remodeled without regard to the limits of Section 17.92.020 (Limits on Reconstruction—Exceptions) of these zoning regulations.
    2. Accessory Structures and Uses. The following items may be located within the required creek setback without obtaining a discretionary exception unless otherwise noted; provided, that they do not extend beyond the top of bank into the creek channel; will not cause the removal of native riparian vegetation; will not reduce any flooding capacity in compliance with the city’s flood damage prevention regulations; in total occupy not more than one-half of the total required creek setback area; and are consistent with other property development standards of the zoning regulations.
        a. Walls or fences; provided, that in combination with buildings they enclose not more than one-half of the setback area on any development site.
        b. For a single-unit dwelling: uncovered parking spaces.
        c. Patios and pervious walkways. However, impervious pedestrian walkways and bicycle paths shall require a director’s hearing as provided in subsection (G)(4) of this section.
        d. Decks, stairs, and landings that are no more than thirty inches in height, as measured from adjacent existing grade.
        e. One-story, detached buildings used as tool and storage sheds, play houses, and similar uses, provided the projected roof area does not exceed one hundred twenty square feet. No more than one such building is allowed per parcel.
        f. Garden structures such as trellises, arbors, and gazebos, provided they are constructed using an open lattice design and light-weight materials.
        g. Picnic tables and benches.
        h. Natural flood control and stormwater improvements, including vegetated buffers, bioswales, and rain gardens.
    3. Architectural Features. The following architectural features may extend into the setback up to thirty inches: cornices, canopies, eaves, buttresses, chimneys, solar collectors, shading louvers, water heaters and related enclosures, and bay or other projecting windows that do not include usable floor space.
    4. Director’s Hearing for Exceptions. 
        a. Intent. The director, through a director’s hearing, may act to approve an exception to the creek setback requirements of this section only where the applicant can provide clear and substantiated evidence that there is no practical way to comply with the provisions and that no other feasible alternatives will result in better implementation of other zoning regulations or general plan policies while allowing reasonable use of sites subject to creek setbacks.
        b. Application Type. A creek setback smaller than required by this section may be approved by city action on a plan for public facilities approved by the council or on a specific plan, development plan under planned development zoning, or land division, use permit, or architectural review. Where one of these types of applications is not otherwise required for the proposed feature, an exception request shall be in the form of a director’s hearing.
        c. Findings. Each director’s hearing or other discretionary application to grant an exception to a required creek setback shall be subject to each of the following findings, in addition to any other required findings associated with the project application under which the request is considered:
            i. The location and design of the feature receiving the exception will minimize impacts to scenic resources, water quality, and riparian habitat, including opportunities for wildlife habitation, rest, and movement; and
            ii. The exception will not limit the city’s design options for providing flood control measures that are needed to achieve adopted city flood policies; and
            iii. The exception will not prevent the implementation of city-adopted plans, nor increase the adverse environmental effects of implementing such plans; and
            iv. There are circumstances applying to the site, such as size, shape, or topography, which do not apply generally to land in the vicinity with the same zoning, that would deprive the property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity with the same zoning; and
            v. The exception will not constitute a grant of special privilege—an entitlement inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity with the same zoning; and
            vi. The exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area of the project or downstream; and
            vii. Site development cannot be feasibly accomplished with a redesign of the project; and
            viii. Redesign of the project would deny the property owner reasonable use of the property. “Reasonable use of the property” in the case of new development may include less development than indicated by zoning. In the case of additional development on an already developed site, “reasonable development” may mean no additional development considering site constraints and the existing development’s scale, design, or density.
        d. Biological Survey. A biological survey by a qualified, independent person shall be required for each creek setback exception request to provide the basis for making the required findings above, unless waived by the director upon determining that no purpose would be served by such a survey because no biological resources could be affected by the exception.Figure 3-1. Creek Setbacks
        [IMAGE: <17.70.030_Fig3-1.png>]
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.040 Density.
A. Determination of Allowed Development. 
    1. Density Calculation—General. In the AG, C/OS, and R-1 zones, each single-unit dwelling counts as one density unit. In the other zones, different size dwellings have density unit values as follows:
        a. Studio and one-bedroom dwellings less than six hundred square feet = 0.50 unit;
        b. One-bedroom dwellings between six hundred one and one thousand square feet = 0.66 unit;
        c. Two-bedroom dwelling = 1.00 unit;
        d. Three-bedroom dwelling = 1.50 units;
        e. Dwelling with four or more bedrooms = 2.00 units.
    2. Maximum Development Density—Sloped Sites. 
        a. General. In all zones, unless otherwise specified, the maximum development density allowed on a given lot or land area shall be based on the average cross-slope of the site (see Section 17.70.090(B): Average Cross-Slope Calculation) and as follows:
        +---------------------+---------+--------------+-----+-----+----------------+
        |     Table 3-1: Maximum Residential Density for Cross-Slope Categories     |
        +---------------------+---------+--------------+-----+-----+----------------+
        | Average Cross-Slope |    Maximum Density Allowed (units per net acre)     |
        |        in %         |                                                     |
        +---------------------+---------+--------------+-----+-----+----------------+
        |                     |   R-1   | R-2, O, C-N, | R-3 | R-4 | C/OS, AG, PF,  |
        |                     |         |     C-T      |     |     | C-R, C-D, C-C  |
        |                     |         |              |     |     |     C-S, M     |
        +---------------------+---------+--------------+-----+-----+----------------+
        | 0—15                | As allowed in the zoning regulations for that zone. |
        +---------------------+---------+--------------+-----+-----+----------------+
        | 16—20               | 4       | 6            | 9   | 12  | As allowed in  |
        |                     |         |              |     |     | the zoning     |
        |                     |         |              |     |     | regulations    |
        |                     |         |              |     |     | for that zone. |
        +---------------------+---------+--------------+-----+-----+----------------+
        | 21—25               | 2       | 4            | 6   | 8   | As allowed in  |
        |                     |         |              |     |     | the zoning     |
        |                     |         |              |     |     | regulations    |
        |                     |         |              |     |     | for that zone. |
        +---------------------+---------+--------------+-----+-----+----------------+
        | 26+                 | 1       | 2            | 3   | 4   | As allowed in  |
        |                     |         |              |     |     | the zoning     |
        |                     |         |              |     |     | regulations    |
        |                     |         |              |     |     | for that zone. |
        +---------------------+---------+--------------+-----+-----+----------------+
        b. Exceptions. The director, through a director’s action, may act to approve an exception to the reduction of density with slope where the parcel in question is essentially enclosed on all sides by development at least as dense and within the same cross-slope category as the proposed development. The exception shall not authorize density greater than that allowed for the category of less than fifteen percent slope for the appropriate zone. (See also Section 17.96.020(D), Nonconforming Lots—Regulations.)
    3. Maximum Residential Development Potential. Maximum residential development potential shall be the net lot area (in whole and fractional acres), multiplied by the maximum density allowed (in density units per acre) according to subsections (A)(1) through (A)(2) of this section. The resulting number (in density units, carried out to the nearest one hundredth unit) will be the maximum residential development potential. Any combination of dwelling types and numbers may be developed, so long as their combined density unit values do not exceed the maximum potential.
B. Density Transfer. 
    1. PD Overlay Zone. Development potential may be transferred within the area covered by a planned development (PD) overlay zone, in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 17.48: Planned Development (PD) Overlay Zone.
    2. C/OS Zone. Where a portion of a lot is within a zone or zones that allow residential use and the rest of the lot is in a C/OS zone, and the portion within the C/OS zone is not large enough to allow one dwelling, the fractional dwelling unit potential from the C/OS zone may be transferred to the other portion of the lot, without planned development rezoning.
C. Density Averaging. Where portions of a lot are within two or more different zones that allow different maximum densities, and any portion is not of the size required for a lot in that zone, density may be averaged over the whole lot, with each portion contributing to the overall maximum development potential in proportion to its area and maximum allowed density.
D. Density Bonus for Low-Income and Moderate-Income Housing. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65915, the city may negotiate a density bonus or other benefits in exchange for provision of housing affordable to households with very low, low, or moderate income, as defined in the Government Code, and as stipulated in Chapter 17.140: Affordable Housing Incentives of these regulations.
E. Density in Hotels. For hotels and motels, maximum density includes dwelling units located in hotels and motels, but does not include other hotel or motel units/rooms. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.050 Edge conditions.
A. Purpose. The edge conditions regulations support a buffer between low-density residential zones or open space areas and zones that permit development of higher intensity. Where multi-unit residential zones or commercial zones are adjacent to lower intensity residential or open space zones, development shall incorporate elements in the site design and building design to soften its impact and to result in a compatible transition to the sensitive zone.
B. Applicability. The standards below apply to any portion of property located within any zone designated in Table 3-2: Edge Condition Zones as “Zones Providing Transition” that are adjacent to a parcel designated in Table 3-2: Edge Conditions Zones as “Zones Receiving Transition.” For the purposes of this section, the term “adjacent” shall not include any properties separated by a street, alley, or other right-of-way, whether public or private.
+----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Table 3-2: Edge Condition Zones                                   |
+----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Zones Receiving Transition | R-1, R-2                             |
+----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Zones Providing Transition | R-3, R-4, O, PF, C-N, C-C, C-D, C-R, |
|                            | C-T, C-S, M                          |
+----------------------------+--------------------------------------+
C. Exceptions. 
    1. Where a transition area abuts a zone receiving transition and all properties that would receive transition are developed with legally allowed nonresidential uses, the requirements of this section shall not apply.
    2. The requirements of this section shall not apply to development of a wireless telecommunications facility.
D. Standards. 
    1. FAR Reduction. The maximum floor area ratio for a property in a zone providing transition shall be ten percent less than indicated in the zoning regulations for that zone (Chapters 17.12 through 17.64, inclusive).
    2. Setbacks. The setback standards for a property in a zone providing transition shall be as set forth in Table 3-3: Edge Conditions Minimum Setbacks. See also Figure 3-2: Edge Conditions Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height.
    +------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
    |                  Table 3-3: Edge Conditions Minimum Setbacks                  |
    +------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
    |         Maximum Building Height          |      Minimum Required Setback      |
    +------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
    | A point this high on the roof of a       | Must be at least this far from the |
    | building in a zone providing transition: | property line of a zone receiving  |
    |                                          | transition:                        |
    +------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
    | 1—22 feet                                | 10 feet (minimum setback)          |
    +------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
    | 23—24 feet                               | 12 feet                            |
    +------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
    | 25—26 feet                               | 14 feet                            |
    +------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
    | 27—28 feet                               | 16 feet                            |
    +------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
    | 29—31 feet                               | 19 feet                            |
    +------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
    | 32—33 feet                               | 21 feet                            |
    +------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
    | 34+ feet                                 | 23 feet                            |
    +------------------------------------------+------------------------------------+Figure 3-2. Edge Conditions Interior Side and Rear Setbacks and Building Height
    [IMAGE: <17.70.050_Fig3-2.png>]
    3. Upper Level Open Space Orientation and Setbacks. Balconies and terraces are prohibited above the first floor on the building side facing an adjacent zone receiving transition.
    4. Rooftop Open Spaces. The minimum required setback for any rooftop open space shall be increased by ten feet on the building side facing an adjacent zone receiving transition. All such permitted rooftop open spaces and terraces shall incorporate features that guard against noise impacts on adjacent properties located within a zone receiving transition consistent with standards set forth in Chapter 9.12 (Noise Control).
    5. Windows. All windows along any facade facing a property in a zone receiving transition shall, at the second story and above, be offset horizontally at least twelve inches (edge to edge) from any windows on buildings on an adjacent property in a zone receiving transition, with the intent of preserving privacy and avoiding having windows immediately opposite each other.
E. Driveway Orientation. All driveways and drive aisles shall be oriented such that glare from automobile headlights originating from the use does not point towards an adjacent zone receiving transition. Any driveways and drive aisles facing an adjacent zone receiving transition must be fully screened from the adjacent use.
F. Trash and Recycling. 
    1. Collection Areas. Areas for the collection and storage of trash, green waste, and recyclable materials shall be located on the subject site in a location that will avoid noise and odor impacts consistent with applicable city and other codes.
    2. Containers. All refuse and recycling containers shall be contained within structures enclosed on all four sides and utilize lids made of molded plastic or other sound buffering material.
G. Hours of Operation. A use that will operate outside of the hours from seven a.m. to eight p.m. shall require a minor use permit to ensure that the use will not negatively impact the uses located in the zone receiving transition. Commercial hours of operation may be restricted upon evidence of a substantiated complaint or inadequate parking.
H. Mechanical Service and Loading Areas. Service and loading areas shall be screened from zones receiving transition. When located in proximity to residential uses in zones receiving transition, techniques such as block walls, enhanced setbacks, or enclosed loading or equipment shall be used to minimize adverse impacts from vehicular noise and noise from mechanical equipment. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.060 FAR measurement and exceptions.
A. Measurement—Generally. Floor area ratio (FAR) maximums are applied to buildings in the R-1 zone and all nonresidential zones. The floor area of a building consists of the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building or other enclosed structure, measured from the outside perimeter of the exterior walls and/or the centerline of interior walls. In a mixed-use building, floor area ratio maximums apply to both the residential and the nonresidential components of the development.
B. Single-Unit Residential Floor Area. The floor area for single-unit dwellings shall be measured as the total horizontal floor area of all the floors of a building from the outside walls. The total horizontal floor area shall include the residential floor area of any building(s) located on the lot including the main dwelling, detached accessory structures, all garage area except as exempted below, and enclosed patios. The following shall be excluded from floor area for the purposes of calculating floor area ratio:
    1. Floor area shall exclude required parking spaces in a garage (with each required parking space not exceeding 250 square feet) but shall include any additional enclosed parking spaces provided in addition to the minimum requirements.
    2. Floor area shall exclude fully subterranean basements.
    3. Floor area shall exclude nonenclosed covered structures such as decks, patios, porches, and balconies enclosed on three or fewer sides.
    4. Floor area shall exclude legally allowed accessory dwelling units.
C. Nonresidential Floor Area. The floor area shall include the total horizontal floor area of all the floors of a building measured from the outside walls, exclusive of vents, shafts, courts, elevators, stairways, mechanical, electrical, and communications equipment, and similar facilities. Floor area shall include mezzanine and lofts. The following shall be excluded from floor area for the purposes of calculating floor area ratio.
    1. Floor area shall exclude required parking areas in a garage (with each required parking space not exceeding two hundred square feet) but shall include any additional enclosed parking spaces provided in addition to the minimum requirements.
    2. Floor area shall exclude fully subterranean garages and basements.
    3. Floor area shall exclude nonenclosed covered structures such as decks, patios, porches, and balconies enclosed on three or fewer sides. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.070 Fences, walls, and hedges.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to achieve a balance between concerns for privacy and public concerns for enhancement of the community appearance, visual image of the streetscape, overall character of neighborhoods, and to ensure the provision of adequate light, air, and public safety.
B. Application. These regulations apply to any type of visible or tangible obstruction that has the effect of forming a physical or visual barrier between properties or between property lines and the public right-of-way, including but not limited to: any type of artificially constructed barriers of wood, metal, or concrete posts connected by boards, rails, panels, wire or mesh, and any type of natural growth such as hedges and screen plantings.
C. Standards for Fences Located within Required Setbacks. Fences, walls or hedges may be placed within required setbacks, provided they do not exceed maximum height limitations and comply with the following standards:
    1. Fence Height within Front Setback. The maximum height of a fence, wall, or hedge shall not exceed six feet; except within any front setback, the maximum fence, wall, or hedge height shall be as shown in Figure 3-3: Fence, Wall, and Hedge Height in Front Setbacks. See also Section 17.70.210 (Vision Clearance Triangle at Intersections).Figure 3-3. Fence, Wall, and Hedge Maximum Height in Front Setbacks
    [IMAGE: <17.70.070_Fig3-3.png>]
    2. Corner Lots Fence Height within Street Side Setbacks. On corner lots, the maximum height of a fence, wall, or hedge shall not exceed six feet; except within any street side setback, the maximum fence, wall, or hedge height shall be as shown in Figure 3-4: Fence, Wall, and Hedge Height in Street Side Setbacks (Corner Lots). See also Section 17.70.210 (Vision Clearance Triangle at Intersections).Figure 3-4. Fence, Wall, and Hedge Maximum Height in Street Side Setbacks (Corner Lots)
    [IMAGE: <17.70.070_Fig3-4.png>]
    3. Driveway Gates. In the R-1 zone, gates across driveways shall be set back a minimum of ten feet behind the property line. In all other zones, gates across driveways shall allow for adequate space to queue vehicles entering the property.
    4. Interior Side and Rear Setback Height. The maximum height of a fence, wall, or hedge in any interior side or rear setback shall be six feet.
    5. Arbors, Trellises, and Ornamental Features. 
        a. General. Arbors, trellises, and other similar ornamental features are allowed within a required setback subject to the same height limits that apply to fences, walls, and hedges, except as provided in subsection (C)(5)(b) of this section.
        b. Street Side and Front Setback. Up to one arbor, trellis, or other similar ornamental feature per street frontage is allowed with a maximum height of nine feet, and an area of not more than forty square feet as measured by the perimeter formed by the vertical projection to the ground of the outermost elements of the feature, and no horizontal dimension shall exceed eight feet in length. Any portion of such a feature wider than eighteen inches and that exceeds the usual fence height requirements of this section shall be of an open design such that a person standing on the adjacent public right-of-way can see completely through at least fifty percent of the structure to the depth of the required street yard (see Figure 3-5: Arbors in Front and Street Side Setbacks). Such features within required setbacks shall not be connected to another structure or building. For the purposes of this section, the term “connected” shall include structures that are rigidly joined by structural components. Such features within required setbacks shall not be constructed of heavy materials such as masonry or metal. Such features within required setbacks comply with Section 17.70.210 (Vision Clearance Triangle at Intersections).Figure 3-5. Arbors in Front and Street Side Setbacks
        [IMAGE: <17.70.070_Fig3-5.png>]
    6. Pilasters. Decorative pilasters, statuary, flower pots, and similar ornamental elements attached to or incorporated into the design of conforming fences or walls may exceed the required height limit up to 18 inches, provided that the decorative element is not wider than eighteen inches and that such elements are used to define a gateway or other entryway or are otherwise at least four feet apart.
D. Standards for Fences Located Outside of Required Setback Areas. Fences, walls, and arbors may be placed outside required setbacks, provided:
    1. The maximum fence, wall, arbor or hedge height is eight feet.
    2. Where the fence, wall, or arbor is connected to and a part of a building, it may be any height allowed in the underlying zone.
E. Fence Height with Difference in Grade. Fence height is measured from the adjacent grade along the lower side of the wall, fence, or hedge, directly at the base of the wall or fence.
F. Measurement of Height Where Fences or Walls Are Located on Retaining Walls. 
    1. Where fences or walls are located on retaining walls, the height of the retaining wall shall be considered as part of the overall height of the fence or wall. Walls or fences must have a minimum spacing of five feet between each other to be considered separate structures for purposes of measuring overall height.
    2. Where fences are located on a berm or mound, the height of the fence shall include the berm or mound directly beneath the fence and above natural grade in the overall height measurement.
    3. Where fences are located on retaining walls within interior side or rear setbacks, fences shall not exceed six feet as measured from the uphill side if erected or replaced on top of the retaining walls, and the combined fence and retaining wall height shall not exceed nine feet from the lower side, provided no modification of grade has occurred from the original subdivision improvements and/or design approvals. A building permit is required for the combined fence and retaining wall height that exceeds six feet. If there is evidence that a modification to the grade has occurred from the original subdivision/design approvals, the height must be authorized through a fence height exception pursuant to Chapter 17.108 (Director’s Action). For retaining walls in hillside areas, see also Section 17.70.090(C)(3) (Retaining Walls).
G. Intersection and Driveway Visibility. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, fences, walls, and hedges shall comply with Section 17.70.210 (Vision Clearance Triangle at Intersections).
H. Director’s Action. The director, through a director’s action, may grant exceptions to standards of this section as set forth in Chapter 17.108 (Director’s Action) when there is no practical way to comply with the provisions and no other feasible alternatives will result in better implementation of other zoning regulations or general plan policies while allowing reasonable use of sites. Circumstances where a director’s action may be approved include, but are not limited to, issues related to topography and privacy. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.080 Height measurement and exceptions.
A. Residential and Nonresidential Building Height on Flat Lots. For flat lots and lots with an average (cross-parcel) slope of less than sixteen percent, the height of a building or structure shall be measured as the vertical distance from the average level of highest and lowest existing grade of that portion of the site covered by the building to the topmost point of the roof, including parapets but excluding features outlined in subsection C of this section. The average level of the ground is determined by adding the elevation of the lowest point of the part of the lot covered by the building to the elevation of the highest point of the part of the lot covered by the building and dividing by two. Height measurements shall be based on existing topography of the site, before grading for proposed on-site improvements. (See Figure 3-6: Measurement of Structure Height: Flat Ground and Slopes of Less than Fifteen Percent.)Figure 3-6. Measurement of Structure Height: Flat Ground and Slopes of Less than Fifteen Percent
[IMAGE: <17.70.080_Fig3-6.png>]
B. Building Height on Slopes with Sixteen Percent Grade or Greater. For lots with an average (cross-parcel) slope of sixteen percent or greater, the height of a building or structure shall be measured as the vertical distance from the adjacent existing grade to the topmost point of the roof, including parapets but excluding features outlined in subsection C of this section. The maximum allowable height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the existing grade of the site to an imaginary plane located at the allowed height above and parallel to the grade. Height measurements shall be based on existing topography of the site, before grading for proposed on-site improvements. (See Figure 3-7 Measurement of Structure Height: Slopes of Sixteen Percent of Greater.)Figure 3-7. Measurement of Structure Height: Slopes of Sixteen Percent or Greater
[IMAGE: <17.70.080_Fig3-7.png>]
C. Exceptions. 
    1. Setbacks and Building Heights. See also Sections 17.16.020(B) (R-1 Zone, Interior Side and Rear Setback Standards), 17.18.020(B) (R-2 Zone, Interior Side and Rear Setback Standards), 17.20.020(B) (R-3 Zone, Interior Side and Rear Setback Standards), 17.22.020(B) (R-4 Zone, Interior Side and Rear Setback Standards), 17.24.020(B) (O Zone, Interior Side and Rear Setback Standards), 17.26.020(B) (C-N Zone, Interior Side and Rear Setback Standards), and Section 17.70.050(D)(2) (Edge Conditions—Standards—Setbacks) for relationship of setbacks and building height.
    2. Projections. Components of solar energy systems, chimneys, elevator towers, screening for mechanical equipment that is not integral with building parapets, vents, antennas, and steeples shall extend not more than ten feet above the maximum building height. See Section 17.70.160 (Satellite Dish Antenna) for restrictions on roof-mounted satellite antenna. See Section 17.86.290 (Wireless Telecommunications Facilities) pertaining to site development and performance standards for wireless telecommunications facilities.
    3. Exceptions. 
        a. Exceptions for Certain Zones. Height exceptions may be permitted in the C-D and PF zones consistent with regulations in Section 17.32.030(E) (Maximum Building Height in the C-D Zone) and Section 17.46.030 (Public Facility Zone, Additional Regulations), respectively.
        b. Affordable Housing Exceptions. For height exceptions provided in exchange for affordable housing, see Chapter 17.140 (Affordable Housing Incentives).
        c. Other Exceptions. Any other exception to the height limits requires approval of a variance as provided in Chapter 17.114 (Variances).
D. Signs. For height limits of signs, see Chapter 15.40, Sign Regulations. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.090 Hillside development standards.
A. Purpose and Application. 
    1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement goals of the Conservation and Open Space and Land Use Elements of the General Plan:
        a. To protect and preserve scenic hillside areas and natural features such as the volcanic morros, ridge lines, plant communities, rock outcroppings and steep slope areas that function as landscape backdrops for the community;
        b. To avoid encroachment into sensitive habitats or unique resources as defined in the Conservation and Open Space Element;
        c. To protect the health, safety and welfare of community residents by directing development away from areas with hazards such as landslides, wildland fires, flooding and erosion; and
        d. To protect the city’s scenic setting.
    2. Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to all lots and sites that have an average cross slope of sixteen percent or more (see Section 17.70.090(B): Average Slope Calculation). The director may require a survey and slope analysis to determine whether the provisions of this section apply to a specific property or development. Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, a lot created pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and Title 16 (Subdivisions) of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code prior to the effective date of this division may be developed with a single unit structure in compliance with other applicable requirements of these zoning regulations.
B. Average Cross-Slope Calculation. Average cross-slope is the ratio, expressed as a percentage of the difference in elevation to the horizontal distance between two points on the perimeter of the area for which slope is being determined. The line along which the slope is measured shall run essentially perpendicular to the contours.
    1. Where a site does not slope uniformly, average cross-slope is to be determined by proportional weighting of the cross-slopes of uniformly sloping subareas, as determined by the director.
    2. Cross-slope determinations shall be based on the existing topography of the net site area after subtracting the area for any future on-site grading necessary to accommodate proposed right-of-way improvements and other on-site improvements.
    3. Cross-slope shall be calculated only for the net area as defined in Section 17.70.110 (Lot Area).
C. Hillside Development Standards. 
    1. General Site Planning Standards. To assist in maintaining a natural appearance for hillsides and ridgelines, each structure shall be located in the most accessible, least visually prominent, most geologically stable portion or portions of the site, at the lowest feasible elevation, and shall, at a minimum, meet the following requirements:
        a. See Section 17.70.040(A)(2) (Maximum Development Density—Sloped Sites) for maximum density in hillside areas.
        b. See Section 17.70.090(B) (Building Height on Slopes with Sixteen Percent Grade or Greater) for maximum height in hillside areas.
    2. Site Access and Driveways. Each driveway shall not have a grade steeper than five percent within ten feet of a garage or carport entry. Driveway finished grade shall not exceed an average of fifteen percent, or twenty percent at any point.
    3. Retaining Walls. Retaining walls that are twenty feet in length shall be limited to six feet in height (above ground/visible portion). Retaining walls longer than twenty feet shall be limited to four feet in height (above ground/visible portion). A minimum five-foot horizontal separation is required between retaining walls. For exceptions, see subsection D of this section.
    4. Downhill Building Walls. No single building wall on the downhill side of a house shall exceed fifteen feet in height above grade. Additional building height on a downhill side is allowed in fifteen-foot increments, where each increment is stepped-back from the lower wall a minimum of ten feet.
    5. Height of Lowest Floor Level, Decks, and Support Structures. See Figure 3-8: Height Limit for Lowest Floor, Decks, and Support Structures.
        a. Lowest Floor Level. The vertical distance between the lowest point where the foundation meets grade and the lowest floor line of the structure shall not exceed six feet.
        b. Decks. No portion of the walking surface of a deck with visible underpinnings shall exceed a height of six feet above grade.
        c. Support Structures. Support structures (e.g., columns, pilings, etc.) below the lowest floor on the downhill side of a house shall be enclosed unless visible structural members are an integral feature of the architectural design. Support structure wall surfaces shall not exceed six feet in height.Figure 3-8. Height Limit for Lowest Floor, Decks, and Support Structures
        [IMAGE: <17.70.090_Fig3-8.png>]
    6. Exterior Wall Surfaces. 
        a. Single-story and small-scale elements, setbacks, overhangs, roof pitches, and/or other means of horizontal and vertical articulation shall be used to create shade and shadow and break up otherwise massive forms to minimize the apparent size of exterior wall surfaces visible from public rights-of-way.
        b. Large flat building planes are prohibited; the spatial arrangement of the building, including roof overhangs, shall be used to achieve alternating light and dark building surfaces that will blend with similar contrasts found in the surrounding natural vegetation.
    7. Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment may be placed on rooftops or below a deck only if the equipment is not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent properties, except for solar collectors that are compatible with the roof line and architecturally integrated with the structure.
    8. Fencing. Hillside area perimeter fencing that is visible from off-site vantages, except on side and rear yards that are directly adjacent to living areas on adjacent lots, shall be of a semitransparent, rather than solid, design. Semitransparent material includes, but is not limited to, wrought iron, split rail, and four-inch square welded wire. In side and rear yards between living areas on adjacent lots, solid, opaque fencing is allowed. However, the preference is for a more naturalistic approach to screening in the side yards, with semi-transparent fencing combined with landscaping, or landscaping alone.
D. Director’s Action. The director may grant exceptions to standards of this section as set forth in Chapter 17.108 (Director’s Action), subject the following additional findings:
    1. Intent. The director, through a director’s action, may act to approve an exception to the hillside requirements of this section only where the applicant can provide clear and substantiated evidence that there is no practical way to comply with the provisions and that no other feasible alternatives will result in better implementation of other zoning regulations or general plan policies while allowing reasonable use of sites subject to hillside regulations.
    2. Application Type. A hillside regulation less than required by this section may be approved by city action on a plan for public facilities approved by the council or on a specific plan, development plan under planned development zoning, land division, use permit, or architectural review. Where one of these types of applications is not otherwise required for the proposed feature, an exception request shall be in the form of a director’s action.
    3. Findings. Each director’s action to grant an exception to a required hillside regulation shall be subject to each of the following findings, regardless of the type of project application under which the request is considered:
        a. The proposed alternative complies with and furthers the intent of this section; and
        b. The proposed alternative provides a design solution that is equivalent to or better than the standards prescribed in this section for quality, effectiveness, durability, and safety; and
        c. The location and design of the feature receiving the exception will minimize impacts to scenic resources and will not hinder opportunities for wildlife habitation, rest, and movement; and
        d. The exception will not prevent the implementation of city-adopted plans, nor increase the adverse environmental effects of implementing such plans; and
        e. There are circumstances applying to the site, such as size, shape, or topography, which do not apply generally to land in the vicinity with the same zoning, that would deprive the property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity with the same zoning; and
        f. The exception will not constitute a grant of special privilege—an entitlement inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity with the same zoning; and
        g. The exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area of the project; and
        h. Site development cannot be feasibly accomplished with a redesign of the project or redesign of the project would deny the property owner reasonable use of the property. “Reasonable use of the property” in the case of new development may include less development than indicated by zoning. In the case of additional development on an already developed site, “reasonable development” may mean no additional development considering site constraints and the existing development’s scale, design, or density.
E. Process Requirements. 
    1. Minor Development Review. Hillside development shall require approval of minor development review from the city’s planning division.
    2. Design Review. Plans submitted for hillside development shall be reviewed for consistency with the city’s community design guidelines, this section, and general development standards of the zoning regulations. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.095 Incentives related to new all-electric buildings.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to support the city’s Clean Energy Choice program by providing temporary incentives in the application of site development standards, for the provision of all-electric buildings.
B. Application. This section shall apply to new all-electric buildings.
C. Standards. Site development standards included in this chapter for accessory structures; edge conditions; FAR; fences, walls and hedges; height measurement and exceptions; hillside development standards; lot coverage; mixed-use development; and setbacks may be exceeded to the minimum extent deemed necessary to allow for equipment installations or similar improvements to accommodate all-electric buildings.
D. The director may grant incentives to site development standards of this chapter that are minor in nature without application for director action when all of the following circumstances apply:
    1. The request directly relates to construction of an all-electric building and may include, but is not limited to, issues such as the installation of mechanical equipment;
    2. The request provides the minor flexibility needed to design a project with all-electric buildings and results in better implementation of other zoning regulations or general plan policies while allowing reasonable use of sites;
    3. The request is minor in nature and does not have the potential to cause a significant effect on the environment; and
    4. The findings in Section 17.108.040 are met.
E. Term. The provisions in this section shall apply to building permits with an application date after July 1, 2020, and prior to December 31, 2022. (Ord. 1685 § 3 (Exh. A (part)), 2020)

17.70.100 Lighting and night sky preservation.
A. Purpose. 
    1. These outdoor lighting regulations are intended to encourage lighting practices and systems that will:
        a. Permit reasonable uses of outdoor lighting for nighttime safety, utility, security, and enjoyment while preserving the ambience of night;
        b. Curtail and reverse any degradation of the nighttime visual environment and the night sky;
        c. Minimize glare and obtrusive light by limiting outdoor lighting that is misdirected, excessive, or unnecessary;
        d. Help protect the natural environment from the damaging effects of night lighting;
        e. Meet the minimum requirements of the California Code of Regulations for Outdoor Lighting and Signs (Title 24, Chapter 6).
    2. Other laws or ordinances may require minimum illumination levels for specific applications and may conflict with these regulations. In such cases, those laws or ordinances shall govern.
B. Application Requirements. 
    1. Whenever a person is required to obtain a building permit, electrical permit for outdoor lighting or signage, and/or approval of any development project, the applicant shall, as a part of the application, submit sufficient information to enable the community development department to determine whether the proposed lighting complies with the provisions of this section. The application shall include the following:
        a. A site plan indicating the proposed location of all outdoor lighting fixtures that are not exempted by subsection F of this section.
        b. A description of each illuminating device, fixture, lamp, support, and shield. This description may include, but is not limited to, manufacturer’s catalog cuts and drawings (including sections where required), lamp types, and lumen outputs.
        c. Photometric plans depicting the location of all light poles and building-mounted lighting fixtures and a maximum ten-foot by ten-foot grid of both the initial and maintained lighting levels on the site, and including impact on adjacent properties.
        d. The project lighting plan shall be coordinated with any associated landscaping plan to prevent site planning conflicts.
        e. Any other information the director may determine is necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section.
    2. The director may waive any or all of these requirements if compliance can be determined based on available information.
C. Operational Standards. 
    1. Outdoor lighting shall be designed, installed, and maintained to prevent nighttime sky light pollution, preserve and enhance visibility of stars, and use energy efficiently by lighting only those areas or objects necessary for safety and security.
    2. All outdoor lighting shall conform to the following regulations:
        a. Orientation. Outdoor lighting shall be directed downward and away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.
        b. Light Trespass in Residential Zones. No lighting on private property shall produce an illumination level greater than two maintained horizontal foot-candles at grade on any property within a residential zone except on the site of the light source.
        c. Light Intensity on Residential Sites. The maximum light intensity on a residential site shall not exceed a maintained value of ten foot-candles, when measured at finished grade.
        d. Light Intensity on Nonresidential Sites. 
            i. General. The maximum light intensity on a nonresidential site, except auto sales lots and sports fields, shall not exceed a maintained value of ten foot-candles, when measured at finished grade.
            ii. Auto Sales Lots. The maximum light intensity on an auto sales lot shall not exceed a maintained value of forty foot-candles, when measured at finished grade.
            iii. Athletic Fields. The maximum light intensity on an athletic field shall not exceed a maintained value of fifty foot-candles when measured three feet above grade. Baseball field lighting and lighting for other recreational uses may be increased to a maintained value of one hundred foot-candles with approval of a director’s action (see Chapter 17.108: Director’s Action).
        e. Hours of Operation. Outdoor lighting shall be completely turned off or significantly dimmed at the close of business hours unless lighting is essential for security or safety (e.g., illumination of parking areas and plazas).
        f. Prohibited Lighting. 
            i. Flashing. Outdoor lighting shall not blink, flash, or rotate.
            ii. Projection above Horizontal Plane. Outdoor flood light projection above the horizontal plane, as defined in subsection (D)(1) of this section and shown in Figure 3-9: Outdoor Lighting Horizontal Plane is prohibited, unless exempted by subsection F of this section.
            iii. Upward Sign Illumination. All upward directed sign lighting, including illumination of billboards, is prohibited, unless exempted by subsection F of this section.
            iv. Search Lights. Search lights, laser source lights, or any similar high-intensity light are prohibited, unless exempted by subsection F of this section.
        g. Outdoor Athletic Fields Illumination Hours. Outdoor athletic fields shall not be illuminated after eleven p.m., except to conclude a scheduled recreational or sporting event in progress prior to eleven p.m.
D. New Development. In addition to required operational standards, new development projects shall incorporate the following regulations to minimize glare and light trespass and facilitate better vision at night. See also community design guidelines for guidance on preferred fixture styles.
    1. Fully Shielded. Outdoor lighting fixtures, including lighting for outdoor recreational facilities, shall be shielded with full cutoff or recessed fixtures designed and installed so that no emitted light will break a horizontal plane passing through the lowest point of the fixture (see Figure 3-9: Outdoor Lighting Horizontal Plane). Cutoff fixtures shall be installed using a horizontal lamp position.Figure 3-9. Outdoor Lighting Horizontal Plane
    [IMAGE: <17.70.100_Fig3-9.png>]
    2. Design. Lighting fixtures should be of a design that complements building design and landscaping and may require architectural review.
    3. Height, Intensity, and Scale. Lighting fixtures shall be appropriate in height, intensity, and scale to the use they are serving. Parking lot lights shall not exceed a height of twenty-one feet, and wall-mounted lights shall not exceed a height of fifteen feet, measured from the adjacent grade to the bottom of the fixture.
    4. Service Station Canopies. All luminaries mounted on the under surface of service station canopies shall be fully shielded and utilize flush-mounted canopy fixtures with flat lenses.
    5. Alternate Materials and Methods of Installation. Designs, materials, or methods of installation not specifically prescribed by this section may be approved by director, subject to director’s action. In approving such a request, the director shall find that the proposed design, material, or method provides approximate equivalence to the specific requirements of this section or is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of these provisions.
E. Nonconforming Fixtures. No outdoor lighting fixture that was installed prior to the enactment of this title and was consistent with zoning regulations at the time of installation shall be required to be removed or modified. However, no modification or replacement shall be made to a nonconforming fixture unless the fixture thereafter conforms to the provisions of this section.
F. Exemptions. The following lighting fixtures are exempt from the requirements of this section:
    1. Neon and Signage Lighting. Neon and other low-intensity outdoor lighting fixtures used for signage or architectural decoration that are approved through architectural review.
    2. Public Rights-of-Way Lighting. Outdoor lighting fixtures on public rights-of-way; provided, that measures have been taken to reduce impacts on surrounding properties and the night sky.
    3. Emergency Aviation Lighting. Emergency lighting operated by public agencies or for the purpose of aviation safety.
    4. Infrastructure Construction Lighting. All temporary lighting used for the construction or repair of roadways, utilities, and other public infrastructure.
    5. Nonelectric Lighting. Nonelectric lighting such as gas lamps or kerosene lanterns.
    6. Temporary and Seasonal Lighting. Temporary lighting equipment and seasonal lighting equipment; provided, that individual lamps are ten watts or less. Temporary lighting that does not comply with the regulations contained in this section is subject to the director’s review and approval of director’s action. In granting a request for approval of temporary lighting that does not comply with these regulations, the director shall make all of the following findings:
        a. The purpose for which the lighting is proposed is not intended to extend beyond thirty days; and
        b. The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize light pollution and trespass as much as feasible.
    7. Accent Lighting. Accent lighting for architectural features, national flags, statues, public art, signage or other objects of interest is subject to the director’s review and approval of director’s action. In granting a request for approval of accent lighting, the director shall make all of the following findings:
        a. The fixture emits a very narrow cone of light for the purpose of confining the light to the object of interest; and
        b. The fixture minimizes spill-light and glare.
    8. Search Lights. Search lights, laser source lights, or any similar high-intensity light used for emergencies by police and/or fire personnel, or at their direction, or for purposes of gathering meteorological data. Exceptions may be granted in conjunction with approved temporary lighting (see Section 17.70.100(F)(6): Temporary and Seasonal Lighting).
    9. Billboards. Upgrades to existing lighting fixtures on outdoor advertising signs (billboards) that reduce light pollution are subject to the director’s review and approval of director’s action. In granting a request for approval of accent lighting, the director shall find that the level of illumination associated with the upgraded lighting fixture is not increased.
    10. Decorative Patio Lighting. Low-level outdoor patio lighting, where individual lamps are ten watts or less, used by commercial businesses to provide ambiance. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.110 Lot area.
A. Purpose and Application. As defined in Chapter 17.158 (General Definitions), lot area is the land area associated with a particular lot. Net lot area is used to calculate maximum density and/or floor area ratio.
B. Net Lot Area. Net area is the total area within the property lines of the development site, excluding the following:
    1. Street rights-of-way;
    2. Area between the tops of banks of creeks shown on the Open Space Element creeks map;
    3. Habitat occupied by species listed as endangered or threatened by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or the California Department of Fish and Game, or as plants of highest priority by the California Native Plant Society, unless the director determines there is no practical alternative as defined by the general plan;
    4. Area within the drip line of heritage trees designated by the city. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.120 Lot coverage.
A. Purpose and Application. As defined in Chapter 17.158 (General Definitions), lot coverage is the ratio of the total area of a lot covered by the footprint of all structures to the net lot area, typically expressed as a percentage of the total lot area, including all buildings, decks, balconies, porches, accessory structures and accessory dwellings, and similar architectural features. Maximum coverage shall be as provided in the specific property development standards for the various zones in Chapters 17.12 through 17.64, inclusive.Figure 3-10. Lot Coverage
[IMAGE: <17.70.120_Fig3-10.png>]
B. Excluded from Lot Coverage. The following structures shall be excluded from the lot coverage calculation:
    1. Uncovered decks, porches, landings, balconies, and stairways that are thirty inches or less in height, as measured from the adjacent existing grade.Figure 3-11. Decks Excluded from Coverage
    [IMAGE: <17.70.120_Fig3-11.png>]
    2. Roof eaves which project thirty inches or less from the structure are not included in the determination of coverage.
    3. Swimming pools and hot tubs that are not enclosed in roofed structures or decks.
    4. One small, nonhabitable accessory structure under one hundred twenty square feet and under seven feet high. Any additional structures above quantity of one shall be included in lot coverage.
    5. Up to eight hundred square feet of an accessory dwelling unit. Any additional square footage of an accessory dwelling unit shall be included in lot coverage. (Ord. 1677 § 2, 2020: Ord. 1657 § 9, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.130 Mixed-use development.
A. Purpose. This section provides standards for the design of mixed-use projects to be compatible with existing and planned development on the site and adjacent and nearby properties. Mixed-use projects provide an opportunity to locate housing, jobs, recreation, and other daily needs in close proximity to one another, thereby enhancing vitality and street life in San Luis Obispo and forwarding the city’s sustainability goals.
B. Allowed Uses. A mixed-use project requires a combination of residential units with any other use or multiple uses allowed in the applicable zone by Section 17.10.020 (Use Regulations by Zone). Where a mixed-use project is proposed with a use required by Section 17.10.020 (Use Regulations by Zone) to have use permit approval in the applicable zone, the entire mixed-use project shall be subject to that use permit requirement.
C. Maximum Density. The residential component of a mixed-use project shall comply with the maximum density requirements of the applicable zone, plus density bonuses where applicable.
D. Site Layout and Project Design Standards. Each proposed mixed-use project shall comply with the property development standards of the applicable zone and the following requirements:
    1. Location of Units. 
        a. Ground Floor Limitations. In the C-D zone, residential units shall not occupy any ground floor space. In all other zones, residential units shall not occupy ground floor space within the first fifty feet of floor area measured from each building face adjacent to a street toward the rear of the building unless the review authority finds that the project enhances the pedestrian environment in the surrounding area or will perform a function or provide a service that is essential or beneficial to the community or city.
        b. Noise. Residential units shall be located on the site to minimize adverse impacts from existing known noise sources in compliance with the city’s noise regulations. When a project is located adjacent to a known noise emission above the residential thresholds, a noise study shall be provided.
    2. Mechanical Service and Loading Areas. Service and loading areas shall be screened from residential areas and integrated with the design of the building. Special attention shall be given when designing loading and mechanical facilities in a location that is proximate to residential uses. Techniques such as block walls, enhanced setbacks, or enclosed loading or equipment shall be used to minimize adverse impacts to residents from vehicle and mechanical noise.
    3. Trash and Recycling Areas. Areas for the collection and storage of trash and recyclable materials shall be located on the site in locations that are convenient for both the residential and nonresidential uses. The location and design of trash enclosures shall reduce nuisances from odors and noise when residential uses might be impacted.
    4. Limitations on Use. The following uses and activities shall not be allowed within any mixed-use development:
        a. Major vehicle/equipment repair (e.g., body or mechanical work, including boats and recreational vehicles, vehicle detailing and painting, upholstery, or any similar use);
        b. Storage of flammable liquids or hazardous materials beyond that normally associated with a residential use;
        c. Manufacturing or industrial activities, including but not limited to welding, machining, or any open flame work; or
        d. Any other activity or use, as determined by the review authority, to be incompatible with residential activities and/or to have the possibility of affecting the health or safety of mixed-use development residents due to the potential for the use to create dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or would be hazardous because of materials, processes, products, or wastes.
E. Design Standards. A mixed-use project shall be designed to achieve the following objectives:
    1. The design shall provide for internal compatibility between the different uses in terms of noise, hours of operation, vehicle and pedestrian circulation, access, use of open space, and similar operating characteristics.
    2. Potential noise, odors, glare, pedestrian traffic, and other potentially significant impacts on residents shall be minimized to allow a compatible mix of residential and nonresidential uses on the same site.
    3. The design of the mixed-use project shall take into consideration potential impacts on adjacent properties and shall include specific design features to minimize potential impacts.
    4. The design of the mixed-use project shall ensure that the residential units are of a residential character and that privacy between residential units and between other uses on the site is maximized.
    5. The design of the structures and site planning shall encourage integration of the street pedestrian environment with the nonresidential uses through the use of plazas, courtyards, walkways, and street furniture.
    6. Site planning and building design shall be compatible with and enhance the adjacent and surrounding built environment in terms of scale, building design, color, exterior materials, roof styles, lighting, landscaping, and signage.
F. Performance Standards. 
    1. Lighting. Lighting for nonresidential uses shall be appropriately designed, located, and shielded to not negatively impact the residential units in the development or any adjacent residential uses and shall also comply with Section 17.70.100 (Lighting and Night Sky Preservation).
    2. Noise. All residential units shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts from nonresidential project noise and shall comply with Chapter 9.12 (Noise Control).
    3. Air Quality and Odors. All residential units shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts from mechanical equipment and operations of nonresidential project air pollutant emissions and odors in compliance with the Air Pollution Control District Air Quality Handbook and Chapter 8.22 (Offensive Odors).
    4. Hours of Operation. 
        a. C-N and O Zones. The commercial component of a mixed-use project shall be allowed to operate from seven a.m. to eight p.m. Operation outside of these allowed hours shall require a minor use permit to ensure that the commercial use will not negatively impact the residential uses within the project.
        b. All Other Zones that Allow Mixed-Use Projects. The commercial component of a mixed-use project shall be allowed to operate from seven a.m. to eight p.m. Operation outside of these allowed hours shall require a minor use permit to ensure that the commercial use will not negatively impact the residential uses within the project.
        c. General. Commercial hours of operation also may be restricted upon evidence of a substantiated complaint or inadequate parking.
    5. Residential Noise Notice. Residents of new mixed-use projects, whether owners or tenants, shall be notified in writing before taking up residence that they will be living in an urban-type environment and that the noise levels may be higher than a strictly residential area.
G. Pedestrian Access. On-site pedestrian circulation and access shall be provided per the following standards:
    1. Internal Connections. A system of pedestrian walkways shall connect all buildings on a site to each other, to on-site automobile and bicycle parking areas, and to any on-site open space areas or pedestrian amenities.
    2. To Circulation Network. Regular and convenient connections between on-site walkways and the public sidewalk and other existing or planned pedestrian routes, such as safe routes to school, shall be provided. An on-site walkway shall connect the principal building entry or entries to a public sidewalk on each street frontage.
    3. To Adjacent Areas. Direct and convenient access shall be provided from mixed-use projects to adjoining residential and commercial areas to the maximum extent feasible while still providing for safety and security.
    4. To Transit. Safe and convenient pedestrian connections shall be provided from adjacent transit stops to building entrances.
    5. Interior Pedestrian Walkway Design. 
        a. Walkways shall have a minimum clear unobstructed width of six feet, be hard surfaced, and paved with concrete, stone, tile, brick, or comparable material.
        b. Where a required walkway crosses driveways, parking areas, or loading areas, it must be clearly identifiable through the use of a raised crosswalk, a different paving material, or similar method.
        c. Where a required walkway is parallel and adjacent to an auto travel lane, it must be raised or separated from the auto travel lane by a raised curb at least four inches high, bollards, or other physical barrier.
H. Objective Design Criteria. 
    1. Building Orientation and Entrances. 
        a. Orientation. The principal building of a development shall be oriented to face a public street. Building frontages shall be generally parallel to streets. For all residential, retail, and office uses, at least one primary entrance to a ground floor use shall face the adjacent street right-of-way. Ground-related entrances include entrances to ground floor uses, residential units, clusters of residential units, lobbies, or private courtyards.
        b. Nonresidential Entrances. Entries shall be clearly defined features of front façades and of a scale that is in proportion to the size of the building and number of units being accessed. Larger buildings shall have a more prominent building entrance, while maintaining a pedestrian scale.
        c. Transitional Space at Residential Entries. New residential buildings shall provide transitional spaces in the form of stoops, overhangs, and porches between public areas fronting the primary street and entrances. This type of element or equivalent shall be required for each unit or group of units, but no less than one of this type of element shall be provided.
    2. Building Articulation. No street frontage wall may run in a continuous plane for more than twenty feet without an opening or offsets, or as approved by the review authority if the project is constrained by unusual parcel size, shape, use, or other features that the responsible review authority accepts as rendering this requirement infeasible. Openings fulfilling this requirement shall have transparent glazing and provide views into work areas, display areas, sales areas, lobbies, or similar active spaces. Offsets shall vary in depth and/or direction of at least eighteen inches, or a repeated pattern of offsets, recesses, or projections of similar depth. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.140 Public art requirements for private development.
A. Purpose and Application. 
    1. Purpose. The city wishes to enhance the cultural and aesthetic environment of San Luis Obispo and to encourage creativity and an appreciation of the arts and our cultural heritage. Through the establishment of a program of public art funded by private development, the city will promote the general welfare through balancing the community’s physical growth and revitalization with its cultural and artistic resources.
    2. Application. The program described in this section is a mandatory program, and the standards specified are minimum standards for compliance. Participation in the program by itself does not qualify project applicants for consideration of increased project density/intensity as discussed in the Land Use Element of the General Plan. The minimum requirements in this section apply to:
        a. All new nonresidential development, defined as commercial, office, and industrial projects, parking structures, and the nonresidential portion of mixed-use projects, having a total construction cost of one hundred thousand dollars or more, as calculated based on the most recent Building Valuation Data from the Uniform Building Code (UBC).
        b. All expansion of, remodeling of, or tenant improvements to existing eligible buildings when any such work has a total construction cost of one hundred thousand dollars or more, as calculated based on the most recent Building Valuation Data from the Uniform Building Code (UBC).
    3. Exceptions. The following development activities shall be exempt from the requirements of this section:
        a. Construction, repair, or alteration of buildings to carry out rehabilitation of private property if that rehabilitation is primarily financed with public funds.
        b. Construction, repair, or alteration of buildings to meet city-mandated seismic rehabilitation or fire lateral replacement.
B. Definitions. As used in this section:
    1. “Public art coordinator” shall mean that city employee designated by the city administrative officer to be responsible for the city’s visual arts in public places program.
    2. “Public art jury” shall mean an appointed jury of no fewer than five city residents including, but not limited to, as appropriate, a board member from the San Luis Obispo County arts council, an artist, a business representative, an educator/historian, and a city or advisory body representative.
C. Public Art Account. There shall be an account designated for public art, into which shall be deposited all fees paid in compliance with this section. This account shall be maintained by the city finance director and shall be used for the acquisition, installation, and improvement of public art in the city.
D. Public Art Contribution. 
    1. On-Site Contribution. The project applicant shall acquire and install public art approved by a public art jury in a public place on or in the vicinity of the development project site. A public place may include city-owned or privately owned land or buildings that are open to the general public on a consistent basis and are of high visibility to the general public. The minimum cost of the public art, including installation, shall be determined by the following allocation:
        a. An amount equal to one-half of one percent of that portion of the total construction costs in excess of one hundred thousand dollars, for each building permit, computed using the latest Building Valuation Data as contained in the Uniform Building Code (UBC) unless, in the opinion of the city’s building official, a different valuation measure should be used.
        b. Should a project consist of multiple buildings with separate building permits, at the city’s option, arrangements may be made to combine the public art requirements in an appropriate manner.
        c. In no event shall the required cost for public art under this program exceed fifty thousand dollars per building permit.
    2. Off-Site Contribution. As an option, the project applicant may acquire and install public art, approved by a public art jury and accepted by the council, in a city-owned public place not located on or in the vicinity of the development site. The art shall be installed in a location that is open to the general public on a consistent basis and also is of high visibility to the general public. Cost of the public art shall be determined by the allocations contained in subsection A of this section. Such public art shall be considered a donation to the city.
    3. In-Lieu Contribution. In lieu of placement of approved public art, the applicant may pay, as a voluntary alternative, to a public art in-lieu account an amount equal to the program allocation contained in subsection (D)(1) of this section.
E. Application and Review Procedures for Placement of Required Public Art on Private Property. 
    1. Application. An application for placement of public art on private property shall be submitted as a director’s action application and shall include:
        a. Preliminary sketches, photographs, or other documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the proposed public art.
        b. An appraisal or other evidence of the value of the proposed public artwork, including acquisition and installation costs.
        c. Preliminary plans containing such detailed information as may be required by a public art jury to adequately evaluate the location of the artwork in relation to the proposed development and its compatibility to the proposed development, including compatibility with the character of adjacent conforming developed parcels and existing neighborhoods.
        d. A narrative statement to be submitted to the director to demonstrate that the public art will be displayed in an area open and freely available to the general public, or that public accessibility will be provided in an equivalent manner based on the characteristics of the artwork or its placement on the site.
    2. Review. 
        a. The director shall review the application for compliance with this section.
        b. The director shall forward the completed application to the public art coordinator who shall convene a public art jury to review the proposed public art using adopted public art evaluation criteria.
        c. Upon recommendation of the public art jury, the public art application shall be reviewed by the director and shall meet the findings required for a director’s action (Chapter 17.108: Director’s Action).
        d. All approvals for placement of public art on private property shall be obtained prior to issuance of a building permit.
F. Application and Review Procedures for Acceptance of Public Art Donated to the City. 
    1. Application. An application for acceptance of public art to be donated to the city shall include:
        a. Preliminary sketches, photographs, models, or other documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the proposed public art.
        b. An appraisal or other evidence of the value of the proposed public art, including acquisition and installation costs.
        c. A written agreement executed by or on behalf of the artist who created the public art which expressly waives the artist’s rights under the California Art Preservation Act or other applicable law.
        d. Other information as may be required by the public art coordinator to adequately evaluate the proposed donation of public art.
    2. Review. 
        a. Prior to the issuance of grading and building permits, the applicant shall submit to the director an application for acceptance of public art donated to the city, in compliance with subsection D (Public Art Contribution) of this section and subsection (F)(1) (Application) of this section.
        b. The director shall forward the application to the public art coordinator, who shall convene a public art jury to review the proposed public art using adopted public art evaluation criteria.
        c. Upon the recommendation of the public art jury, the public art application shall be reviewed by the director.
        d. Upon the recommendation of the director, the application shall be forwarded to the council, which shall have the sole authority to accept, reject, or conditionally accept the donation.
G. Process. 
    1. Payment of Art In-Lieu Fee. If the payment of an art in-lieu fee is voluntarily elected, the payment, in an amount equal to the program allocation contained in subsection (D)(3) (In-Lieu Contribution) of this section shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit.
    2. Certificate of Occupancy. The following requirements must be met prior to the city’s issuance of occupancy permits.
        a. Full compliance with one of the following:
            i. The approved public art has been placed on the site of the approved project, in a manner satisfactory to the building official and the public art coordinator; or
            ii. Donation of approved public art has been accepted by the council; or
            iii. In-lieu art fees have been paid.
        b. If public art has been placed on the site of the approved project, the applicant must execute and record with the county recorder covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) that require the property owner, successor in interest, and assigns to:
            i. Maintain the public art in good condition as required by the city’s public art guidelines.
            ii. Indemnify, defend, and hold the city and related parties harmless from any and all claims or liabilities from the public art, in a form acceptable to the city attorney.
            iii. Maintain liability insurance, including coverage and limits as may be specified by the city’s risk manager.
H. Ownership of Public Art. 
    1. All public art placed on the site of an applicant’s project shall remain the property of the applicant; the obligation to provide all maintenance necessary to preserve the public art in good condition shall remain with the owner of the site.
    2. Maintenance of public art, as used in this section, shall include without limitation, preservation of the artwork in good condition to the satisfaction of the city; protection of the public art against physical defacement, mutilation, or alteration; and securing and maintaining fire and extended coverage insurance and vandalism coverage in an amount to be determined by the city’s risk manager. Prior to placement of approved public art, the applicant and owner of the site shall execute and record a covenant, in a form approved by the city, requiring maintenance of the public art. Failure to maintain the public art as provided in this section is declared to be a public nuisance.
    3. In addition to all other remedies provided by law, in the event the owner fails to maintain the public art, upon reasonable notice, the city may perform all necessary repairs and maintenance or secure insurance, and the costs shall become a lien against the real property.
    4. All artwork donated to the city shall become the property and responsibility of the city upon acceptance by the council.
I. Removal or Alteration of Public Art. 
    1. Public art installed on or integrated into a construction project in compliance with the provisions of this section shall not be removed or altered without the approval of the director.
    2. If any public art provided on a development project in compliance with the provisions of this section is knowingly removed by the property owner without prior approval, the property owner shall contribute funds equal to the development project’s original public art requirement to the city’s public art in-lieu account, or replace the removed artwork with one that is of comparable value and approved by the director. If this requirement is not met, the occupancy permit for the project may be revoked by the director upon due notice and an opportunity to be heard. The city may, in addition, pursue any other available civil or criminal remedies or penalties. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.150 Rooftop uses.
A. Height. The height of any railings or parapets, exterior stairways, and other access features such as stairwells or elevators for access to roof decks shall not exceed the maximum allowable building height for the structure, including exceptions allowed by Section 17.70.080 (Height Measurement and Exceptions).
B. Furniture. No furniture or equipment, including chairs, mattresses, couches, recreational furniture, or other materials may be placed on any roof, patio cover, carport, shed top, or similar structure, except for the following:
    1. Roof-top equipment, including antennas, satellite dishes, masts, poles, heating, ventilation, air conditioning equipment, and similar devices that are designed for roof-top installation, and were lawfully installed, may remain on the roof as long as they are properly maintained.
    2. Furniture or other equipment may be placed on a roof deck or other similar place that was lawfully designed and created for such use. All such furniture and accessories located on a roof deck shall be secured as necessary to prevent wind damage or dislocation.
C. Performance Standards. 
    1. Lighting. Lighting for rooftop uses shall be appropriately designed, located, and shielded to not negatively impact any adjacent residential uses. See also Section 17.70.100 (Lighting and Night Sky Preservation).
    2. Noise. All rooftop decks shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts to surrounding properties in compliance with the city’s noise regulations (Chapter 9.12: Noise Control).
    3. Hours of Operation. 
        a. C-N and O Zones. Nonresidential rooftop uses shall be allowed to operate from seven a.m. to eight p.m. Operation outside of these allowed hours shall require a minor use permit to ensure that the commercial rooftop use will not negatively impact surrounding residential uses.
        b. All Other Nonresidential Zones. Nonresidential rooftop uses shall be allowed to operate from seven a.m. to ten p.m. Operation outside of these allowed hours shall require a minor use permit to ensure that the commercial rooftop use will not negatively impact surrounding residential uses.
        c. General. Commercial hours of operation for rooftop uses also may be restricted upon evidence of a substantiated complaint.
D. Edge Conditions. Where a rooftop deck is located on a property adjacent to a zone receiving transition, as defined in Section 17.70.050 (Edge Conditions), rooftop decks and activities shall also comply with Section 17.70.050(D)(4) (Rooftop Open Spaces). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.160 Satellite dish antenna.
A. Purpose. These regulations are established to regulate the installation of dish-type satellite antennas to help protect public safety and preserve view corridors and neighborhood character.
B. Residential Performance Standards. The installation of dish-type antennas may be allowed in all residential zones, subject to the following criteria. Dish-type satellite antenna installations that are less than one meter in diameter are exempt from these regulations unless proposed on a historic building.
    1. Antenna Size. Maximum diameter shall be ten feet.
    2. Setback. No part of a satellite dish antenna may be located in any required setback area, any side yard area between a street and the primary residence, or any front yard area.
    3. Height. Maximum antenna height shall be thirteen feet.
    4. Roof-Mounted. Roof-mounted installations or pole-mounted installations attached to eaves are prohibited except by approval of a director’s action.
    5. View Preservation. Any antenna that may block significant views from neighboring buildings or from public areas, as determined by the director, shall be subject to review by the architectural review commission.
    6. Screening. All satellite dishes higher than side or rear yard fences shall be screened from view from neighboring properties.
C. Commercial Performance Standards. The installation of dish-type satellite antennas may be allowed in the office, commercial, and industrial zones, subject to the following criteria:
    1. Installation shall be subject to architectural review in compliance with the adopted architectural review commission ordinance and guidelines.
    2. Installations shall not be allowed within setback area of any yard adjacent to a public street.
    3. Installations shall be located to minimize visibility from adjoining properties and rights-of-way.
D. Exceptions. 
    1. Dish-type satellite antenna installations that are less than one meter in diameter are exempt from these regulations unless proposed on a historic building. For proposed installations on historic buildings, review by the architectural review commission shall be required.
    2. Dish-type satellite antenna installations that cannot meet the performance standards included in subsections B and C of this section may be considered through review by the architectural review commission. Conditions imposed as part of the approval would typically include requirements to minimize the visibility of the installation, including blockage of significant public and private views of hillsides, city vistas, or open space areas. Acceptable techniques to reduce the visibility of dish installations include use of alternative materials (wire mesh instead of solid surface), painting the dish in a subdued or natural color, and landscaped screening.
E. Open Space/Conservation Standards. The installation of dish-type satellite antennas may be allowed in the open space/conservation zone subject to architectural review in compliance with adopted architectural review commission ordinances and guidelines.
F. Building Permit Required. All satellite dish installations require issuance of a building permit. This is to ensure that dishes are structurally sound and properly grounded. Plans submitted for a building permit for a roof-mounted or pole-mounted installation require certification by a registered engineer. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.170 Setbacks.
A. Purpose. This section establishes standards for the measurement of setbacks and required setback areas. These provisions, in conjunction with other applicable provisions of the zoning regulations, are intended to help determine the pattern of building masses and open areas within neighborhoods. They also provide separation between combustible materials in neighboring buildings. Setback areas are further intended to help provide landscape beauty, air circulation, views, and exposure to sunlight for both natural illumination and use of solar energy.
B. Measurement of Setbacks. 
    1. General. All setback distances shall be measured at right angles from the designated property line to the building or structure, and the setback line shall be drawn parallel to and at the specified distance from the corresponding front, side, or rear property line. Exception: Where the front property line is located beyond the curb (i.e., within a street or common driveway), the front setback is defined as the minimum distance between a structure and the edge of curb.
    2. Building Height and Setbacks. The height of a building in relation to setback standards is the vertical distance from the ground to the top of the roof, measured at a point that is a specific distance (the setback distance) from the property line. Height measurements shall be based on the existing topography of the site before grading for proposed on-site improvements. Where building height is linked to a minimum setback, that setback shall apply to the building incrementally and shall not require a clear-to-sky setback for the entire building. Rather, the setback requirements allow the building to be stepped back incrementally consistent with the required setback distance based on building height.
    3. Sloped Lots. For sloped lots, the measurement shall be made as a straight, horizontal line from the property line to the edge of the structure, not up or down the hill slope.
    4. Flag Lots. For flag lots, the pole portion of the parcel shall not be used for defining setback lines.
C. Allowed Projections into Required Setback Areas. The following features are allowed projections into required setback areas:
    1. Utility Structures. Adequately screened components of public utility systems may be located within front and street side setbacks when approved by director’s action.
    2. Fences, Walls, and Hedges. Fences, walls, and hedges may occupy setbacks to the extent provided in Section 17.70.070 (Fences, Walls, and Hedges). Vegetation may also be controlled by the California Solar Shade Control Act.
    3. Arbors and Trellises. Arbors and trellises may occupy setbacks subject to the extent provided in Section 17.70.070 (Fences, Walls, and Hedges). Arbors and trellises shall not be connected to or supported by a building, nor be designed to support loads other than vines or similar plantings. They are not considered structures for zoning purposes and shall not be used as patio covers.
    4. Signs. Signs in conformance with the sign regulations codified in Chapter 15.40 (Sign Regulations) may occupy setbacks to the extent provided in that chapter.
    5. Architectural Features. The following and similar architectural features may extend into a required setback:
        a. Cornices, canopies, eaves, buttresses, chimneys, solar collectors, shading louvers, reflectors, water heater enclosures, and bay or other projecting windows that do not include usable floor space may extend no more than thirty inches into a required setback (see Figure 3-12: Architectural Feature Projections into Required Setbacks).Figure 3-12. Architectural Feature Projections into Required Setbacks
        [IMAGE: <17.70.170_Fig3-12.png>]
        b. Uncovered balconies, uncovered porches, and decks may extend into the required setback not more than four feet or one-half the required setback distance, whichever is less. Fire escapes, exit stairs, or other required exits may be required to meet greater setbacks to comply with building code requirements.
        c. Planters and similar features less than thirty inches in height may be located within the required setbacks.
    6. Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment shall comply with required setbacks, with the following exceptions:
        a. Tankless water heaters may encroach into the required side and rear setbacks by thirty inches.
        b. Mechanical equipment serving swimming pools, spas, and water features shall be set back not less than three feet from a side or rear property line. All such equipment shall be acoustically shielded to comply with Chapter 9.12 (Noise Control).
        c. All ground-mounted heating and air conditioning equipment shall be set back not less than five feet from any side or rear property line and shall comply with Chapter 9.12 (Noise Control).
    7. Trash Enclosures. Enclosures that have been approved in conjunction with Development Review or a discretionary review process may be located within a required side or rear setback, provided no part of the enclosure is less than three feet from any right-of-way or adopted setback line.
    8. Vehicle Parking. Vehicle parking in front yard areas (as defined in Section 17.158.016: F Definitions) of residential properties shall conform to Section 17.76.040 (Front Yard Parking). No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, within any front or street side setback or upon any unpaved surface as defined in this section and Section 12.38.040 (Parking and Driveway Standards).
    9. Unenclosed Parking Spaces in Side and Rear Setbacks. Unenclosed parking spaces and parking aisles may be located within side and rear setbacks. For residential properties, parking spaces may not be located within the front yard area unless consistent with Section 17.76.040 (Front Yard Parking).
    10. Enclosed and Unenclosed Parking Spaces in Front and Street Side Setback Prohibited. In no case shall an enclosed parking space or required parking space from which vehicles exit directly onto the street be located less than twenty feet from the street right-of-way or property line, except as provided in subsection D (Exceptions to Setback Requirements) of this section, or as provided in Section 17.76.040(D) (Single Car Garages and Single Car Parking). In no case shall a parking space encroach on a public sidewalk.
    11. Landscaping in Setbacks. Required setbacks with city-required landscape plans and stormwater facilities shall be landscaped and maintained in compliance with approved plans.
    12. Second Story Setback in R-1 Zone. Up to fifty percent of the upper story side wall may align with the lower floor wall, provided such alignment occurs within the rear half of the structure (see Figure 3-13: Second Story Setback Allowed Projection).Figure 3-13. Second Story Setback Allowed Projection
    [IMAGE: <17.70.170_Fig3-13.png>]
D. Exceptions to Setback Requirements. 
    1. Exceptions Entitled to Property Due to Physical Circumstances. 
        a. Front and/or Street Side Setback Averaging in Developed Areas. Where these zoning regulations require front and/or street side setbacks and where buildings have been erected on at least one-half of the lots in a block as of the effective date of the regulations codified in this section, the minimum required front and/or street side setback shall be the average of the front and/or street side (as applicable) setback of the developed lots, but in no case less than ten feet nor more than would otherwise be required. Averaging does not apply to enclosed parking structures.
        b. Reduced Front or Street Side Setback for New Structure Providing Additional Creek Setback. Where a new structure provides a rear or side creek setback larger than required by these zoning regulations, the required front and/or street side setback, respectively, shall be reduced by one foot for each one foot of additional creek setback, so long as the front and street side setback is at least one-half that required by the zone in which the property is located. Refer to the front and street side setback standards for each zone in Chapters 17.12 through 17.64, inclusive.
        c. Setbacks Adjacent to an Alley. The standards required for interior side and rear setbacks shall apply along alleys. However, zero setback is allowed for required surface parking spaces.
        d. Rear Setback on Through Lots. On through lots, the minimum rear setback shall be the equivalent to the minimum required front setback.
    2. Discretionary Exceptions. Discretionary exceptions to setback requirements shall require a director’s action and meet the findings required for a director’s action (Chapter 17.108), as well as any findings indicated below for an individual exception.
        a. Reduced Front and Street Side Setbacks. Upon approval of a director’s action, or in conjunction with tandem parking approval, the director may allow front and/or street side setbacks to be reduced to zero for unenclosed parking spaces. Front and street side setbacks may be reduced to ten feet for structures, including side-loaded carports and garages. However, no driveway shall be less than 18 feet six inches deep, as measured from the sidewalk to face of a garage, or where no sidewalk exists, the outer edge of the street, to accommodate a parked car in the driveway without overhanging onto the public right-of-way.
        b. Variable Front Setbacks in Subdivisions. In new residential subdivisions, the review authority may approve variable front setbacks, to be noted on the approved map, provided the average of the front setbacks on a block is at least fifteen feet and no front setback is less than ten feet. Garages or carports that back directly onto the public right-of-way shall maintain a minimum setback of at least eighteen feet six inches, as measured from the sidewalk or where no sidewalk exists, as measured from the outer edge of the public right-of-way, to accommodate a parked car in the driveway without overhanging onto the public right-of-way.
        c. Variable Side and Rear Setbacks in New Subdivisions. In new residential subdivisions, the review authority may approve exceptions to the side and rear setback standards, with the exceptions to be noted on the map, provided a separation of at least ten feet between buildings on adjacent lots will be maintained and an acceptable level of solar exposure will be guaranteed by alternative setback requirements or private easements to ensure the development will comply with solar access standards of General Plan Conservation and Open Space Element Policy 4.5.1.
        d. Other Setback Variations in Previously Subdivided Areas. Upon approval of a director’s action, the director may allow side and rear setbacks to be reduced to zero under either of the following circumstances:
            i. When there exists recorded agreement, to the satisfaction of the city attorney, running with the land to maintain at least ten feet of separation between buildings on adjacent parcels and the development will comply with solar access standards of General Plan Conservation and Open Space Element Policy 4.5.1; or
            ii. When the reduction is for either a minor addition to an existing legal structure that is nonconforming with regard to side and rear setback requirements or for a detached single-story accessory structure; provided, that all such minor additions and new accessory structures shall comply with applicable provisions of Title 15, Building and Construction (see also Chapter 17.92, Nonconforming Structures) and the director makes the following findings:
                (a) In the case of a minor addition, that the minor addition is a logical extension of the existing nonconforming structure;
                (b) In the case of a detached single-story accessory structure (either new or replacing a previously approved nonconforming structure), that the accessory structure is consistent with the traditional development pattern of the neighborhood and will have a greater front and/or street side setback than the main structure;
                (c) That adjacent affected properties will not be deprived of reasonable solar exposure, and the development will comply with solar access standards of General Plan Conservation and Open Space Element Policy 4.5.1;
                (d) That no useful purpose would be realized by requiring the full setback;
                (e) That no significant fire protection, emergency access, privacy, or security impacts are likely from the addition; and
                (f) That it is impractical to obtain a ten-foot separation easement in compliance with subsection (D)(2)(d)(ii)(a) of this subsection.
        e. Side and Rear Setback Building Height Exceptions. Upon approval of a director’s action, the director may allow exceptions to the side and rear setback standards provided in Article 2 for each zone. Such exceptions may be granted in any of the following and similar circumstances, but in no case shall exceptions be granted for less than the minimum setback required:
            i. When the property that will be shaded by the excepted development will not be developed or will not be deprived of reasonable solar exposure, considering its topography and zoning;
            ii. When the exception is of a minor nature, involving an insignificant portion of total available solar exposure;
            iii. When the properties at issue are within an area where use of solar energy is generally infeasible because of landform shading;
            iv. When adequate recorded agreement running with the land exists to protect established solar collectors and probable collector locations;
            v. When the property to be shaded is a street;
            vi. Where no significant fire protection, emergency access, privacy or security impacts are likely to result from the exception.
            vii. The development will comply with solar access standards of General Plan Conservation and Open Space Element Policy 4.5.1.
            Any other exception to the height limits requires approval of a variance as provided in Chapter 17.114 (Variances). For height limits of signs, see Chapter 15.40, Sign Regulations. (Ord. 1657 § 10, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.180 Showers, lockers, and changing rooms.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage bicycling, transit use, walking, carpooling, and other modes of transportation (other than by motor vehicle) that can move the city toward achieving modal split goals in the General Plan Circulation Element.
B. Application. New nonresidential developments of ten thousand square feet or larger and nonresidential buildings that expand the floor area by ten percent or more and exceed ten thousand square feet shall provide shower and clothes locker facilities in compliance with the standards of this section.
C. Standards. 
    1. Shower and Dressing Areas. A minimum of one shower facility shall be provided in new nonresidential developments with a gross floor area between ten thousand and twenty-four thousand nine hundred ninety-nine square feet, two showers in projects between twenty-five thousand square feet and one hundred twenty-four thousand nine hundred ninety-nine square feet, and four showers for any project over one hundred twenty-five thousand square feet. Dressing areas and lockers shall be provided in close proximity to shower facilities.
    2. Floor Area Exemption. Floor area dedicated to showers, dressing areas, and clothes lockers shall not be included in the floor area for calculating the parking requirement or for total floor area for the project.
    3. Tenant Improvements. Required showers, lockers, and changing areas shall not be removed during tenant improvements or through subsequent remodeling without the approval of the director.
D. Alternative Compliance. Alternative compliance, as established in this subsection, may be applied to all land use classifications.
    1. Upon written request by the applicant, the director may approve alternative compliance from the provisions of this section through an approved director’s action, which may include, but is not limited to, a reduction or deviation in the number, type, or location of the required bicycle parking, and may include a waiver of the requirement.
    2. Considerations used in the determination may include, but are not limited to:
        a. Physical site planning constraints;
        b. Projects that cannot be classified into the provided land use categories;
        c. Provision of enhanced shower facilities within the development or use;
        d. Inclusion of the site within a larger development for which adequate showers, dressing areas, and clothes lockers are already provided;
        e. Projects that exhibit unusual operational characteristics associated with a particular use;
        f. Unforeseen circumstances or individual land use changes. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.190 Pools and pool equipment—Location.
A. A swimming pool shall not be located in a required front setback area nor in any part of a front yard visible from a public street.
B. A swimming pool shall not be located within five feet of a property line.
C. Pool equipment shall not be located in a required front setback area or that portion of side setback area located between the front lot line and the rearmost portion of the principal building. To minimize the potential impact of noise, equipment shall be located not less than ten feet from any window or other opening into a dwelling or other habitable building on an adjacent property.
D. Pool equipment shall be enclosed or screened from street and adjoining property view and acoustically shielded to ensure compliance with Chapter 9.12 (Noise Control). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.200 Trash enclosure standards.
A. Purpose and Applicability. This section establishes standards for the location, development, and operations of trash enclosures to ensure that the storage of trash, green waste, and recyclable materials do not have significant adverse health consequences and do minimize adverse impacts on surrounding properties.
B. When Required. All new and expanded commercial and industrial projects with a floor area exceeding five hundred square feet, all intensifications of commercial and industrial uses, all new multi-unit residential projects located in any zone, and all new mixed-use projects shall be required to provide and maintain at least one trash enclosure. Trash enclosures may be located indoors or outdoors to meet the requirements of this section.
C. Location. 
    1. Residential. Outdoor trash enclosures required under this section for residential projects shall not be located within any required front or street side yard.
    2. General. No outdoor trash enclosures shall be located within any public right-of-way, or in any location where it would obstruct pedestrian walkways, vehicular ingress and egress, reduce motor vehicle sightline, or in any way create a hazard to health and safety.
D. Maintenance. Outdoor trash enclosures required shall be maintained in the following manner:
    1. There shall be the prompt removal of visible signs of overflow of garbage, smells emanating from enclosure, graffiti, pests, and vermin.
    2. Trash enclosure covers shall be closed when not in use.
    3. Trash enclosures shall be easily accessible for garbage and recyclables collection.
    4. Trash enclosures shall be regularly emptied of garbage.
E. Design of Enclosure Area. 
    1. Each trash enclosure shall be of a material and colors that complement the architecture of the buildings they serve or shall have exterior landscape planting that screens the walls.
    2. The interior dimensions of the trash and recyclables enclosure shall provide convenient and secure access to the containers to prevent access by unauthorized persons and minimize scavenging, while allowing authorized persons access for disposal and collection of materials.
    3. All outdoor trash enclosures shall have full roofs to reduce stormwater pollution and to screen unsightly views. The design of the roof and the materials used shall be compatible with the on-site architecture, with adequate height clearance to enable ready access to any containers.
    4. Designs, materials, or methods of installation not specifically prescribed by this section may be approved by director, subject to director’s action. In approving such a request, the director shall find that the proposed design, material, or method provides approximate equivalence to the specific requirements of this section or is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of these provisions. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.210 Vision clearance triangle at intersections.
A. Intersection Visibility. At roadway intersections not controlled by a stop sign or traffic signal, no plant, structure, or other solid object over three feet high that would obstruct visibility may be located within the area indicated in Figure 3-14: Intersection Visibility. At controlled intersections, the director shall determine visibility requirements for proper sight distance.Figure 3-14. Intersection Visibility
[IMAGE: <17.70.210_Fig3-14.png>]
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.70.220 Water-efficient landscape standards.
A. Applicability. 
    1. The provisions of this section shall apply to the following landscape projects:
        a. New residential, commercial, institutional, and multi-unit residential development projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred square feet subject to a building permit, plan check, or development review.
        b. Rehabilitated landscapes for residential, institutional, commercial, and multi-unit residential development projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet which are otherwise subject to a building permit or development review.
    2. Homeowners associations and common interest developments’ architectural guidelines (i.e., CC&Rs) shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low water-using plants as a group. Furthermore, the guidelines shall not prohibit the removal of turf nor restrict or prohibit the reduction of turf in lieu of more water-efficient alternatives (California Civil Code Section 1353.8).
    3. This section shall not apply to:
        a. Registered local, state or federal historical sites;
        b. Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or
        c. Plant collections that are part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public.
    4. Words or phrases used in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable application, and as defined in Chapter 17.158 (General Definitions) under “Water-Efficient Landscape Standards.”
B. Submittal Requirements. 
    1. Landscape Design Plan. For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be designed and planned for the intended function of the project. For each landscape project subject to this section, applicants shall submit a landscape design plan that meets the maximum applied water allowance calculation (Section 17.158.050—W Definitions) and design criteria in the city engineering standards uniform design criteria for landscaping and irrigation.
    2. Irrigation Design Plan. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. For each landscape project subject to this section, applicants shall submit an irrigation design plan that is designed and installed to meet design and irrigation efficiency criteria as described in the city engineering standards uniform design criteria for landscaping and irrigation.
    3. Soils Management Report. To reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, soil amendment, mulching, and soil conditioning recommendations shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, licensed civil engineer, or licensed architect as described in the city engineering standards uniform design criteria for landscaping and irrigation.
    4. Grading Design Plan. For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste as described in the city engineering standards uniform design criteria for landscaping and irrigation.
    5. Stormwater Management. Stormwater best management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration, which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Stormwater best management practices shall be implemented within the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site retention and infiltration. Project applicants shall refer to Chapter 12.08 and the city engineering standards for stormwater quality requirements.
C. MAWA Calculation. Based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0.
D. Implementation Procedures. 
    1. Development Review Application. For projects that require development review, project applicants shall submit the following documentation:
        a. A completed maximum applied water allowance for the conceptual landscape design.
        b. A conceptual landscape design plan that demonstrates that the landscape will meet the landscape design specifications of the city engineering standards uniform design criteria for landscaping and irrigation.
        c. A conceptual irrigation design plan that describes the irrigation methods and design actions that will be employed to meet the irrigation specifications of the city engineering standards uniform design criteria for landscaping and irrigation.
        d. A grading plan that demonstrates the landscape will meet the specifications of the city engineering standards uniform design criteria for landscaping and irrigation.
    2. Building Application. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, project applicants shall submit the following:
        a. A completed maximum applied water allowance form (including appendices and city engineering standards) based on the final landscape design plan.
        b. A final landscape design plan that includes all the criteria required in the city engineering standards uniform design criteria for landscaping and irrigation.
        c. A final irrigation plan that includes all the criteria required in the city engineering standards uniform design criteria for landscaping and irrigation.
        d. A soils management report that includes at a minimum the criteria required in the city engineering standards uniform design criteria for landscaping and irrigation.
        e. A final grading plan that includes all the criteria required in the city engineering standards uniform design criteria for landscaping and irrigation.
    3. Project Completion. Upon completion of the installation of the landscape and irrigation system and prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the project applicant shall submit the following:
        a. A certification of completion (including appendices and city engineering standards) signed by the professional of record for the landscape and irrigation design certifying that the project was installed in compliance with the city-approved landscape design, irrigation and grading plans and meets or exceeds an average landscape irrigation efficiency of 0.71. The city reserves the right to inspect and audit any irrigation system that has received an approval through the provisions of this section.
        b. The project applicant shall develop and provide to the owner or owner representative and the city an irrigation schedule that assists in the water management of the project and utilizes the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the criteria in the city engineering standards uniform design criteria for landscaping and irrigation.
        c. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted by the project applicant with the certificate of completion that includes: routine inspections, adjustment and repairs to the irrigation system, aerating and dethatching turf areas, replenishing mulch, fertilizing, pruning, and weeding. The maintenance schedule will be provided to the owner or owner representative. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.72 PARKING AND LOADING

Sections:
17.72.010    Purpose and application.
17.72.020    General provisions.
17.72.030    Required parking spaces.
17.72.040    Parking for electric vehicles.
17.72.050    Parking reductions.
17.72.060    Nonconforming parking.
17.72.070    Bicycle parking standards.
17.72.080    Motorcycle parking standards.
17.72.090    Parking and driveway design and development standards.
17.72.100    On-site loading standards.

17.72.010 Purpose and application.
A. Purpose. The purposes of this chapter are to:
    1. Ensure that adequate off-street parking is provided for new land uses and major alterations to existing uses, considering the demands likely to result from various uses, combinations of uses, and settings, and to avoid the negative impacts associated with spillover parking into adjacent neighborhoods and districts;
    2. Minimize the negative environmental and urban design impacts that can result from parking lots, driveways, and drive aisles within parking lots;
    3. Offer flexible means of minimizing the amount of area devoted to vehicle parking by allowing reductions in the number of required spaces in transit-served locations, shared parking facilities, and other situations expected to have lower vehicle parking demand;
    4. Where possible, consolidate parking and minimize the area devoted exclusively to parking and driveways when typical demands may be satisfied more efficiently by shared facilities;
    5. Ensure that parking and loading areas are designed to operate efficiently and effectively and in a manner compatible with on-site and surrounding land uses; Ensure that adequate off-street bicycle parking facilities are provided;
    6. Promote parking lot designs that offer safe and attractive pedestrian routes;
    7. Encourage bicycling, transit use, walking, carpooling, and other modes of transportation (other than by motor vehicle) that can move the city toward achieving modal split goals in the General Plan Circulation Element; and
    8. Accommodate and encourage increased use of alternative fuel and zero-emissions vehicles.
B. Applicability. The minimum off-street parking spaces established in this section shall be provided for new construction or intensification of use, and for the enlargement or increased capacity and use of land. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.72.020 General provisions.
A. Requirements by Type of Use. Except as otherwise provided in these zoning regulations, for every structure erected or enlarged and for any land or structure devoted to a new use requiring more spaces according to the schedule set out in this chapter, the indicated minimum number of off-street parking spaces located on the site of the use shall be provided. The right to occupy and use any premises shall be contingent on preserving the required parking and maintaining its availability to the intended users, including residents, staff, and/or customers. In no case shall required parking spaces for a use be rented or leased to off-site uses or used for other purposes, unless allowed by subsection D (Unbundling Parking) of this section.
Additional parking or alternative parking development standards may be required as a condition of use permit approval.
B. Uses Not Listed. The director shall determine the parking requirement for uses that are not listed in Table 3-4: Parking Requirements by Use. The director’s determination shall be based on similarity to listed uses; that decision may be appealed to the planning commission.
C. Parking Calculations. 
    1. Floor Area. The parking requirement calculation shall be based on the gross floor area of the entire use, unless stated otherwise.
    2. Sites with Multiple Uses. If more than one use is located on a site (including a mix of uses or a mixed-use development), the number of required on-site parking spaces and loading spaces shall be equal to the sum of the requirements calculated separately for each use unless a reduction is approved pursuant to Section 17.72.050 (Parking Reductions).
D. Unbundling Parking. This section authorizes the separating, or “unbundling,” of parking areas from the use or uses the parking is intended to serve by leasing those spaces separately from such residential unit or nonresidential use. The purpose of allowing for unbundled parking is to move toward the city’s goal of encouraging travel mode shift away from single-user private motor vehicles.
    1. Residential Uses. Residential projects may unbundle the parking from the residential uses with approval of a director’s action (Chapter 17.108: Director’s Action), and the following rules shall apply to the sale or rental of on-site parking spaces unless waived by the director as infeasible:
        a. All off-street parking spaces shall be leased or sold separately from the rental or purchase fees for dwelling units for the life of the dwelling units, such that potential renters or buyers have the option of renting or buying a residential unit at a price lower than would be the case if there were a single price for both the residential unit and the parking space.
        b. Renters or buyers of on-site inclusionary affordable units shall have an equal opportunity to rent or buy a parking space on the same terms and conditions as offered to renters or buyers of other dwelling units.
    2. Nonresidential Uses. Nonresidential projects may unbundle the parking from nonresidential use with approval of a director’s action (Chapter 17.108: Director’s Action), and the following rule shall apply to the sale or rental of on-site parking spaces unless waived by the director as infeasible: All off-street parking spaces shall be leased or sold separately from the rental or purchase fees for each nonresidential space for the life of the space, such that potential tenants or buyers have the option of renting or buying the nonresidential square footage at a price lower than would be the case if there were a single price for both the floor area and the parking space. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.72.030 Required parking spaces.
A. Minimum Number of Spaces Required Outside of Downtown Core. Each land use shall be provided at least the number of on-site parking spaces stated in this section and Table 3-4: Parking Requirements by Use.
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
|                               Table 3-4: Parking Requirements by Use                                |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
|              Type of Land Use               |          Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces          |
|                                             |                       Required                        |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| AGRICULTURE                                                                                         |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Agricultural Accessory Structure            | No requirement                                        |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Animal Husbandry and Grazing                | No requirement                                        |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Community Garden                            | No spaces required when on-street parking             |
|                                             | is available immediately adjacent to                  |
|                                             | the garden. If no on-street parking                   |
|                                             | is available, then a minimum of two                   |
|                                             | spaces.                                               |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Crop Production                             | No requirement                                        |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Greenhouse/Plant Nursery, Commercial        | No requirement                                        |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| INDUSTRY, MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING, WHOLESALING                                                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Fuel Dealer (propane, etc.)                 | 1 space per 1,000 sf of outdoor sales/storage         |
|                                             | area                                                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Handicraft Manufacturing                    | 1 space per 1,000 sf                                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Laboratory—Medical, Analytical, Research,   | 1 space per 1,000 sf of combined laboratory           |
| Testing                                     | and office space                                      |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Manufacturing—Heavy                         | 1 space per 1,000 sf of manufacturing                 |
|                                             | space, plus any required spaces for                   |
|                                             | dedicated office area                                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Manufacturing—Light                         | 1 space per 1,000 sf, plus any required               |
|                                             | spaces for dedicated office area                      |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Recycling                                                                                           |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Recycling—Collection Facility               | None required                                         |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Recycling—Processing Facility               | As provided in approved use permit                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Research and Development                    | 1 space per 1,000 sf of combined assembly/fabrication |
|                                             | space (indoor and outdoor) and office                 |
|                                             | space                                                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Salvage and Wrecking                        | 1 space per 500 sf of office space,                   |
|                                             | plus 1 space per 0.5 acre of gross                    |
|                                             | outdoor use area                                      |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution                                                              |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Outdoor Storage                             | 1 space per 1,500 sf of outdoor storage               |
|                                             | area                                                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Personal Storage                            | 1 space per 6,000 sf of combined storage              |
|                                             | space and business/sales office                       |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Warehousing and Indoor Storage              | 1 space per 1,500 sf of combined storage              |
|                                             | area and office space                                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Wholesaling and Distribution                | 1 space per 1,000 sf of combined storage              |
|                                             | area and office space                                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| LODGING                                                                                             |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Bed and Breakfast Inn                       | 1 space per room                                      |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Homeless Shelter                            | 2 spaces for the facility plus one space              |
|                                             | for each six occupants at maximum allowed             |
|                                             | occupancy                                             |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Hostel                                      | 1 space per lodging room                              |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Hotels and Motels                           | 1 space per room, plus any spaces required            |
|                                             | for conference/meeting facilities and                 |
|                                             | restaurants open to the public                        |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| RV Parks                                    | As provided in approved use permit                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| PUBLIC AND ASSEMBLY USES                                                                            |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Cultural Institutions                       | Live Theater: 1 space per 100 sf; all                 |
|                                             | other uses 1 space per 400 sf of public               |
|                                             | assembly area                                         |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Hospitals and Clinics                                                                               |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Clinic                                      | 1 space per 200 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Hospital                                    | 1 space per bed                                       |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Park and Recreation Facilities              | 4 spaces per acre of park space and                   |
|                                             | 1 space per 200 sf indoor recreational                |
|                                             | facilities                                            |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Public Assembly Facilities                  | 1 space per 100 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Religious Assembly Facilities               | 1 space per 100 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Schools—Colleges                            | 2 spaces per classroom plus 1 space                   |
|                                             | per 300 sf of assembly or common area                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Schools—Primary and Middle                  | 2 spaces per classroom plus 1 space                   |
|                                             | per 300 sf of assembly or common area                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Schools—Secondary, High School              | 5 spaces per classroom plus 1 space                   |
|                                             | per 300 sf of assembly or common area                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Schools—Trade Schools                       | 2 spaces per classroom plus 1 space                   |
|                                             | per 300 sf of assembly or common area                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Sports and Entertainment Assembly Facility  | As provided in approved use permit                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| RESIDENTIAL USES                                                                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| General Residential Housing Types                                                                   |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Single-Unit Dwellings, Detached             | 2 parking spaces for the first 4 bedrooms,            |
|                                             | 0.75 space per each additional bedroom                |
|                                             | (no requirement for accessory dwelling                |
|                                             | units), plus 1 guest parking space                    |
|                                             | per 5 units in a tract development                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Multi-Unit Residential                      | 0.75 space per bedroom (no less than                  |
|                                             | 1 space per dwelling unit), plus 1                    |
|                                             | guest parking space per 5 units                       |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Boarding House                              | 1 space per 1.5 occupants or 1.5 spaces               |
|                                             | per bedroom, whichever is greater                     |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Caretaker quarters                          | Two spaces per dwelling                               |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Continuing Care Community                   | Same as dwelling type, plus 1 space                   |
|                                             | for every two employees providing on-site             |
|                                             | services to residents                                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Elderly and Long-Term Care                  | 2 spaces for the owner-manager plus                   |
|                                             | 1 for every 5 beds and 1 for each nonresident         |
|                                             | employee                                              |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Family Day Care—Small                       | None in addition to what is required                  |
|                                             | for the residential use                               |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Family Day Care—Large                       | Same as dwelling type, plus 1 space                   |
|                                             | for every two employees providing day                 |
|                                             | care services                                         |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Fraternities and Sororities                 | 1 space per 1.5 occupants or 1.5 spaces               |
|                                             | per bedroom, whichever is greater                     |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Hospice In-Patient Facility                 | Same as dwelling type, plus 1 space                   |
|                                             | for every two employees providing on-site             |
|                                             | services to residents                                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| High-Occupancy Residential Use              | The parking requirement shall be greater              |
|                                             | of: (1) the number of spaces required                 |
|                                             | for dwellings, or (2) 1 off-street                    |
|                                             | parking space per adult occupant, less                |
|                                             | 1                                                     |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Mobile Home Park                            | 1.25 spaces per unit: one space to be                 |
|                                             | with each unit                                        |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Residential Care Facilities—6 or fewer      | None in addition to what is required                  |
| residents                                   | for the residential use                               |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Residential Care Facilities—7 or more       | 2 spaces for the owner-manager plus                   |
| residents                                   | 1 for every 5 beds and 1 for each nonresident         |
|                                             | employee                                              |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Supportive and/or Transitional Housing,     | Same as dwelling type, plus 1 space                   |
| with On- or Off-Site Services               | for every two employees providing on-site             |
|                                             | services to residents                                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| MIXED USES                                                                                          |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Mixed-Use Development                       | As required for each separate use in                  |
|                                             | the mixed-use development                             |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| COMMERCIAL USES                                                                                     |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Adult Entertainment Businesses              | As required for the primary type of                   |
|                                             | use (for example, retail sales or assembly)           |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Animal Care, Sales and Services                                                                     |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Animal Boarding/Kennels                     | 1 space per 1,000 sf of indoor area                   |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Animal Grooming                             | 1 space per 250 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Animal Retail Sales                         | 1 space per 250 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Veterinary Services, Large Animal           | 1 space per 500 sf of indoor area                     |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Veterinary Services, Small Animal           | 1 space per 300 sf of indoor area                     |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Banks and Financial Institutions                                                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| ATMs                                        | No requirement                                        |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Banks and Credit Unions                     | 1 space per 300 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Check Cashing Shops/Payday Loans            | 1 space per 300 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Business Services                           | 1 space per 300 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Cemetery                                    | 1 space per 4 acres                                   |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Commercial Recreation—Large Scale           | 1 space per 200 sf of indoor space,                   |
|                                             | 1 space per 500 sf of outdoor space                   |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Commercial Recreation—Small Scale           | 1 space per 200 sf of indoor space,                   |
|                                             | 1 space per 500 sf of outdoor space                   |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Day Care Center                             | 1 space per 500 sf of indoor space                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Eating and Drinking Establishments                                                                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Bars, Nightclubs, and Taverns               | 1 space per 100 sf, including any food                |
|                                             | preparation/service and entertainment                 |
|                                             | areas                                                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Restaurant                                  | 1 space per 100 sf of total restaurant                |
|                                             | area, including any food preparation/service          |
|                                             | area                                                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Food and Beverage Sales                                                                             |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| General Market                              | 1 space per 250 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Convenience Store                           | 1 space per 250 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Produce Stand                               | 1 space per 300 sf gross floor area                   |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Liquor Store                                | 1 space per 250 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Food Preparation (no on-site sales or       | 1 space per 1,500 sf                                  |
| service)                                    |                                                       |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Funeral Parlors and Interment Services      | 1 space per four fixed seats or 1 space               |
|                                             | per 80 sf assembly area, whichever                    |
|                                             | is greater                                            |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Instructional Services                      | 1 space per 200 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Maintenance and Repair Services             | 1 space per 600 sf, plus 1 space for                  |
|                                             | each fleet vehicle                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Offices                                                                                             |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Business and Professional Offices           | 1 space per 300 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Medical and Dental Offices                  | 1 space per 200 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Personal Services                           | 1 space per 300 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Retail Sales                                                                                        |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Building Materials and Services—Indoor      | 1 space per 1,000 sf of indoor space                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Building Materials and Services—Outdoor     | 1 space per 1,500 sf of outdoor space                 |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| General Retail                              | 1 space per 300 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Large-Scale Retail                          | 1 space per 250 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Nurseries and Garden Centers                | 1 space per 500 sf of floor area, plus                |
|                                             | 1 space per 2,000 sf of outdoor display               |
|                                             | area                                                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Theaters                                    | 1 space per 100 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Vehicle Sales and Services                                                                          |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Auto and Vehicle Sales and Rental           | 1 space per 300 square feet office area,              |
|                                             | plus 1 space per 500 square feet parts                |
|                                             | sales service area, plus 1 space per                  |
|                                             | 2,000 square feet outdoor sales area                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Large Vehicle, Construction and Heavy       | 1 space per 500 sf of floor area, plus                |
| Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental        | 1 space per 2,000 outdoor sales area                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Service/Fueling Stations                    | No parking required for fueling operations.           |
|                                             | See “convenience store” or “vehicle                   |
|                                             | services” if applicable                               |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Vehicle Services—Major Repair/Body Work     | 1 space per 500 sf of non-service bay                 |
|                                             | floor area and 2 spaces per service                   |
|                                             | bay                                                   |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Vehicle Services—Minor Repair/Maintenance   | 1 space per 500 sf of non-service bay                 |
|                                             | floor area and 2 spaces per service                   |
|                                             | bay                                                   |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Vehicle Services—Washing                    | 1 space plus sufficient waiting line(s)               |
|                                             | or 2 spaces plus washing area(s)                      |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS, AND UTILITIES                                                       |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Airport                                     | To be determined when use permit is                   |
|                                             | approved                                              |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Wireless Telecommunications Facilities      | No requirement                                        |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Freight/Truck Terminals                     | 1 space per 1,500 sf of indoor space                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Light Fleet-Based Services                  | 1 space per 1,000 sf of indoor space,                 |
|                                             | plus any required spaces for dedicated                |
|                                             | office area and 1 space for each fleet                |
|                                             | vehicle                                               |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Media Production                                                                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Backlots and Soundstages                    | As provided in approved use permit                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Broadcast Studios                           | 1 space per 300 sf                                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Heliport                                    | As provided in approved use permit                    |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Parking Facility                            | No requirement                                        |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Public Safety Facilities                    | 1 space per 500 square feet gross floor               |
|                                             | area                                                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Transit Station or Terminal                 | 1 space per 300 sf office/waiting area                |
|                                             | plus 1 space per 1,000 sf house/garage                |
|                                             | area                                                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Utilities Facilities                                                                                |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Facilities with On-Site Staff               | 1 space per 1,500 sf of indoor area                   |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Facilities with No On-Site Staff (unmanned) | No requirement                                        |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Transmission Lines                          | No requirement                                        |
+---------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
B. Elderly Housing Parking. Housing occupied exclusively by persons aged sixty-two or older may provide one-half space per dwelling unit or one space per four occupants of a group quarters.
C. Minimum Number of Spaces Required in the C-N Zone. Within the neighborhood-commercial (C-N) zone, the following parking standards shall apply for the specific land uses identified below:
    1. Eating and drinking establishments and food and beverage sales shall provide one-half that required in Table 3-4: Parking Requirements by Use. Parking space reductions permitted by Section 17.72.050(B) (Shared Parking Reductions) shall not be applicable in conjunction with this provision, as the reduced parking rates established here are intended to provide flexibility in meeting parking requirements and rely on the consolidation of parking; however, Section 17.72.050(C) (Other Parking Reductions) may apply.
D. Minimum Number of Spaces Required in Downtown Core. Within the downtown-commercial (C-D) zone, the following parking standards and incentives shall apply:
    1. Parking space reductions permitted by Section 17.72.050(B) (Shared Parking Reductions) shall not be applicable in the downtown parking district, as the reduced parking rates established here are intended to provide flexibility in meeting parking requirements and rely on the consolidation of parking; however, Section 17.72.050(C) (Other Parking Reductions) may apply.
    2. Eating and drinking establishments, theaters, cultural institutions, public assembly facilities, and religious assembly facilities: One-half that required in Table 3-4: Parking Requirements by Use; provided, however, that in no case shall the requirement exceed one space per three hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area.
    3. Residential uses, hotels and motels, and bed and breakfast inns: One-half that required in Table 3-4: Parking Requirements by Use.
    4. All other uses: One space per five hundred square feet gross floor area.
    5. For existing buildings, only the parking needed for additions thereto or for changes in occupancy which increase parking requirements relative to prior uses shall be required.
    6. Options to Comply. The parking space requirement may be met by:
        a. Providing the required spaces on the site occupied by the use.
        b. The director may, by approving a director’s action (Chapter 17.108: Director’s Action), allow some or all of the parking to be located on a site different from the use and within the downtown parking district area. Such off-site parking shall not be located within a residential zone. It shall be within reasonable walking distance and no greater than five hundred feet of the use, and shall not be separated from the use by any feature that would make pedestrian access inconvenient or hazardous. The site on which the parking is located shall be owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the party controlling the use.
        c. Participating in a commonly held and maintained off-site parking lot where other businesses maintain their required spaces.
        d. Participating in a parking district that provides parking spaces through a fee or assessment program.
        e. Participating in an in-lieu fee program as may be established by the council. Any parking agreement approved prior to adoption of the parking standards contained in subsections (D)(1) through (D)(3) of this section may be adjusted to conform with those standards, subject to approval by the director and city attorney. (Ord. 1657 §§ 11—14, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.72.040 Parking for electric vehicles.
A. Parking spaces for electric vehicles shall be provided for all uses as indicated in Table 3-5: Electric Vehicle (EV) Parking or in accordance with the requirements of the California Green Building Standards Code and any local amendments thereto, whichever yields the greater number of spaces. All such spaces shall count toward the minimum required parking spaces before applying any parking reductions. These requirements do not apply in the downtown zone or within an in-lieu fee district.
+----------------------------+------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------+
|                                Table 3-5: Electric Vehicle (EV) Parking                                |
+----------------------------+------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------+
|          Land Use          |                      Number of Total Required Spaces                      |
+----------------------------+------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------+
| "                          |       5—10       |       11—15       |       16—25       |  More than 25  |
+----------------------------+------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------+
| Multi-Unit Residential     | 1 EV ready space | 2 EV ready spaces | 3 EV ready spaces | 10% EV ready   |
| with 5 or More             | minimum, plus    | minimum, plus     | minimum, plus     | spaces, plus   |
| Units                      | 25% EV capable   | 50% EV capable    | 50% EV capable    | 50% EV capable |
+----------------------------+------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------+
| Nonresidential—Commercial, | 1 EV ready space | 2 EV ready spaces | 3 EV ready spaces | 10% EV ready   |
| Office, Industrial,        | minimum, plus    | minimum, plus     | minimum, plus     | spaces, plus   |
| and Mixed Use              | 25% EV capable   | 50% EV capable    | 50% EV capable    | 25% EV capable |
+----------------------------+------------------+-------------------+-------------------+----------------+
B. All EV ready spaces, as defined in this title, shall be equipped with electric vehicle charging equipment, as defined in this title, including an electric vehicle charging station, for the use of which the property owner or operator may require payment, at his/her discretion. All EV capable spaces, as defined in this title, shall be served by an empty raceway to supply power for future EV charging stations at any given time.
C. Any charging or similar equipment shall not be placed within the required parking space dimensions and shall not obstruct any pedestrian path of travel.
D. EV ready and EV capable spaces and the associated electric vehicle charging equipment shall be provided for all new developments and whenever a substantial addition to an existing development is proposed, as defined by Section 17.106.020(B) (Enlargements and Modifications).
E. Where an existing legal, nonconforming parking condition exists, the EV spaces requirement shall be based on the existing number of parking spaces, not the required number of parking spaces. (Ord. 1657 § 15, 2019: Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.72.050 Parking reductions.
A. Affordable Housing Developments. See Chapter 17.140: Affordable Housing Incentives.
B. Shared Parking Reduction. Where a shared parking facility serving more than one use will be provided, the total number of required parking spaces may be reduced by up to twenty percent with director approval via director’s action (Chapter 17.108), if the director finds that:
    1. The peak hours of use will not overlap or coincide to the degree that peak demand for parking spaces from all uses or projects will be greater than the total supply of spaces;
    2. The proposed shared parking provided will be adequate to serve each use and/or project;
    3. A parking demand study conducted and prepared under procedures set forth by the director supports the proposed reduction; and
    4. In the case of a shared parking facility that serves more than one property, a parking agreement has been prepared and recorded with the office of the county recorder, requiring the parking to be operated on a nonexclusive basis, to be open and available to the public for shared use, short-term parking during normal business hours.
C. Other Parking Reductions. Required parking for any use may be reduced by up to ten percent through director approval of a director’s action. Required parking may be reduced by more than ten percent through planning commission approval. However, no reduction shall be made in addition to any reductions for shared parking permitted through subsection B (Shared Parking Reduction) of this section.
    1. Criteria for Approval. The review authority may only approve a request for reduced parking if it finds that:
        a. Special conditions, including, but not limited to, the nature of the proposed operation; proximity to frequent transit service; proximity to a general market; transportation characteristics of persons residing, working, or visiting the site; or because the applicant has undertaken a transportation demand management program that provides justification of innovative design components and strategies to reduce single-occupant vehicle travel to and from the site and will reduce parking demand at the site;
        b. The use will adequately be served by the proposed on-site parking; and
        c. Parking demand generated by the project will not exceed the capacity of or have a detrimental impact on the supply of on-street parking in the surrounding area.
    2. Parking Demand Study. In order to evaluate a proposed project’s compliance with the above criteria, a parking demand study shall be conducted and prepared under procedures set forth by the director that substantiates the basis for granting a reduced number of spaces.
    3. Reduction Rates. The review authority may consider the following rates for parking reductions associated with a parking demand study:
        a. One car space for each five motorcycle spaces provided in excess of required parking.
        b. One car space for each five bicycle spaces provided in excess of required parking. All bicycle parking that exceeds the required number of spaces shall be apportioned between short-term and long-term bicycle spaces as stipulated by Table 3-6: Required Bicycle Parking. Any additional bicycle parking provided for residential uses shall be covered.
    4. Vehicle Trip Reduction Plan. Based on the parking study, the director may require implementation of a vehicle trip reduction plan and such other conditions deemed necessary to reduce parking demand.
D. Reductions and Common Parking. Where there has been a reduction in required parking, all resulting spaces must be available for common use and not exclusively assigned to any individual use. In residential and mixed-use projects, required residential parking may be reserved, but commercial parking must be made available for guests or overflow from residences.
E. Off-Site Parking. The director may, by approving a director’s action (Chapter 17.108), allow some or all of the required parking to be located on a site different from the use. Such off-site parking shall be within a zone where the use is allowed or conditionally allowed, or within an office, commercial or manufacturing zone. It shall be within three hundred feet of the use and shall not be separated from the use by any feature that would make pedestrian access inconvenient or hazardous. The site on which the parking is located shall be owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the party controlling the use. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.72.060 Nonconforming parking.
For additions or changes in use for existing uses or structures that do not meet current parking standards, the following standards shall apply.
A. Nonresidential Additions and Reconstruction. When expansion of floor area creates an increase of ten percent or more in the number of required on-site parking spaces in an existing nonresidential building, additional on-site parking shall be provided for such addition and not for the entire building or site. Additional parking spaces are not required for the reconstruction of an existing building when there is no increase in floor area.
B. Residential Additions. At least one legally conforming space shall be provided for each existing unit, in addition to all parking required for the addition itself, unless otherwise exempted for an approved accessory dwelling unit or through an approved parking reduction, as authorized by Section 17.72.050 (Parking Reductions).
C. Use Changes. Changes in use that increase the total parking demand from existing legal uses that are nonconforming because they do not meet current parking requirements may be allowed so long as the number of spaces equal to the difference between the number required by the previous use and the number required by the new use is provided, in addition to all spaces already provided for the previous use. The existing parking shall be maintained. If the number of existing parking spaces is greater than the requirements for such use, the number of spaces in excess of the prescribed minimum may be counted toward meeting the parking requirements for the addition, enlargement, or change in use. A change in occupancy is not considered a change in use unless the new occupant is in a different use classification than the former occupant. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.72.070 Bicycle parking standards.
A. Applicability. 
    1. The provisions of this section shall apply to:
        a. New multi-unit residential developments, nonresidential developments, and community and institutional facilities.
        b. Existing nonresidential developments that involve a change in use. A change in occupancy is not considered a change in use unless the new occupant is in a different use classification than the former occupant.
        c. Existing multi-unit residential and nonresidential developments that involve expansion, intensification, addition, or any other changes to the site requiring planning approval or a building permit.
    2. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
        a. Single-unit residential dwellings, or accessory dwelling units.
        b. Any site where there is less than two thousand five hundred square feet of gross building area.
B. Required Bicycle Spaces. Parking for bicycles shall be provided in accordance with Table 3-6: Required Bicycle Parking, unless exempted through subsection D (Alternative Compliance) of this section.
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
|                                   Table 3-6: Required Bicycle Parking                                    |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
|        Land Use        |          Example           |      Standard      |  Short Term   |   Long Term   |
|                        |                            | (Number of Bicycle |               |               |
|                        |                            |  Parking Spaces)   |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Residential            | All residential            | 2 per unit, plus   | Guest spaces  | 2 per unit    |
|                        | housing types              | 1 guest per        |               |               |
|                        |                            | every 5 units      |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Residential—Group      | Fraternity/sorority,       | 1 per bed          | 25%           | 75%           |
| living                 | co-op housing              |                    |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Lodging                | Hotel, motel,              | 1 per 10 guest     | 50%           | 50%           |
|                        | homeless shelters          | rooms              |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Restaurant—Quick       | Deli, coffee               | 1 per 150 sf       | 75%           | 25%           |
| serve                  | shop, bar/tasting          |                    |               |               |
|                        | rooms                      |                    |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Restaurant—Sit         | Restaurant, accessory      | 1 per 500 sf       | 75%           | 25%           |
| down                   | dining areas               |                    |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| General Retail         | Grocery store,             | 1 per 1,000 sf     | 75%           | 25%           |
| and Personal           | hardware store,            |                    |               |               |
| Services               | personal services,         |                    |               |               |
|                        | handicraft                 |                    |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Office and Financial   | General office,            | 1 per 1,500 sf     | 75%           | 25%           |
| Institutions           | medical, clinic,           |                    |               |               |
|                        | research and               |                    |               |               |
|                        | development,               |                    |               |               |
|                        | banks                      |                    |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Food and beverage manufacturing,                    | 1 per 2,000 sf     | 25%           | 75%           |
| woodworking                                         |                    |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Large Scale Commercial | Garden supply,             | 1 per 2,500 sf     | 75%           | 25%           |
| Retail and Services    | furniture stores,          |                    |               |               |
|                        | repair shops,              |                    |               |               |
|                        | auto dealership            |                    |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Industrial and         | Warehousing,               | 1 per 7,500 sf     | 25%           | 75%           |
| Hospitals              | manufacturing,             |                    |               |               |
|                        | hospitals                  |                    |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Shopping Center        | Mix of personal            | 20% of motor       | 75%           | 25%           |
|                        | services, retail,          | vehicle spaces     |               |               |
|                        | restaurants,               | required           |               |               |
|                        | offices                    |                    |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Civic, Cultural,       | Library or museum,         | 20% of motor       | 75%           | 25%           |
| Public and Religious   | places of public           | vehicle spaces     |               |               |
| Assembly               | or religious               | required           |               |               |
|                        | assembly                   |                    |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Theater, health clubs, gymnastics,                  | 40% of motor       | 75%           | 25%           |
| yoga, martial arts, etc.                            | vehicle spaces     |               |               |
|                                                     | required           |               |               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Educational Facilities | Schools, day               | As determined by the director                      |
|                        | care                       |                                                    |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Transportation         | Parking Structures,        | As determined by the director                      |
| Facilities             | Transit Stations/Terminals |                                                    |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Outdoor Recreation     | Parks, sports              | As determined by the director                      |
|                        | fields, community          |                                                    |
|                        | gardens                    |                                                    |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Downtown (C-D)         | Includes all               | Apply same standards for land uses above when      |
| Zone                   | nonresidential             | feasible. Facilities may be shared or expanded     |
|                        | land use types             | in close proximity, as determined by the director. |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
| Notes:                                                                                                   |
| 1. sf = square feet of gross floor area                                                                  |
| 2. Minimum Requirements. All nonresidential uses shall provide a minimum                                 |
| of two bicycle parking spaces per site. In the case of multi-tenant nonresidential                       |
| buildings, minimum required bicycle parking shall be two spaces per unit.                                |
| Alternative compliance may supersede this requirement.                                                   |
| 3. Mixed-Use and Mix of Uses. When there are two or more separate primary                                |
| uses on a site, the required bicycle parking for the site is the sum of                                  |
| the required parking for the individual primary uses.                                                    |
| 4. Short-term and long-term percentages listed in this table are intended                                |
| as guidelines subject to a final determination by the director.                                          |
+------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+---------------+---------------+
C. Required Bicycle Parking Location and Standards. 
    1. General. All bicycle parking spaces shall be provided on the same parcel as the building or use to which such spaces are required, unless the city has established programs allowing for shared parking arrangements at bicycle corrals. All short-term bicycle spaces shall be located at the ground floor level and near or within visual site distance of building entrances.
    2. Downtown Parking District—All Nonresidential Uses. Businesses and developments within the downtown parking district are not required to provide bicycle parking on site if adequate on-site space is not available, as determined by the director. The city shall permit required bicycle parking within the public right-of-way for the downtown parking district area in locations and amounts determined by the director. Downtown multi-unit residential developments shall comply with the requirements of this section.
D. Alternative Compliance. Alternative compliance, as established in this subsection, may be applied to all land use classifications.
    1. Upon written request by the applicant, the director may approve alternative compliance from the provisions of this section through an approved director’s action (Chapter 17.108: Director’s Action), which may include, but is not limited to, a reduction or deviation in the number, type, or location of the required bicycle parking, and may include a waiver of the requirement.
    2. Considerations used in the determination may include, but are not limited to:
        a. Physical site planning constraints;
        b. Proximity to existing bicycle parking;
        c. Projects that cannot be classified into the provided land use categories;
        d. Provision of enhanced bicycle facilities provided in the development;
        e. Inclusion of the site within a larger development for which adequate bicycle parking is already provided;
        f. Unforeseen circumstances or individual land use changes. (Ord. 1657 § 16, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.72.080 Motorcycle parking standards.
Each use or development that requires ten or more motor vehicle parking spaces shall provide facilities for parking motorcycles at the rate of one space for each twenty car spaces. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.72.090 Parking and driveway design and development standards.
A. Requirements. Parking and driveway design and requirements shall be as provided in the parking standards adopted by council resolution.
B. Location of Parking. 
    1. Residential Uses. Required parking spaces serving nonresidential uses shall be located on the same lot as the use they serve or in an off-site parking facility as provided in subsection (B)(3) (Off-Site Parking Facilities) of this section. If located in an off-site parking facility, a parking agreement shall be filed as provided in subsection (B)(3)(b) (Parking Agreement) of this section. Refer to Section 17.76.040 (Front Yard Parking) for additional residential parking location regulations associated with single-unit residential dwellings and accessory dwelling units.
    2. Nonresidential Uses. Required parking spaces serving nonresidential uses shall be located on the same lot as the use they serve or in an off-site parking facility as provided in subsection (B)(3) (Off-Site Parking Facilities) of this section.
    3. Off-Site Parking Facilities. Parking facilities for uses other than single-unit dwellings, duplexes, and accessory dwelling units may be provided off site with approval of a Minor Use Permit, provided the following conditions are met:
        a. Location. 
            i. Residential Uses. Any off-site parking facility must be located within one hundred feet, along a pedestrian route, of the unit or use served.
            ii. Nonresidential Uses. Any off-site parking facility must be located within four hundred feet, along a pedestrian route, of the primary entrance containing the use(s) for which the parking is required.
        b. Parking Agreement. A written agreement between the landowner(s) and the city in a form satisfactory to the city attorney shall be executed and recorded in the office of the county recorder. The agreement shall include:
            i. A guarantee among the landowner(s) for access to and use of the parking facility; and
            ii. A guarantee that the spaces to be provided will be maintained and reserved for the uses served for as long as such uses are in operation.
C. Tandem Parking. 
    1. Residential Uses. For residential uses, when parking spaces are identified for the exclusive use of occupants of a designated dwelling, required spaces may be arranged in tandem (that is, one space behind the other) subject to director’s review and approval of director’s action (Chapter 17.108: Director’s Action). Tandem parking is intended to allow for needed flexibility on constrained lots or where tandem parking is consistent with the existing neighborhood pattern and allows for deviations from minimum parking space size regulations of subsection A (Requirements) of this section. For single-unit dwellings, required parking may be provided in tandem configuration where safe and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
    2. Hotel and Restaurant Projects (New and Existing) in the C-D Zone. Tandem parking may be used for hotel and restaurant development in the C-D zone where parking service is provided, subject to approval of a director’s action (Chapter 17.108: Director’s Action) and a parking management plan approved by the director.
    3. New Office Uses. Tandem parking may be considered for office development if all of the following requirements are satisfied:
        a. With review of the location and design by the director’s action, where adequate maneuverability and access arrangements are provided; and
        b. When the tandem spaces are set aside for the exclusive use of on-site employees; and
        c. Where the total number of tandem spaces does not exceed thirty percent of the total parking provided for projects that require ten vehicle parking spaces or less, and fifteen percent of the total parking provided for projects that require eleven or more vehicle parking spaces; and
        d. With a parking management plan approved by the public works and community development directors to ensure that proper management and oversight of the use of the proposed tandem spaces will occur.
    4. Existing Office Uses. For existing office development where there is a desire to upgrade or modify the parking layout to increase efficiency or better meet standards, and review by the architectural review commission would not be required, the new tandem parking spaces would be subject to director’s review and approval of director’s action, and the additional finding that adequate maneuverability and access arrangements are provided.
D. Mechanical Parking Lifts. In commercial zones and multi-unit developments and subject to director’s review and approval of director’s action, mechanical parking lifts may be used to satisfy all or a portion of vehicle parking requirements. Up to twenty-five percent of the required minimum amount of spaces may be required to be provided as nonmechanical parking for lift systems unable to accommodate a range of vehicles, including trucks, vans, SUVs, or large sedans. Application submittals shall include any information deemed necessary by the director to determine parking can adequately and feasibly be provided and that the following performance standards can be met and the following findings for approval can be made:
    1. The use of mechanical lift parking results in superior design and implementation of city goals and policies for infill development.
    2. In existing developments and established neighborhoods, mechanical lift parking will be adequately screened and compatible with the character of surrounding development; and, in new developments, mechanical lift parking shall comply with community design guidelines and be compatible and appropriately considered with overall building and site design.
    3. Mechanical lift parking systems shall comply with all development standards including but not limited to height and setback requirements and parking and driveway standards, except for minimum parking stall sizes, which are established by lift specifications.
    4. There exists adequate agreement running with the land that mechanical parking systems will be safely operated and maintained in continual operation except for limited periods of maintenance.
    5. There are no circumstances of the site or development or particular model or type of mechanical lift system that could result in significant impacts to those living or working on the site or in the vicinity.
E. Exceptions. Subject to director’s review and approval of director’s action, the director may grant exceptions to the standards subject to appropriate conditions and upon finding that:
    1. The exception will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the driveway or parking limitations upon other properties in the vicinity;
    2. The exception will not adversely affect the health, safety or general welfare of persons working or residing in the vicinity; and
    3. The exception is reasonably necessary for the applicant’s full enjoyment of uses allowed upon the applicant’s property. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.72.100 On-site loading standards.
A. Required Loading Spaces in Certain Zones. In the C-R, C-C, C-S, M, and BP zones, every new building and every building enlarged by more than five thousand square feet of gross floor area that is to be occupied by a manufacturing—heavy establishment; manufacturing—light establishment; warehousing, storage, and distribution facility; retail sales; eating and drinking establishment; general market; hotel; hospital; funeral parlor and interment service; or other use similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles or trucks of material or merchandise, shall provide off-street loading and unloading areas as follows:
+------------------------------+---------------------------+
|  Table 3-7: Loading Spaces Required by Gross Floor Area  |
+------------------------------+---------------------------+
| Gross Floor Area of Building | Number of Spaces Required |
+------------------------------+---------------------------+
| 1,000 to 9,999               | None                      |
+------------------------------+---------------------------+
| 10,000 to 29,999             | 1                         |
+------------------------------+---------------------------+
| 30,000 to 99,999             | 2                         |
+------------------------------+---------------------------+
| 100,000 and more             | 3                         |
+------------------------------+---------------------------+
B. Reduction in Number of Loading Spaces Required. The loading space requirement may be waived by director’s action if the director finds that the applicant has satisfactorily demonstrated that, due to the nature of the proposed use, such loading space will not be needed.
C. Additional Loading Spaces Required. The required number of loading spaces may be increased to ensure that trucks will not be loaded, unloaded, or stored on public streets. Such requirement shall be based on the anticipated frequency of truck pick-ups and deliveries and of the truck storage requirements of the use for which the on-site loading spaces are required.
D. Loading Space Location. All required loading berths shall be located on the same site as the use served. No loading berth for vehicles over two-ton capacity shall be closer than fifty feet to any property in a residential district unless completely enclosed by building walls, or a uniformly solid fence or wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet in height. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within twenty-five feet of the nearest point of any street intersection.
E. Minimum Size. Each on-site loading space required by this section shall not be less than ten feet wide, twenty-five feet long, and fourteen feet high, exclusive of driveways for ingress and egress, maneuvering areas and setbacks. The minimum size requirement may be modified by director’s action if the director finds that the applicant has satisfactorily demonstrated that, due to the nature of the proposed use, such size will not be needed.
F. Driveways for Ingress and Egress and Maneuvering Areas. Each on-site loading space required by this section shall be provided with driveways for ingress and egress and maneuvering space of the same type and meeting the same criteria required for on-site parking spaces. Truck-maneuvering areas shall not encroach into required parking areas, travelways, or street rights-of-way. This requirement may be modified by director’s action if the director finds that sufficient space is provided so that truck-maneuvering areas will not interfere with traffic and pedestrian circulation. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.74 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

Sections:
17.74.010    Purpose and application.
17.74.020    General standard and special conditions.
17.74.030    Air contaminants.
17.74.040    Discharges to water or public sewer system.
17.74.050    Energy conservation.
17.74.060    Hazardous materials.
17.74.070    Heat and humidity.
17.74.080    Light and glare.
17.74.090    Noise.
17.74.100    Solid waste.
17.74.110    Vibration.

17.74.010 Purpose and application.
A. Purpose. This chapter establishes performance standards intended to guard against the use of any property or structure in any zone in any manner which would create any dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable condition or element that adversely affects the health and safety of residents, the community, and the surrounding area and adjoining premises.
B. Applicability. The minimum requirements in this chapter apply to all land uses in all zones, unless otherwise specified.
C. Exceptions. Compliance may be waived by the review authority if a condition created under prior ordinances physically precludes the reasonable application of the standards. Additional categorical exemptions from compliance with the performance standards are as follows:
    1. Temporary Activity. Festivals and other special events with approved temporary use permits or other required permits, where such activities otherwise comply with other applicable provisions of these zoning regulations.
    2. Emergency Activities. Any emergency activity on the part of the city, any other government agency, or a private party.
    3. Construction Activity. Temporary construction activity is exempted except where such activity is explicitly regulated by other regulations of the municipal code. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.74.020 General standard and special conditions.
A. Land or buildings shall not be used or occupied in a manner creating any dangerous, injurious, or noxious fire, explosive, or other hazard that would adversely affect the surrounding area.
B. These performance standards are general requirements and shall not be construed to prevent the review authority from imposing, as part of project approval, specific conditions that may be more restrictive, in order to meet the intent of these regulations. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.74.030 Air contaminants.
A. No use or activity shall be conducted without first obtaining any required permit from the county air pollution control district.
B. Uses shall be conducted to prevent dust or other airborne material from crossing property lines. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.74.040 Discharges to water or public sewer system.
A. Discharges to groundwater or waterways, whether direct or indirect, shall conform with the requirements of the city’s stormwater quality ordinance contained in Chapter 12.08 and city standards, as well as requirements of the State and Regional Water Quality Control Boards, the California Department of Fish and Wildlife, and any other regulatory agency with jurisdiction over the activity.
B. Discharges to the city sewer system shall conform to Article II of Chapter 13.08. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.74.050 Energy conservation.
The use of conventional energy sources for space heating and cooling, water heating, and illumination shall be minimized by means of proper design and orientation, including provision and protection of solar exposure. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.74.060 Hazardous materials.
The use, handling, storage and transportation of hazardous and extremely hazardous materials shall require a minor use permit and shall comply with the provisions of the California Hazardous Materials Regulations and the California Fire and Building Codes, as well as the laws and regulations of the California Department of Toxic Substances Control and the County Environmental Health Agency. Activities, processes, and uses shall not generate or emit any fissionable or radioactive materials into the atmosphere, a sewage system, or onto the ground. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.74.070 Heat and humidity.
A. Heat. No activity shall be conducted which causes radiant heat or a stream of heated air resulting in a temperature increase of more than twenty degrees Fahrenheit at any property line or any public right-of-way.
B. Humidity. Every existing or proposed use, activity, or process or portion thereof producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air shall be carried on in such a manner that the humidity caused is not perceptible at or beyond any property line. The presence of humidity in the form of steam or moist air within the boundaries of a property shall not in itself constitute a violation of this section. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.74.080 Light and glare.
A. Shielding. Every existing or proposed use, activity, or process or portion thereof producing glare shall be shielded in such a manner that the glare is not perceptible at or beyond any property line.
B. Reflective Materials. Highly reflective wall surface material and mirror glass is prohibited if located within view of vehicles in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.74.090 Noise.
No use shall be established nor any activity conducted which violates the standards of Chapter 9.12: Noise Control. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.74.100 Solid waste.
Solid wastes shall be handled and stored so as to prevent nuisances, health, and fire hazards, and to facilitate recycling. Suitable containers shall be provided to prevent blowing or scattering of trash by animals. Suitable space and containers shall be provided to encourage on-site sorting and collection of recyclables. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.74.110 Vibration.
Subject to the exceptions in Section 9.12.100 (Exceptions), no activity shall be conducted that causes ground vibrations perceptible without the aid of instruments by a reasonable person at the property line. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.76 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS

Sections:
17.76.010    Purpose.
17.76.020    General requirements.
17.76.030    Front yard paving.
17.76.040    Front yard parking.
17.76.050    Fences, walls, and hedges.
17.76.060    Neighborhood preservation.
17.76.070    Prohibited acts.
17.76.080    Private cause of action.
17.76.090    Rooftop uses.
17.76.100    Screening.

17.76.010 Purpose.
The quality of life in this city is tied to the character and conditions of its neighborhoods. The purpose of these property maintenance standards is to protect the appearance, integrity, and character of the community. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.76.020 General requirements.
The provisions of this chapter apply to all zones in the city, except as otherwise specified. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.76.030 Front yard paving.
No more than forty percent of any residential front yard (see definition of “front yard” in Section 17.158.016—F Definitions), not to exceed twenty-six feet in width, may be covered by concrete or other impervious material, including driveways, patio areas, walkways, and other landscape features. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.76.040 Front yard parking.
A. Purpose and Application. 
    1. The purpose of these regulations is to preserve the residential character of streetscapes in the city’s neighborhoods. The expansion of parking in front yard (see definition of “front yard” in Article 9) areas off driveways interferes with the pattern of building masses and open areas within neighborhoods, creates vehicle clutter, and results in excessive vehicle parking, which has the effect of creating small parking lots in front yard areas that are intended to remain as open areas within neighborhoods.
    2. These regulations apply to vehicle parking within the front yard areas as defined in Section 17.158.016—F Definitions and shown in Figure 3-15: Front Yard, including the street side yard on corner lots. No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, unless consistent with the provisions of this section.Figure 3-15. Front Yard
    [IMAGE: <17.76.040_Fig3-15.png>]
B. Allowed Front Yard Parking. Vehicles parked in front yard areas of residential lots shall conform to all of the following requirements:
    1. Vehicle parking is allowed on driveways leading to garage parking or on other approved off-street parking pads and spaces.
    2. Vehicles may only be parked in areas within the driveway width established to serve approved parking spaces, as defined in city parking and driveway standards, or on an approved off-street parking pad as allowed by subsection D (Single Car Garages and Single Car Parking) of this section. Vehicles shall be parked completely within the driveway or parking pad surface with all tires completely on the driveway surface.
    3. Vehicles may be parked in tandem (one vehicle behind another), provided there is sufficient space that no part of the vehicle overhangs the property line or sidewalk.Figure 3-16. Allowed Front Yard Parking
    [IMAGE: <17.76.040_Fig3-16.png>]
C. Prohibited Front Yard Parking. 
    1. Vehicles shall not be parked outside the driveway width area leading to approved garage or parking spaces or other approved parking pad or in any other manner inconsistent with subsection B (Allowed Front Yard Parking) of this section. (See Figure 3-17: Prohibited Front Yard Parking.)Figure 3-17. Prohibited Front Yard Parking
    [IMAGE: <17.76.040_Fig3-17.png>]
    2. Parking where vehicles are “straddling” or are partially on the driveway or parking pad and partially on an unpaved or paved surface next to the driveway is prohibited. (See Figure 3-18: Vehicles Straddling Driveway Prohibited.)Figure 3-18. Vehicles Straddling Driveway Prohibited
    [IMAGE: <17.76.040_Fig3-18.png>]
    3. Vehicles shall not be parked diagonally or in any other configuration that would require vehicle circulation outside the width of the driveway area, except as provided in Section 17.72.090(C) (Tandem Parking). (See Figure 3-19: Diagonally Parked Vehicles Prohibited.)Figure 3-19. Diagonally Parked Vehicles Prohibited
    [IMAGE: <17.76.040_Fig3-19.png>]
D. Single Car Garages and Single Car Parking. Residential properties that have parking configurations of a single car garage or single car surface parking similar to Figure 3-20: Single Car Driveway may establish an additional parking pad between the driveway and the nearest property line upon approval of a construction permit and conformance with the following requirements:
    1. The parking pad shall meet minimum parking space dimensions of parking and driveway standards to ensure adequate space for vehicle parking on the driveway and adjacent parking pad.
    2. The parking pad shall meet minimum depth requirements of the parking and driveway standards (typically eighteen and one-half feet) and vehicles may not be parked to overhang the sidewalk or property line into the public right-of-way.
    3. The parking pad space shall be surfaced with alternative paving to achieve aesthetic and environmental objectives. Examples of alternative paving surfaces include, but are not limited to interlocking pavers, eco-block, porous AC paving, or cobblestone. Parking pads for single car garages and single car parking established prior to the adoption of this section may be exempted from this requirement.
    4. Vehicle Circulation. There shall be adequate driveway ramp access such that vehicles can access the parking pad location from the public right-of-way without crossing over sidewalk area or other public improvements outside of the driveway ramp area including transitions.Figure 3-20. Single Car Driveway
    [IMAGE: <17.76.040_Fig3-20.png>]
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.76.050 Fences, walls, and hedges.
All fencing and walls that are visible from a public right-of-way shall be maintained so that fencing materials and support are structurally sound, with no missing materials. Where hedges are used as screening, trimming or pruning shall be employed as necessary to maintain the maximum allowed height. Fences and walls shall be maintained and shall stand upright and shall not lean. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.76.060 Neighborhood preservation.
A. Generally. It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person, firm, or corporation owning, leasing, occupying, or having possession of any private property in the city to maintain such property in such a manner that any of the conditions described in this section are found to exist.
B. Trash Receptacles. Trash, green waste, and recycling receptacles shall not be within the front yard (see definition of “front yard” in Section 17.158.016—F Definitions) area except as provided in Chapter 8.04, which states:
Trash and garbage containers shall not be placed adjacent to the street for pickup more than twenty-four hours before pickup time, and such containers shall be removed within the twelve-hour period following pickup. Trash and recycling containers shall not be placed adjacent to the street for pickup before five p.m. or the close of business on the day preceding pickup, whichever is later. Such containers shall be removed before ten a.m. following pickup.
Trash, green waste, and recycling receptacles shall be completely screened from public view from the public right-of-way that abuts the front yard by a fence, landscaping, or wall that is otherwise allowed by zoning and building codes. Multi-unit residential developments that are approved for individual waste wheelers shall remove waste wheelers from the common area visible from the public right-of-way in compliance with this section. Multi-unit residential developments with shared bin service shall utilize approved enclosure locations consistent with project approvals.
C. Abandoned Buildings. Buildings that are abandoned, partially destroyed or damaged or left in an unreasonable state of partial construction, and whose owners have been notified by the city that the property has been determined to be in violation of this section. An abandoned building means any building or structure which is not occupied, used, or secured for a period of twelve months or more. A partially destroyed or damaged building means any building or structure in which twenty-five percent or more of the structure has been destroyed or damaged and not repaired or replaced for a period of twelve months or more. An unreasonable state of partial construction is defined as any unfinished building or structure that has been in the course of construction for two years or more, and the condition of this unfinished building or structure or accumulation of construction materials substantially detracts from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood.
D. Paint and Finish Materials. Paint or finish material on the exterior surface of a building or other structure that has become substantially deteriorated, damaged, or unsightly so as to significantly detract from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood. For the purposes of this chapter, “substantially” shall be defined as the absence or deterioration of a required protective covering exceeding twenty-five percent of the exterior surface area visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent properties, or five hundred square feet, whichever is less, including, but not limited to, chipping, curling, damaged, or missing paint. Exterior surfaces shall include gutters, downspouts, trim, doors, windows, fences, and walls.
E. Structures and Machines. Broken, deteriorated, neglected, abandoned, or substantially defaced structures, equipment, machinery, ponds, pools, or excavations visually impacting on the neighborhood or presenting a risk to public safety or nuisance attractive to children. For the purposes of this chapter, “nuisance attractive to children” shall mean any condition, instrumentality, or machine located in a building or on premises which is or may be unsafe or dangerous to children by reason of their inability to appreciate the peril therein, and which may reasonably be expected to attract children to the premises and risk injury by playing with, in, or on it.
F. Parking Areas. Parking lots, driveways, paths, or other paved surfaces, except when located in a rear or side yard of a single unit dwelling, which contain substantial cracks, potholes, or other deficiencies posing a substantial risk of harm to the public.
G. Vegetation. Trees, weeds, or other types of vegetation that are dead, decayed, infested, diseased, overgrown, or harbor rats or vermin and are visible from a public right-of-way. For the purpose of this chapter, “overgrown” is limited to lawns or weeds over twelve inches in height. Creek, riparian areas, open space, grassland communities, or other sensitive habitat and unique resource areas as defined by the general plan are subject to separate regulations.
H. Graffiti. Buildings, structures, or other surfaces upon which graffiti exists. Graffiti, as used in this chapter, shall mean defacement, damage, or destruction by the presence of paint, ink, chalk, dye, or other similar substance or by carving, etching, or other engraving.
I. Violations. Any violation of the provisions of a minor use permit, conditional use permit, planned development permit, architectural review approval, variance, or other land use entitlement or land use permit.
J. Public Nuisance. Maintenance of property in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance, as defined by Civil Code Section 3480. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.76.070 Prohibited acts.
A. Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation that owns, occupies, or controls property in the city to maintain or fail to maintain such property in violation of this chapter.
B. Type of Offense. Any person who violates Section 17.76.100 (Screening), 17.76.030 (Front Yard Paving), 17.76.040 (Front Yard Parking), 17.70.150(B) (Furniture), 17.76.050 (Fences, Walls, and Hedges), 17.76.060(B) (Trash Receptacles) or 17.76.060(D) through (H) (Neighborhood Preservation) shall be guilty of an infraction. Violations shall be punishable as contained in Chapter 1.12. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or constituted to prevent the city from commencing any civil proceeding otherwise authorized by law for the declaration or abatement of a public nuisance. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.76.080 Private cause of action.
If the owner of any premises fails or neglects to comply with the provisions of this chapter, it shall constitute a public nuisance in compliance with Section 8.24.020(B). Any aggrieved party may, in addition to any other right or remedy he or she may possess either at law or in equity, pursue a private cause of action to abate a public nuisance, as specified in Section 8.24.190. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.76.090 Rooftop uses.
A. Height. The height of any railings or parapets, exterior stairways, and other access features such as stairwells or elevators for access to roof decks shall not exceed the maximum allowable building height for the structure, including exceptions allowed by Section 17.70.080 (Height Measurement and Exceptions).
B. Furniture. No furniture or equipment, including chairs, mattresses, couches, recreational furniture, or other materials may be placed on any roof, patio cover, carport, shed top, or similar structure, except for the following:
    1. Roof-top equipment, including antennas, satellite dishes, masts, poles, heating, ventilation, air conditioning equipment, and similar devices that are designed for roof-top installation, and were lawfully installed, may remain on the roof as long as they are properly maintained.
    2. Furniture or other equipment may be placed on a roof deck or other similar place that was lawfully designed and created for such use. All such furniture and accessories located on a roof deck shall be secured as necessary to prevent wind damage or dislocation.
C. Performance Standards. 
    1. Lighting. Lighting for rooftop uses shall be appropriately designed, located, and shielded to not negatively impact any adjacent residential uses.
    2. Noise. All rooftop decks shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts to surrounding properties in compliance with the city’s noise regulations.
    3. Hours of Operation. 
        a. C-N and O Zones. Nonresidential rooftop uses shall be allowed to operate from seven a.m. to eight p.m. Operation outside of these allowed hours shall require a minor use permit to ensure that the commercial rooftop use will not negatively impact surrounding residential uses.
        b. All Other Nonresidential Zones. Nonresidential rooftop uses shall be allowed to operate from seven a.m. to ten p.m. Operation outside of these allowed hours shall require a minor use permit to ensure that the commercial rooftop use will not negatively impact surrounding residential uses.
        c. General. Rooftop decks and activities shall also comply with restrictions for development subject to edge conditions regulations (Section 17.70.050: Edge Conditions). Commercial hours of operation for rooftop uses also may be restricted upon evidence of a substantiated complaint. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.76.100 Screening.
A. Screening of Visible Storage and Maintenance. Parking, storage, stockpiling, or maintenance of any of the following items on private property shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Objects and activities will be considered “screened” when they are either not visible from a public right-of-way or behind and below a solid six-foot-high fence, wall, or hedge where such fence, wall, or hedge is otherwise allowed by zoning and building codes.
    1. Furniture and Other Equipment. Furniture or other equipment, including but not limited to stuffed couches and chairs, household appliances, sinks, heaters, boilers, tanks, machinery, other household or commercial equipment, or any parts thereof.
    2. Materials. Building materials, including but not limited to packing boxes, lumber, dirt piles, wood, landscape materials, or debris.
    3. Recreational Vehicles and Related Devices. 
        a. Any airplane or other aircraft, or any parts thereof.
        b. Special mobile equipment or parts thereof, such as tar wagons, water trailers, and similar devices as defined in Section 575 of the Vehicle Code.
        c. Boats, trailers, camper shells, recreational vehicles, jet skis or similar devices, or parts from any of these items, unless exempted by Section 17.86.210 (Recreational Vehicles: Use as Dwelling; Parked on a Private Lot).
    4. Exceptions. The following may be allowed in front yards under the noted circumstances:
        a. Waste haulers and recycling containers may be placed for pickup in compliance with Chapter 8.04 and Section 17.76.060 (Neighborhood Preservation).
        b. Portable on demand storage containers (PODS) used for the temporary storage of personal property owned or rented by the occupants may be allowed for a period not to exceed one week.
        c. Building materials, vehicles, equipment, or construction tools may be placed in yards during construction with a valid building permit.
        d. Personal property owned or rented by the occupants may be repaired, washed, cleaned, and serviced, subject to any other relevant regulations, provided that vehicles are parked in a driveway and that all work is completed within 72 hours.
        e. Storage, repair, and maintenance of vehicles or other equipment may be allowed in commercial or agricultural areas visible from a public right-of-way where these activities are an integral part of the commercial business and are conducted in compliance with all other limitations on that business.
        f. Barbecues and furniture that is designed and intended for outdoor use may remain on a porch or in a walled front patio where the walls are designed in compliance with fence height regulations.
        g. Recreational vehicles and trailers with current licenses may be parked in driveways consistent with Section 17.86.210 (Recreational Vehicles: Use as Dwelling; Parked on a Private Lot).
        h. Parking of personal, operable vehicles may be parked in compliance with Section 17.76.040 (Front Yard Parking).
B. Screening of Mechanical and Electrical Equipment. All exterior mechanical and electrical equipment shall be screened or incorporated into the design of buildings so as not to be visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential zones. Equipment to be screened includes, but is not limited to, all roof-mounted equipment, air conditioners, heaters, utility meters, cable equipment, telephone entry boxes, backflow preventions, irrigation control valves, electrical transformers, pull boxes, and all ducting for air conditioning, heating, and blower systems. Screening materials shall be consistent with the exterior colors and materials of the building. Exceptions to this section are subject to the director’s review and approval via director’s action (Chapter 17.108: Director’s Action). In granting a request for an exception, the director shall find screening is infeasible due to health and safety or utility requirements.
C. Screening of Outdoor Sales and Storage. Screening shall be required for all outdoor sales and storage as set forth in subsection A (Screening of Visible Storage and Maintenance) of this section. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.78 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION

Sections:
17.78.010    Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose, and methods.
17.78.020    Definitions.
17.78.030    General provisions.
17.78.040    Administration.
17.78.050    Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
17.78.060    Variance procedure for floodplains.

17.78.010 Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose, and methods.
A. Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the council does hereby adopt these floodplain management regulations.
B. Findings of Fact. 
    1. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
    2. These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards that increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses.
C. Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land within flood-prone, mudslide (i.e., mudflow), and/or flood-related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to:
    1. Protect human life and health;
    2. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
    3. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
    4. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
    5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
    6. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;
    7. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
    8. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.
D. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. To accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to:
    1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or that result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;
    2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
    3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
    4. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development that may increase flood damage;
    5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards in other areas; and
    6. These regulations take precedence over any less restrictive conflicting local laws, ordinances, and codes. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.78.020 Definitions.
Words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application, and as defined in Chapter 17.158 (General Definitions) under “Floodplain Management Regulations.” (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.78.030 General provisions.
A. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards and where specifically identified, XB zones, within the jurisdiction of the city.
B. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the “Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of San Luis Obispo, California in San Luis Obispo County” dated October 1978, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated April 1979, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum areas of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas, including local experience and historical data which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the council by the floodplain administrator to be included in the regulated area. The study, FIRMs, and FBFMs are on file at the Department of Public Works, 919 Palm Street.
C. Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing here shall prevent the council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
D. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
E. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
    1. Considered as minimum requirements;
    2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
    3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
F. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses allowed within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the council, any officer or employee thereof, the state, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.78.040 Administration.
A. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The public works director or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions.
B. Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include but not be limited to the following:
    1. Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine:
        a. Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures;
        b. The applicant was advised other local, state or federal permits may be required;
        c. The site is reasonably safe from flooding;
        d. The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city;
        e. If the proposed development is within a designated infill area, special floodplain management zone, or the Mid-Higuera Specific Plan Area as defined by the Drainage Design Manual, that the more stringent requirements of the manual have been met; and
        f. All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.
    2. Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures. 
        a. Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, “Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings,” develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining “market value.”
        b. Ensure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community development department staff.
    3. Review, Use, and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in compliance with Section 17.78.030(B) (Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal or State agency, or other source, in order to administer Section 17.78.050 (Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction).
    NOTE: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication FEMA 265, “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas—A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations” dated July 1995.
    4. Notification of Other Agencies. 
        a. Alteration or Relocation of a Watercourse. 
            i. Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;
            ii. Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and
            iii. Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained.
        b. Base Flood Elevation Changes Due to Physical Alterations. 
            i. Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or ensure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR).
            ii. All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.
            Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data.
        c. Changes in Corporate Boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.
    5. Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:
        a. Certification required by Sections 17.78.050(A)(3) and 17.78.050(D) (lowest floor elevations);
        b. Certification required by Section 17.78.050(A)(3) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);
        c. Certification required by Section 17.78.050(A)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);
        d. Certification of elevation required by Section 17.78.050(C)(1) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards);
        e. Certification required by Section 17.78.050(F)(2) (floodway encroachments); and
        f. Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to FEMA.
    6. Map Determination. Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection (D) of this section.
    7. Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 17.78.030(C) (Compliance).
    8. Biennial Report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA.
    9. Planning. Ensure the general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives here.
    10. Nonconversion of Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor. To ensure that the areas below one foot above the base flood elevation (BFE) shall be used solely for parking vehicles, limited storage, or access to the building and not be finished for use as human habitation without first becoming fully compliant with the floodplain management ordinance in effect at the time of conversion, the floodplain administrator shall:
        a. Determine which applicants for new construction and/or substantial improvements have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are five feet or higher;
        b. Obtain a “Conversion Agreement for Construction Within Flood Hazard Areas” or equivalent between the property owner and the city. The agreement shall be recorded with the county of San Luis Obispo recorder as a deed restriction. The conversion agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the floodplain administrator and city attorney and:
            i. Condition the property that there shall be no conversion of enclosed areas below the lowest floor elevation without first becoming fully compliant with this chapter and other city requirements.
            ii. Have the authority granted to the city to inspect any area of a structure below the base flood elevation to ensure compliance upon prior notice of at least seventy-two hours.
C. Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 17.78.030(B) (Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard). Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information:
    1. Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:
        a. Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location;
        b. Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities;
        c. Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities;
        d. Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;
        e. Base flood elevation information as specified in Sections 17.78.030(B) (Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard) or subsection (B)(3) (Review, Use, and Development of Other Base Flood Data) of this section;
        f. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and
        g. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 17.78.050(A)(3) (Elevation and Floodproofing) and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93.
    2. Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 17.78.050(A)(3) (Elevation and Floodproofing).
    3. For a crawlspace foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 17.78.050(A)(3) (Elevation and Floodproofing) and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93.
    4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
    5. All appropriate certifications listed in subsection (B)(5) (Documentation of Floodplain Development) of this section.
D. Appeals. The council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.78.050 Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
A. Standards of Construction. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
    1. Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
    2. Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed:
        a. With flood-resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;
        b. Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
        c. With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and
        d. Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
    3. Elevation and Floodproofing. 
        a. Residential Construction. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the Building Official to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement:
            i. In AE, AH, A1-30 zones, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation.
            ii. In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
            iii. In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM [unnumbered A zone], elevated one foot above the base flood elevation; as determined under Section 17.78.040(B)(3) (Review, Use, and Development of Other Base Flood Data).
            iv. In an XB zone, above the base flood elevation.
        b. Nonresidential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with subsection (A)(3) (Elevation and Floodproofing) of this section or:
            i. Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under subsection (A)(3) (Elevation and Floodproofing) of this section, so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
            ii. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
            iii. Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of subsection (A)(3) (Elevation and Floodproofing) of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.
        c. Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria:
            i. For nonengineered openings:
                (a) Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
                (b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;
                (c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and
                (d) Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow floodwater to directly enter; or
            ii. Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.
        d. Manufactured Homes. 
            i. Manufactured homes located outside of manufactured home parks or subdivisions shall meet the elevation and floodproofing requirement in subsection (A)(3) (Elevation and Floodproofing) of this section.
            ii. Manufactured homes placed within manufactured home parks or subdivisions shall meet the standards in subsection D (Standards for Manufactured Homes Within Manufactured Home Parks or Subdivisions) of this section. Additional guidance may be found in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93.
        e. Garages and Low-Cost Accessory Structures. 
            i. Attached Garages.
                (a) A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters. See subsection (A)(3) (Elevation and Floodproofing) of this section. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood-resistant materials. See subsection (A)(2) (Construction Materials and Methods) of this section.
                (b) A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below-grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.
            ii. Detached Garages and Accessory Structures. 
                (a) Accessory structures used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 17.158.016—F Definitions, under Floodplain Management Regulations, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in compliance with the following requirements:
                    (1) Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage;
                    (2) The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials;
                    (3) The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
                    (4) Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;
                    (5) The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in subsection F (Floodways) of this section; and
                    (6) The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in compliance with subsection (A)(3) (Elevation and Floodproofing) of this section.
                (b) Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in compliance with all applicable standards in subsection A (Standards of Construction) of this section.
B. Standards for Utilities. 
    1. All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:
        a. Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and
        b. Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
    2. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
C. Standards for Subdivisions and Other Proposed Development. 
    1. All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:
        a. Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE).
        b. Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans.
        c. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator:
            i. Lowest floor elevation.
            ii. Pad elevation.
            iii. Lowest adjacent grade.
    2. All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
    3. All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
    4. All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. Standards for Manufactured Homes Within Manufactured Home Parks or Subdivisions. All manufactured homes in special flood hazard areas shall meet the anchoring standards in subsection (A)(1) (Anchoring) of this section, construction materials and methods requirements in subsection (A)(2) (Construction Materials and Methods) of this section, flood openings requirements in subsection (A)(3) (Elevation and Floodproofing) of this section, and garages and low-cost accessory structure standards in subsection (A)(3) (Elevation and Floodproofing) of this section. Manufactured homes located outside of manufactured home parks or subdivisions shall meet the elevation and floodproofing requirement in subsection (A)(3) of this section.
    1. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites located: (a) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (c) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood shall within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
    2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (D)(1) of this section shall be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:
        a. Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or
        b. Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade.
    Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the building official, to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.
E. Standards for Recreational Vehicles. 
    1. All recreational vehicles placed in zones A1-30, AH, and AE shall either:
        a. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days; or
        b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or
        c. Meet the permit requirements of Section 17.78.040(C) (Development Permit) and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (D)(1) of this section.
F. Floodways. Since floodways are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
    1. Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development, including fill, shall be allowed within zones A1-30 and AE unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city.
    2. If the proposed development is within a designated infill area, special floodplain management zone, or the Mid-Higuera Specific Plan Area as defined by the Drainage Design Manual, the more stringent requirements of the manual apply.
    3. Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
    4. If subsections (F)(1) and (F)(2) of this section are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this subsection. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.78.060 Variance procedure for floodplains.
A. Nature of Floodplain Variances. The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.
The variance criteria contained in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.
It is the duty of the council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.
B. Conditions for Variances. 
    1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level; provided, that the procedures of Sections 17.78.040 (Administration) and 17.78.050 (Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction) of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
    2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Chapter 17.158: General Definitions, under Floodplain Management Regulations) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
    3. Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
    4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary,” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this chapter.
    5. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of the floodplain administrator that:
        a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and
        b. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the County of San Luis Obispo recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
    6. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for his/her issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
C. Authority to Grant Variances. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 17.114 (Variances), the council shall be responsible for conducting public hearings on variances pertaining to the provisions of this chapter and for acting upon such variance applications.
    1. In acting upon requests for variances, the council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors and standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:
        a. Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
        b. Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
        c. Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;
        d. Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
        e. Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
        f. Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
        g. Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
        h. Relationship of the proposed use to the general plan and floodplain management program for that area;
        i. Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
        j. Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and
        k. Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.
    2. Variances shall only be issued upon a:
        a. Showing of good and sufficient cause;
        b. Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
        c. Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a public nuisance, cause fraud and victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
    3. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided, that the provisions of subsections (C)(1) through (C)(4) of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.
    4. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection B of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.80 STREET REGULATIONS

Sections:
17.80.010    Building setback lines for master plan of streets.
17.80.020    Street right-of-way dedication and improvement.

17.80.010 Building setback lines for master plan of streets.
A. Title. This section shall be known and cited as the “official building setback line ordinance” of the city.
B. Purpose—Adoption of Building Setback Lines. This section is enacted to enable adoption of official building setback lines for the city, and to provide for the designation, recording, enforcement of, and appeal from such official building setback lines.
C. Purpose—Protection of Master Street and Highway Plan. The purpose of this section is to protect the master street and highway plan adopted by the city. The street and highway plan has been adopted in order to:
    1. Serve as a general guide for the development of streets and highways;
    2. Promote the public welfare, safety, and convenience;
    3. Provide a comprehensive guide for capital outlay on street and highway improvements in the city;
    4. Provide an authentic source of information for residents and investors in the city;
    5. Obviate the menace to the public safety and the damage to property values resulting from inadequate provision of traffic thoroughfares.
D. Designation on Maps—Contents of Maps. 
    1. City Engineer. Official building setback lines shall be designated on maps drawn up by the city engineer at the request of the council or at the request of the planning commission, acting through the council.
    2. Scale. The official building setback maps shall show all buildings adjacent to the street, or proposed street, at a scale of one inch equals fifty feet, and they shall show the existing right-of-way widths, if any, as well as any proposed changes in the street. The maps shall be titled “Official Building Setback Lines of (name of street or highway).” There shall be statements of adoption by the planning commission and the council on each map.
E. City Clerk to Keep Up-to-Date Copies of Maps. 
    1. Up-to-Date Maps. The city clerk is instructed to keep up-to-date maps which shall show the streets or portions of streets upon which official building setback lines have been established.
    2. Not Recorded. The maps shall not be recorded.
F. Planning Commission Public Hearing. In order to adopt any additional building setback line maps, the planning commission shall be in receipt of the map from the city engineer and shall hold at least one public hearing thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings). The planning commission shall submit its findings in writing to the council within 90 days after the notice of the hearing.
G. Council Public Hearing. Upon receipt of the report from the planning commission, the council shall set a date for at least one public hearing and give public notice of the hearing as prescribed in Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings). At such time as the hearing is concluded by the council, it may adopt the official building setback line map as an amendment to subsection H (Maps Are Part of Section Provisions) of this section, or resubmit the map to the planning commission for further study.
H. Maps Are Part of Section Provisions. Official building setback line maps and all the notations on the maps are made a part of this section at the time of their adoption by the council, and the maps constitute subsections under this section. The centerline shown on any building setback line map is designated as the official centerline of the street.
I. Laurel Lane. The map adopted by Ordinance 48, 1957 Series, is designated as the “Official Building Setback Lines of Laurel Lane,” dated July 15, 1957, and the building setback line is forty-three feet in nonresidential zones and thirty-eight feet in residential land use districts, on both sides of the centerline shown on the map.
J. Foothill Boulevard. The map adopted by Ordinance No. 56, 1957 Series, is designated as the “Official Building Setback Lines of Foothill Boulevard,” and the building setback line is forty-three feet in nonresidential zones and thirty-eight feet in residential zones, on both sides of the centerline shown on the map, except on Sheets 2A and 3A as amended by Ordinance No. 346, 1966 Series.
K. South Street. The map adopted by Ordinance 85, 1958 Series, is designated as the “Official Building Setback Lines of South Street,” and the building setback line is forty-three in nonresidential zones and thirty-eight feet in residential zones, on both sides of the centerline shown on the map.
L. Johnson Avenue. The map adopted by Ordinance 130, 1959 Series, is designated as the “Official Building Setback Lines of Johnson Avenue,” and the building setback line is forty-three feet in commercial and manufacturing land use districts, on both sides of the centerline shown on the map.
M. Broad Street—Marsh to Southeast City Limits. An official building setback line is established on both sides of Broad Street, from Marsh Street to the southeasterly city limit line, excepting therefrom that portion from Pismo Street to High Street, for forty feet from the existing centerline of this portion of Broad Street.
N. Orcutt Road—Broad to Johnson. An official building setback line is established on both sides of Orcutt Road, between Broad Street and Johnson Avenue, in compliance with the official map designated “Official Building Setback Line for Orcutt Road between Broad Street and Johnson Avenue” dated November 4, 1963, as amended by the council by ordinance on February 16, 1982, and as amended by the council by ordinance on August 16, 1994, on file in the office of the city clerk. The setback line may be amended in the event that the city, at its sole discretion, chooses to construct, or cause to be constructed, improvements which require a reduced area.
O. California Boulevard and San Luis Drive. The map adopted by Ordinance 313, 1965 Series, is designated as the “Official Building Setback Line of California Boulevard and San Luis Drive,” this map being dated May 17, 1965.
P. South Higuera Street. The map adopted by Ordinance No. 313, 1965 Series, is designated as the “Official Building Setback Line of South Higuera Street,” this map being dated June 7, 1965.
Q. Higuera Street—Marsh to Madonna. The official building setback line is established on the west side of Higuera Street from Marsh Street to Madonna Road, in compliance with the official map designated “Official Building Setback Line for South Higuera Street, between Marsh Street and Madonna Road,” dated September 7, 1965, as amended by the council by ordinance on April 21, 1981, and as amended by the council by ordinance on September 18, 2001, on file in the office of the city clerk.
R. Santa Rosa Street—Monterey to Murray. An official building setback line is established along both sides of Santa Rosa Street from Monterey Street to Murray Street and shall be forty-five feet from the centerline of the Santa Rosa Street. No person shall erect or construct, or cause to be erected or constructed, or begin to erect or construct, any building, wall, fence, sign, or other structure within the space between the setback lines described in this section and the line of the street in front of the property on which the setback lines exist.
S. Higuera Street—Prado Road to South City Limit. An official building setback line is established along both sides of Higuera Street from Prado Road to the southerly city limits in compliance with the map dated January 20, 1969, on file in the office of the city clerk, and the line shall be forty-two feet from the centerline on both sides of Higuera Street.
T. Santa Rosa Street—Monterey to Marsh. An official building setback line is established along both sides of Santa Rosa Street between Monterey Street and Marsh Street in compliance with the map dated January 20, 1969, on file in the office of the city clerk and the line shall be forty feet from the centerline on both sides of Santa Rosa Street.
U. Osos Street—Monterey to Higuera. An official building setback line is established along both sides of Osos Street between Monterey Street and Higuera Street, in compliance with the official map dated November 3, 1969, on file in the office of the city clerk, and the line shall be twenty-nine feet from the centerline on both sides of Osos Street.
V. Santa Barbara Avenue—High Street to Broad Street. An official building setback line is established at thirty-seven feet easterly of the existing centerline of Santa Barbara Avenue, from High Street to Broad Street (State Highway 227), along with seventeen-foot radius property returns at the High Street and Roundhouse Avenue intersections, in compliance with the map dated November 6, 2001, on file in the office of the city clerk.
W. No New Structures to Be in Setback Area—Exceptions. 
    1. Building Setbacks. No building permit shall be issued for and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected or placed within the official building setback line of streets or highways established by this section, nor within the setback areas designated under Article 2 of these zoning regulations, measured from the official setback lines established by this section, except as provided for under subsection X (Appeals from This Section) of this section.
    2. Exception for Existing Structures. All buildings or structures as they are presently located and built along streets named in this section, and for which setback lines have been or are hereby established, are expressly excepted from the effects hereof.
X. Appeals from This Section. 
    1. Council Decision and Findings. 
        a. Variance Required. The council shall hear and decide appeals through the variance procedures from the strict application of this section for the modification of street setback standards or elimination of the setback ordinance from any property damaged thereby.
        b. Planning Commission Findings. In order to make a recommendation contrary to the provisions stated in subsection W (No New Structures to Be in Setback Area–Exceptions) of this section, or to recommend that any property be completely excepted from the building setback line restrictions, the council must find:
            i. That the property of which the official building setback line is a part is of such nature that the owner of the land will be substantially damaged by the refusal to grant the permit or exception therefrom; or
            ii. That the property will not earn a fair return on the owner’s investment unless the construction involved is authorized; or
            iii. That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation of substantial property rights.
    2. Council Hearing for Building Permit. If property which, by the appeal process, has been excepted from the official building setback line otherwise fronting thereon, is sought to be used for improvements that would have been prevented by the effect of the particular building setback line, no building permit shall be granted without the council having first been given sixty days within which it may choose, by resolution, to acquire such property as is necessary for future street widening purposes. If the council chooses not to acquire the property, the council shall then determine whether a permit should be granted to the applicant.
Y. Enforcement—Nonconforming Buildings and Structures Declared Unlawful and a Nuisance—Abatement. 
    1. Building Official. It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce this section. The building official shall not issue any such permit in conflict with the terms of this section, and any such permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this section shall be null and void.
    2. Public Nuisance. Any building or structure erected or moved contrary to the provisions of this section shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance; and the city attorney shall, upon order of the council, immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building or structure. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.80.020 Street right-of-way dedication and improvement.
A. Purpose. This section establishes requirements and procedures for the purchase, dedication, and improvement of the street right-of-way specified in Section 17.80.010 (Building Setback Lines for Master Plan of Streets) and in the Circulation Element of the General Plan.
B. General Requirements and Procedures. 
    1. City Engineer Responsibilities. The city engineer shall establish setback lines and grades for the purchase, dedication, or improvement of any street right-of-way specified in Section 17.80.010 (Building Setback Lines for Master Plan of Streets). The city engineer shall also resolve any uncertainty regarding these setback lines and grades.
    2. Recordation of Nonconformities. If purchase or dedication of property creates nonconforming conditions, the city shall record this nonconformity with the county recorder for the information of future property owners.
    3. Undergrounding of Utilities. When feasible, the city shall ensure that overhead utility lines along the proposed right-of-way are placed underground prior to completion of the street widening.
    4. Public Facilities. When funds are available, the city shall ensure that inadequate or deficient public facilities (water, sewer, fire hydrant, storm drain) are replaced prior to completion of the street widening.
    5. Street Trees. When funds are available, the city shall ensure that street trees are planted in conjunction with the street widening. Under specified conditions, the city may require property owners to plant required trees.
    6. Private Signs. Replaced private signs shall conform to the sign ordinance codified in Chapter 15.40.
    7. Curbside Parking. The city cannot guarantee a permanent right to curbside parking.
    8. Subdivisions. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, new subdivisions shall adhere to the requirements stated in Title 16.
C. Special Requirements. The council shall adopt a resolution establishing requirements under the following conditions:
    1. Where the city initiates construction of a street widening and purchases property lying within a proposed right-of-way;
    2. Where a property owner applies to improve property;
    3. Where a property owner applies for a use permit;
    4. Where a property owner voluntarily dedicates property lying within a proposed right-of-way.
D. Appeal. Any person required to dedicate land or make improvements under the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the council, in writing, any determination made by the city engineer or the application of these provisions to the property. The appeal must be filed prior to execution of the agreement to make the dedication and/or improvements. If as part of the appeal a request is made to vary from aforementioned provisions, the appeal shall be granted only upon a finding that imposing the provision appealed from creates an undue hardship that does not apply to other properties similarly situated. Upon finding by the council of such undue hardship, the council may make such modifications in the dedication and improvements as the council deems just. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.82 RESERVED

Chapter 17.84 RESERVED

Article 4. Regulations for Specific Land Uses and Activities

Chapter 17.86 REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES AND ACTIVITIES

Sections:
17.86.010    Purpose and applicability.
17.86.020    Accessory dwelling units, and junior accessory dwelling units, and guest quarters.
17.86.030    Adult entertainment businesses.
17.86.040    Alcoholic beverage sales—Deemed approved regulations and standards.
17.86.050    Alcoholic beverage sales—Bar, live entertainment, late night service.
17.86.060    Alcoholic beverages and motor fuel—Concurrent sales.
17.86.070    Bed and breakfast establishments.
17.86.080    Cannabis.
17.86.090    Convenience stores.
17.86.100    Day care.
17.86.110    Electronic game amusement centers.
17.86.120    Food trucks (mobile food vendors).
17.86.130    Fraternities and sororities.
17.86.140    Home occupations.
17.86.150    Homeless shelters.
17.86.160    Homestay rentals.
17.86.170    Household pets boarding and kennels—Outdoor areas.
17.86.180    Manufacturing.
17.86.190    Outdoor sales on commercial and residential lots.
17.86.200    Parking as a primary use.
17.86.210    Recreational vehicles—Use as dwelling—Parked on a private lot.
17.86.220    Recycling facilities.
17.86.230    Safe parking.
17.86.240    Schools.
17.86.250    Service/fueling stations.
17.86.260    Temporary and intermittent uses.
17.86.270    Utilities facilities.
17.86.280    Vending machines.
17.86.290    Wireless telecommunications facilities.

17.86.010 Purpose and applicability.
The purpose of this Article 4 is to establish standards for the location, site planning, development, and operations of certain land uses that are allowed within individual or multiple zones, as set forth in Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations), and for activities that require special standards to reduce their potential adverse impacts. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.020 Accessory dwelling units, and junior accessory dwelling units, and guest quarters.
A. Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe development and site regulations that apply, except where specifically stated, to accessory dwelling units, and junior accessory dwelling units, and guest quarters, as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions).
B. Accessory Dwelling Units. The provisions in this subsection shall apply to accessory dwelling units as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) and where allowed in compliance with Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations).
    1. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the creation of accessory dwelling units in a manner that is consistent with requirements identified in Government Code Section 65852.2, as amended from time to time. Implementation of this section is meant to expand housing opportunities by increasing the number of smaller units available within existing neighborhoods.
    2. General Requirements. 
        a. Application. Where this section does not contain a particular type of standard or procedure, conventional zoning standards and procedures shall apply.
        b. Areas Where Accessory Dwelling Units Are Allowed. Upon meeting the requirements of this section, accessory dwelling units may be established in any zone that allows single-unit residential dwellings, multi-unit residential dwellings, or mixed-use development (per Table 2.1), where a single-family structure, duplex or multifamily structure is existing or proposed. The existing or proposed residential dwelling is referred to as “primary unit” in this section. Accessory dwelling units that conform to this section shall not be considered a dwelling unit for the purpose of calculating density.
        c. No Subdivision of Property. No subdivision of property shall be allowed where an accessory dwelling unit has been established and the resulting subdivision does not maintain the primary residence on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit(s).
        d. Sale of Property. This section shall apply to new owners of property where an accessory dwelling unit has been established. All conditions of director’s action (if applicable), restrictive covenants and other contractual agreements with the city shall apply to the property and the new owners, except as allowed or prohibited by state law.
        e. Applicability of Building Codes. Accessory dwelling units shall conform to all applicable building and construction codes.
    3. Requirements on Lots with a Proposed or Existing Single-Family Structure or Duplex. 
        a. Unit Types Allowed. An accessory dwelling unit on a lot with a single-family structure or duplex may be either attached or detached from the primary unit.
            i. Attached. An attached accessory dwelling unit shall be either connected to (by a minimum of one shared wall) or contained completely or partially within the existing footprint of a single-family structure or duplex.
            ii. Detached. A detached accessory dwelling unit shall be either new or converted residential square footage that is not connected to the primary single-family structure or duplex.
        b. Size of Accessory Dwelling Unit. The gross floor area of an attached or detached accessory dwelling unit shall be as follows:
            i. Attached. The gross floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall be no less than one hundred fifty square feet and shall not exceed the lesser of the following: fifty percent of an existing primary unit’s living area, or eight hundred fifty square feet for a studio or one-bedroom unit, or one thousand square feet for a unit containing at least two bedrooms.
            ii. Detached. The gross floor area of a detached accessory dwelling unit shall be no less than one hundred fifty square feet and shall not exceed eight hundred fifty square feet for a studio or one-bedroom unit, or one thousand square feet for a unit containing at least two bedrooms.
            iii. An accessory dwelling unit that is entirely within the proposed space of a single-family dwelling or existing space of a single-family dwelling or accessory structure shall be no less than one hundred fifty square feet. An expansion of not more than one hundred fifty square feet beyond the same physical dimensions as the existing structure may be included if the expansion beyond the physical dimensions of the existing structure is limited to accommodating ingress and egress. This does not apply to duplexes.
        c. Limitation on Number. Only one accessory dwelling unit is permitted per lot.
    4. Requirements on Lots with a Proposed or Existing Multifamily Structure Containing Three or More Units. 
        a. Unit Types Allowed. An accessory dwelling unit on a lot with a multifamily structure may be converted from existing square footage, or as new units detached from the primary structure.
            i. Converted Square Footage Units. Accessory dwelling units may be created within the portions of existing multifamily structures that are not used as livable space, including, but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages, if compliant with state building standards for dwellings.
            ii. New Detached Units. Accessory dwelling units may be created on a lot that has an existing or proposed multifamily structure and must be detached from the primary structure.
        b. Size of Accessory Dwelling Unit. The gross floor area of an accessory dwelling unit on a lot with a multifamily structure shall be no less than one hundred fifty square feet.
        c. Limitation on Number. The number of accessory dwelling units shall be limited to no more than twenty-five percent of the existing or proposed multifamily units but shall not be less than the following per lot: (i) one unit that is converted from existing square footage, or (ii) two new detached units. No more than two detached units shall be allowed per lot.
        d. Lots with Both a Multifamily Structure and Single-Family Structure or Duplex. Provisions for accessory dwelling units on lots with multifamily structures cannot be combined with provisions for lots with single-family structures or duplexes, or vice versa.
    5. Performance Standards and Compatibility. 
        a. Design Standards. Accessory dwelling units shall conform to all applicable development standards of the underlying zone, including but not limited to height, setback area, parking, and building coverage, unless otherwise stated in this section or prohibited by state law.
            i. No passageway, defined as a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from a street to one entrance of the accessory dwelling unit, shall be required in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit.
            iii. No setback shall be required for an existing permitted structure that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit, or for an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed in replacement of an existing permitted structure, provided it is in the same location and has the same dimensions.
            iv. A setback of no more than four feet from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit.
            v. Accessory dwelling units that include the creation of new square footage shall be limited to sixteen feet in height, with an exception for accessory dwellings units that are constructed above an existing garage, which shall be limited to twenty-five feet in height. Up to one hundred fifty square feet of new square footage may be exempted from this requirement in connection to a conversion of existing upper floor square footage, but only as needed to accommodate ingress and egress.
            vi. Architectural style and form shall match the style and form of the primary residential structure(s) on the property.
            vii. The materials of the accessory dwelling unit shall match the materials of the primary residential structure(s) on the property.
            viii. Accessory dwelling units shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if fire sprinklers are not required for the primary residence.
            ix. No additional parking spaces shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit. If a garage or car port is converted or removed to accommodate an accessory dwelling unit, replacement parking is not required.
            x. Exceptions to these design standards can be approved by the director, through director’s action, subject to required findings (Section 17.108.040).
        b. Historic Resources. Accessory dwelling units on listed historic properties and in historic districts shall be found consistent with the historic preservation ordinance, including historic preservation guidelines and Secretary of the Interior standards for the treatment of historic properties.
        c. Utility Connection Fees. Where an accessory dwelling unit is created within an existing structure (primary or accessory), no new utility connection or payment of impact fees shall be required. For all other accessory dwelling units, a new utility connection for the accessory dwelling unit and payment of impact fees may be required if the accessory dwelling unit is seven hundred fifty square feet or more.
    6. Procedure Requirements. An accessory dwelling unit that meets the standards contained in this section shall be subject to ministerial review (building permit) and approval without discretionary review (i.e., use permit, architectural review, etc.) or public hearing. Within sixty days of receiving a complete application, the city shall approve any such application which complies with all applicable requirements and development standards identified in this chapter. When an accessory dwelling unit is proposed with a new single-family, duplex, or multifamily structure, this sixty-day requirement shall not apply.
    7. No Short-Term Rental. An accessory dwelling unit cannot be rented for a period of less than thirty days. Homestay use of an accessory dwelling unit is prohibited.
    8. Violations. Violation of any of the provisions shall be subject to basic code enforcement action as provided in Title 1.
    9. Exceptions. The director may authorize an exception to the square footage standards to allow an accessory dwelling unit up to one thousand two hundred square feet through the director’s action process. No other exceptions to the provisions of this section shall be approved, except as provided in subsection (B)(5)(a)(x) of this section.
C. Junior Accessory Dwelling Units. The provisions in this subsection shall apply to junior accessory dwelling units as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) and where allowed in compliance with Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations).
    1. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the creation of junior accessory dwelling units in a manner that is consistent with requirements identified in Government Code Section 65852.22, as amended from time to time. Implementation of this section is meant to expand housing opportunities by increasing the number of smaller units available within existing neighborhoods.
    2. General Requirements. 
        a. Application. Where this section does not contain a particular type of standard or procedure, conventional zoning standards and procedures shall apply.
        b. Areas Where Junior Accessory Dwelling Units Are Allowed. Upon meeting the requirements of this section, junior accessory dwelling units may be established in any zone where the use of the property is a single-unit dwelling, either existing or proposed. A junior accessory dwelling unit may only be allowed on a lot with an accessory dwelling unit if the accessory dwelling unit is detached from the single-family structure.
        c. Sale of Property. A junior accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold independently of the primary dwelling on the parcel.
        d. Location. A junior accessory dwelling unit must be created within the walls of a proposed or existing primary dwelling. Conversion of an existing garage into a junior accessory dwelling unit is not permitted by this section.
            i. An expansion of not more than one hundred fifty square feet beyond the same physical dimensions as the existing structure may be included if the expansion beyond the physical dimensions of the existing structure is limited to accommodating ingress and egress.
        e. Size of Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit. The gross floor area of a junior accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed five hundred square feet.
        f. Limitation on Number. Only one junior accessory dwelling unit may be located on any residentially zoned lot. A junior accessory dwelling unit may only be located on a lot which contains one permitted single-family structure or in connection to the construction of a single-family structure. One detached accessory dwelling unit may also be located on the lot.
        g. Applicability of Building Codes. Junior accessory dwelling units shall conform to all applicable building and construction codes.
    3. Performance Standards and Compatibility. 
        a. Design Standards. Junior accessory dwelling units shall conform to all applicable development standards of the underlying zone, including but not limited to height, setback area, parking, and building coverage. A junior accessory dwelling unit that conforms to this section shall not be considered a dwelling unit for the purpose of calculating density.
            i. A separate exterior entry shall be provided to serve a junior accessory dwelling unit.
            ii. The interior connection to the main living area may be maintained or removed.
            iii. At a minimum, junior accessory dwelling units shall include an efficiency kitchen, which shall contain a cooking facility, food preparation counter, and storage cabinets.
            iv. Junior accessory dwelling units shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if fire sprinklers are not required for the primary residence.
            v. No additional parking spaces shall be required for a junior accessory dwelling unit.
        b. Utility Connection Fees. Where a junior accessory dwelling unit is created no new utility connection or payment of impact fees shall be required.
        c. Fire and Life Protection. For purposes of any fire or life protection ordinance or regulation, a junior accessory dwelling unit shall not be considered a separate or new dwelling unit.
    4. Procedure Requirements. A junior accessory dwelling unit that meets the standards contained in this section shall be subject to ministerial review (building permit) and approval without discretionary review (i.e., use permit, architectural review, etc.) or public hearing. Within sixty days of receiving a complete application, the city shall approve any such application which complies with all applicable requirements of this section.
    5. Owner Occupancy. The owner of the property shall occupy either the primary residence or the junior accessory dwelling unit.
    6. Covenant Agreement. Prior to the issuance of building permits for a junior accessory dwelling unit, a covenant agreement shall be recorded which discloses the structure’s approved floor plan and status as an “junior accessory dwelling unit” and agreeing that the owner of the property will occupy either the primary residence or the junior accessory dwelling unit. This agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder to provide constructive notice to all future owners of the property.
    7. No Short-Term Rental. A junior accessory dwelling unit cannot be rented for a period of less than thirty days. Homestay use of a junior accessory dwelling unit is prohibited.
    8. Violations. Violation of any of the provisions shall be subject to basic code enforcement action as provided in Title 1.
D. Guest Quarters. 
    1. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for the development of guest quarters as an approved accessory use to a primary residential unit.
    2. Applicability. This section does not apply to legally established dwellings or accessory dwelling units, or accessory structures which are separately defined in Chapter 17.158 (General Definitions).
    3. General Requirements. Guest quarters shall conform to all applicable zoning regulations such as height, yards, parking, building coverage, etc., and shall be subject to the following provisions:
        a. Accessory to Primary Residence. Guest quarters may only be used in conjunction with a primary residence that contains a kitchen and may consist of detached structures or additions to primary structures.
        b. Size. Guest quarters shall be no larger than four hundred fifty square feet.
        c. Density and Development Standards. Guest quarters shall be consistent with density provisions and development standards of the underlying zone. For the purposes of calculating density in multi-unit residential zones, guest quarters will be considered an additional bedroom, accessory to the primary unit. The structure may not exceed four hundred fifty square feet and shall remain in an open floor plan (studio configuration).
        d. Zones in Which Guest Quarters May Be Allowed. Upon meeting the requirements in this section, guest quarters may be established in the following zones: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and O, when the primary use on the site is a single-unit residential dwelling.
        e. Areas Prohibited. Guest quarters shall not be allowed on nonconforming lots. Guest quarters shall not be established in any condominium or planned development project unless specifically addressed in the planned development ordinance as adopted or amended, or any mobile home subdivision or trailer park. Guest quarters shall not be allowed on lots with an existing accessory dwelling unit.
        f. Owner Occupancy. The property must be occupied by the property owner as the owner’s primary place of residence. If a property can no longer be occupied as the owner’s primary place of residence, the guest quarters may continue to be used as habitable space (e.g., office, pool house, art studio) but can no longer be used as overnight sleeping quarters.
        g. No Separate Rental. Guest quarters may not be rented separately from the primary dwelling unit.
        h. No Kitchen Facilities. No facilities meeting the definition of a “kitchen” as defined in Chapter 17.158 (General Definitions) may be installed and plumbing shall be provided for bathroom use only. No plumbing may be provided to “wet bars,” dishwashers, or any features that could be used for a kitchen. Plans approved for construction of guest quarters shall not include countertops or plumbing designed for subsequent installation of sinks, dishwashers, garbage disposals, or any other features consistent with the definition of a “kitchen.”
    4. Procedure Requirements. Prior to filing building plans with the city building division, the following shall be met:
        a. Architectural Review Required. All requests shall be reviewed for consistency with the city’s community design guidelines and this section. The director shall determine, upon receiving a complete application, whether the project shall be forwarded to the architectural review commission for review. All new development projects within historic districts or within properties that contain designated historic structures shall be referred to the cultural heritage committee to be reviewed for consistency with Secretary of the Interior standards for treatment of a historic property.
        b. Application Contents. A guest quarters permit shall be approved by the director prior to the submittal of documents requesting construction approval. No additional application fees for architectural review shall be required.
        c. Owner’s Agreement with the City. Prior to the issuance of construction permits, a covenant agreement shall be recorded that discloses the structure’s approved floor plan and status as “guest quarters,” which cannot be used as an independent dwelling unit, and may only be used in conjunction with the primary residence that contains a kitchen. This agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder to provide constructive notice to all future owners of the property. The covenant agreement also may contain authorization for annual inspections, and to allow the city upon reasonable time and notice to inspect the premises for compliance with the agreement and to verify continued compliance with requirements of this section and health and safety codes. If a property can no longer be occupied as the owner’s primary place of residence, the guest quarters may continue to be used as habitable space (e.g., office, pool house, art studio) but shall no longer be used as overnight sleeping quarters.
    5. Conversion of Guest Quarters to an Accessory Dwelling Unit. A legally established guest quarters may either be retained in its configuration or be converted to an accessory dwelling unit in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; however, only one accessory dwelling unit or guest quarters is allowed per property. (Ord. 1679 § 3, 2020: Ord. 1657 § 17, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.030 Adult entertainment businesses.
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate adult businesses which, unless closely regulated, tend to have serious secondary effects on the community, including, but not limited to, the following: depreciation of property values; increase in vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of adult businesses; interference with residential property owners’ enjoyment of their properties when such properties are located in the vicinity of adult businesses, as a result of increases in crime, litter, noise, and vandalism; higher crime rates in the vicinity of adult businesses; and blight conditions such as inadequate maintenance of commercial premises and parking lots, which thereby have a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of adult businesses.
It is neither the intent nor the effect of these regulations to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of these regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to communicative materials or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of adult business to their intended lawful market.
Nothing in these regulations is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any city ordinance or any statute of the State regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness, obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof.
B. Definitions. 
    1. “Adult entertainment business” shall mean those businesses as defined as follows:
        a. Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store is an establishment with more than twenty-five percent of: (a) its floor area devoted to; or (b) stock-in-trade consisting of; or (c) gross revenues derived from, and offering for sale for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:
            i. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, drawings, motion pictures, slides, films, tapes, video cassettes, records, or other visual or audio representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”;
            ii. Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed to be used in connection with “specified sexual activities”; or
            iii. Goods which are replicas of, or which simulate “specified anatomical areas,” or goods which are designed to be placed on or in “specified anatomical areas” or to be used in conjunction with “specified sexual activities.”
        b. “Adult live entertainment theater” means any place, building, enclosure or structure, partially or entirely used for “live adult entertainment” performances or presentations characterized by an emphasis on depicting, exposing, displaying, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons or customers therein.
        “Live adult entertainment” means any physical human body activity, whether performed or engaged in alone or with other persons, including but not limited to singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which the performer or performers expose to public view without opaque covering “specified anatomical areas” for entertainment value for any form of consideration.
        c. “Adult motion picture or video arcade” means any business wherein coin, paper, note, or token operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to four or fewer persons per machine, at any one time, and where the predominant character or theme of the images so displayed is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.
        d. “Adult motion picture theater” means any business, other than a hotel or motel which provides closed circuit viewing to each individual room as a secondary service to its motel customers, with the capacity for five or more persons where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions in which the predominant character and theme is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” as defined in this section. This includes, without limitation, showing any such slides, motion pictures or videos by means of any video tape system which has a display, viewer, screen, or a television set.
        e. Exceptions. An “adult entertainment business” shall not include:
            i. Bona fide medical establishments operated by properly licensed and registered medical and psychological personnel with appropriate medical or professional credentials for the treatment of patients.
            ii. Persons depicting “specified anatomical areas” in a modeling class operated:
                (a) By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by public revenue; or
                (b) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by public revenue; or
                (c) In a structure operated either as a profit or not-for-profit facility:
                    (1) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
                    (2) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class.
            iii. The practice of massage in compliance with Chapter 5.56.
    2. “Specified anatomical areas” shall include the following:
        a. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, and/or the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
        b. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
    3. “Specified sexual activities” shall include the following:
        a. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation and intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or
        b. Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
        c. Human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation; or
        d. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or
        e. Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or
        f. Erotic or lewd touching, lewd fondling or other lewd contact with an animal by a human being; or
        g. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigations.
    4. “Individual viewing area” shall mean a viewing area designed for occupancy by one person.
    5. “Operate” shall mean to own, lease (as lessor or lessee), rent (as landlord or tenant or as agent for the purpose of representing a principal in the management, rental or operation of the property of such principal), manage, conduct, direct, or be employed in an adult entertainment business.
    6. “Operator” shall mean and include the owner, custodian, manager or person in charge of any adult entertainment business.
    7. “Parcel of land” means any quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, which is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit or which has been used or developed as a unit.
    8. “Person” shall mean an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
    9. “Religious institution” shall mean any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used primarily for religious worship, religious education incidental thereto and related religious activities.
    10. “Residential zone” shall mean property which has a zoning designation of R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or such other residential zones as may be created by ordinance, or a mobile home park as defined in this code.
    11. “School” shall mean any public or private educational facility primarily attended by minors, including but not limited to large family day care homes, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, and special education schools, and includes school grounds.
    12. “Sensitive uses” shall include religious institutions, residential zones and schools.
C. Location of Adult Entertainment Businesses. 
    1. No person shall operate or establish an “adult entertainment business,” as defined in this code, in any area of the city, except the retail-commercial (C-R) zone or the tourist commercial (C-T) zone.
    2. No building permit or zoning clearance, business license, or other permit or entitlement for business use shall be legally valid if issued by any adult entertainment business proposed to operate or be established in any area of the city except the retail-commercial (C-R) zone or the tourist-commercial (C-T) zone.
    3. Any adult entertainment business proposed to be operated or established in the retail-commercial (C-R) zone or the tourist commercial (C-T) zone shall be subject to the following restrictions:
        a. The establishment or operation of an adult entertainment business shall be subject to the locational criteria setting forth minimum distances from the sensitive uses and zones as follows:
            i. Seven hundred feet from any lot of land which is located in a residential zone.
            ii. Seven hundred feet from any lot of land upon which a religious institution or school is located.
        b. For the purpose of this chapter, all distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard for intervening structures, using the closest property lines of the lots of the land involved.
D. Design and Performance Standards. The establishment or operation of an adult entertainment business shall comply with the applicable fees and site development standards, including, but not limited to, parking and design review, and the requirements of the uniform codes adopted in compliance with Chapter 15.02. An adult entertainment business shall comply with the applicable city business tax requirements. In addition, adult entertainment businesses shall comply with the following design and performance standards:
    1. Signs, advertisements, displays, or other promotional materials depicting or describing “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities” or displaying instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with “specified sexual activities” shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building or portion thereof in which the adult entertainment business is conducted.
    2. Each adult entertainment business shall have a business entrance separate from any other nonadult business located in the same building.
    3. All building openings, entries, and windows for an adult entertainment business shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior of an adult entertainment business from any area open to the general public.
    4. No adult entertainment business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation by the public of any material or activity depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” from any public way or from any location beyond the walls of the building or portion thereof in which the adult entertainment business is conducted.
    5. The building entrance to the adult entertainment business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that minors are precluded from entering the premises.
    6. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by adult entertainment businesses for amplification of sound to a level discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building or portion thereof in which the adult entertainment business is conducted.
    7. Each adult entertainment business shall be provided with a manager’s station which shall be used for the purpose of supervising activities within the business. A manager shall be on the premises during all times that the adult entertainment business is open to the public.
    8. The interior of the adult entertainment business shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the adult entertainment business to which any patron is allowed access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. If the adult entertainment business has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the adult entertainment business shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the adult entertainment business to which any patron is allowed access for any adult purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection shall be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
    9. No individual viewing area may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. Individual viewing areas of the adult entertainment business shall be operated and maintained without any hole or other opening or means of direct communication or visual or physical access between the interior space of two or more individual viewing areas.
    10. Off-street parking shall be provided for the adult entertainment business in compliance with the parking provisions of Chapter 17.72 (Parking and Loading).
    11. An off-site security program shall be prepared and implemented including the following items:
        a. All off-street parking areas and building entries serving the adult entertainment business shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system which provides a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of one foot candle (ten luxes) (one candlepower) of light on the parking surface and/or walkway.
        b. All interior portions of the adult entertainment business, except those areas devoted to mini-motion or motion pictures, shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with lighting system which provides a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of not less than two foot candles (twenty luxes) (two candlepower) of light on the floor surface.
E. Severance Clause. If any subsection, paragraph, subparagraph or provision of this section or the application thereof to any person, property or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this section and the application of such to other persons, properties or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
F. Violations. It shall be unlawful to establish or operate an adult entertainment business in violation of this section. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall be deemed or constituted to prevent the city from commencing any civil proceeding otherwise authorized by law for the declaration or abatement of a public nuisance. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.040 Alcoholic beverage sales—Deemed approved regulations and standards.
A. Title of Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Sale Regulations. The provisions of this section shall be known as the “Alcoholic Beverage Sales—Deemed Approved Regulations.”
B. Purpose of Alcoholic Beverage Sales—Deemed Approved Regulations. The general purposes of the deemed approved alcoholic beverage sale regulations are to protect and promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare by requiring that alcoholic beverage sales commercial activities that were established without minor use permit or conditional use permit approval prior to the effective date of the deemed approved alcoholic beverage sale regulations comply with the deemed approved performance standards of subsection G of this section and to achieve all of the following objectives:
    1. To protect residential, commercial, industrial, and civic areas and minimize the adverse impacts of nonconforming and incompatible uses;
    2. To provide opportunities for alcoholic beverage sale activities to operate in a mutually beneficial relationship to each other and to other commercial and civic services;
    3. To provide mechanisms to address problems often associated with the public consumption of alcoholic beverages, such as litter, loitering, graffiti, unruly behavior and escalated noise levels;
    4. To provide that alcohol outlets specified in this section are not the source of undue public nuisances in the community;
    5. To provide for properly maintained alcoholic beverage sale establishments so that negative impacts generated by these activities are not harmful to the surrounding environment in any way; and
    6. To monitor that deemed approved activities do not substantially change in mode or character of operation.
C. Applicability of Alcoholic Beverage Sales—Deemed Approved Regulations. This section shall apply to the following alcoholic beverage sales commercial activities within the city which have been established without approval prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section and as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions): (1) eating and drinking establishments—bars, nightclubs, and taverns, (2) eating and drinking establishments—restaurant with late hour alcohol service, and (3) food and beverage sales—liquor stores.
D. Duplicated Regulation. Whenever any provision of this section and any other provision of law, whether identified in this code, or in any other law, ordinance, or resolution of any kind, impose overlapping or contradictory regulations, or contain restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control, except as otherwise expressly provided in this section.
E. Administrative Hearing Officer. There is created an alcoholic beverage sales administrative hearing officer (administrative hearing officer) appointed by the city manager. The administrative hearing officer shall conduct public hearings and make recommendations intended to encourage and achieve the compliance of particular sites as appropriate. This subsection is not intended to restrict the powers and duties otherwise pertaining to other city officers or bodies in the field of monitoring and ensuring the harmony of alcoholic beverage sale commercial activities in the city. These parties shall have the powers and duties assigned to them by the zoning regulations, other codes and ordinances, city charter, or by valid administrative authority.
F. Definitions. The meaning and construction of words and phrases in this section shall be consistent with Article 9 (Definitions).
G. Alcoholic Beverage Sales—Deemed Approved Performance Standards. 
    1. Title and Purpose. The provisions of this subsection shall be known as the “deemed approved performance standards.” The purpose of these standards is to control dangerous or objectionable environmental effects of alcoholic beverage sales commercial activities applicable to this section.
    2. Standards. These standards shall apply to the following alcoholic beverage sales commercial uses listed in Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone, under the category “Eating and Drinking Establishments—Bars, Nightclubs, and Tavern” and “Eating and Drinking Establishments—Restaurant with late-hour alcohol service,” and “Food and Beverage Sales—Liquor Store,” as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions). This section is applicable to these uses under the following circumstances:
        a. Alcoholic beverage commercial uses which have been established without approval prior to the effective date of the ordinance, June 18, 2012, codified in this section.
        b. Alcoholic beverage commercial uses which are inconsistent with Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone and have been established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.
    3. Performance Standards and Deemed Approved Activities. An activity shall retain its deemed approved status only if it conforms with all of the following deemed approved performance standards:
        a. That it does not result in adverse effects to the health, peace or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area;
        b. That it does not result in jeopardizing or endangering the public health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area;
        c. That it does not result in repeated nuisance activities within the premises or in close proximity of the premises, including but not limited to disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially between the hours of twelve midnight and seven a.m., traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and arrests;
        d. That it does not result in violations to any applicable provision of any other city, state, or federal regulation, ordinance or statute; and
        e. That its upkeep and operating characteristics are compatible with and will not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood.
H. Deemed Approved Status Procedure. 
    1. Deemed Approved Status Procedure. The provisions of this subsection shall be known as the “alcoholic beverage sales—deemed approved status procedure.” The purposes of these provisions are to: (a) provide notice of deemed approved status upon alcoholic beverage sales commercial activities applicable to this section; (b) prescribe the procedure for the imposition of conditions of approval upon these activities; and (c) prescribe the procedure for appealing conditions of approval or the revocation of a deemed approved status.
    2. Automatic Deemed Approved Status. All alcoholic beverage sales commercial activities applicable to this section in compliance with subsection G of this section shall automatically become deemed approved activities as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. Each such deemed approved activity shall retain its deemed approved status as long as it complies with the deemed approved performance standards in subsection G of this section.
    3. Notification to Owners of Deemed Approved Activities. The administrative hearing officer shall notify the owner of each deemed approved activity, and also the property owner if not the same, of the activity’s deemed approved status. Such notice shall be sent via certified return receipt mail or similar method providing proof of delivery and shall include a copy of the performance standards of subsection G of this section, with the requirement that these be posted in a conspicuous and unobstructed place visible from the entrance of the establishment for public review; notification that the activity is required to comply with all these same performance standards; and that the activity is required to comply with all other aspects of this chapter. Should the notice be returned, then the notice shall be sent via regular U.S. mail.
    4. Procedure for Consideration of Violations to Performance Standards. Upon receiving a complaint from the public, police department, code enforcement officer, or any other interested party that a deemed approved activity is in violation of the performance standards of subsection G of this section, and once it is determined by the city that violations appear to be occurring, then a public hearing will be scheduled before the administrative hearing officer, as follows:
        a. The director will provide the complainant, the business owner of the deemed approved activity, the property owner (if not the same as the business owner), and other interested parties with at least thirty calendar days’ advance notice of the public hearing. “Interested parties” are defined as those that have made a request with the city clerk to be notified of these proceedings and shall include the downtown association or its successor agency in all instances in which the complaint involves an establishment within the boundaries of the downtown association or its successor agency.
        b. In all instances in which the complaint involves an establishment within the boundaries of the downtown association, the downtown association may, within the thirty-day period preceding the hearing, schedule a meeting with authorized representatives of the establishment to review the facts underlying the complaint and the establishment’s response to the complaint and to develop input to be conveyed to the administrative hearing officer regarding the downtown association’s recommendation regarding the complaint and any measures the downtown association suggests to address the complaint.
            i. Nothing herein shall require the business establishment within the boundaries of the downtown association to participate in the meeting with the downtown association, but the downtown association shall advise the administrative hearing officer if an establishment declines to participate and the administrative hearing officer may consider the establishment’s failure to participate in determining appropriate remedies if a violation is found to have occurred after considering all testimony presented during the public hearing.
            ii. The administrative hearing officer shall not in any manner be bound by any recommendation of the downtown association and shall give the recommendation from the downtown association such weight as the administrative hearing officer, in his or her sole discretion, deems appropriate after consideration of all record testimony and evidence presented in the public hearing. The administrative hearing officer shall proceed with the public hearing after thirty calendar days of issuing a notice of public hearing, whether or not the downtown association or its successor agency has met with the business owner of the deemed approved activity or delivered a recommendation for consideration by the administrative hearing officer. Failure of the downtown association to receive notice in compliance with this section, or in compliance with procedures established by the city, shall not constitute grounds to cancel the public hearing or invalidate the actions for which the notice was given.
            iii. In no event shall a meeting between the downtown association and the business owner of the deemed approved activity cause a delay to or substitute for a public hearing before the city’s administrative hearing officer, unless it is determined in the sole discretion of the administrative hearing officer that a delay is in the public’s interest.
        c. The purpose of the administrative public hearing is to receive evidence and testimony on whether the operating methods of the deemed approved activity are causing undue negative impacts in the surrounding area or on the premises. At the public hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall determine whether the deemed approved activity conforms to the deemed approved performance standards identified in subsection G of this section and to any other applicable criteria, and may continue the deemed approved status for the activity in question, or require such changes, or impose such reasonable conditions of approval as are necessary, in the judgment of the administrative hearing officer, to ensure conformity to said criteria. Any such changes or conditions shall be based on the evidence before the officer. The decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be based upon information compiled by staff and evidence and testimony from the complainant, the business owner, the property owner if not the same, and all other interested parties. New conditions of approval shall be made a part of the deemed approved status and the deemed approved activity shall be required to comply with these conditions. The determination of the administrative hearing officer shall become final ten calendar days after the date of decision unless appealed to the planning commission in compliance with Chapter 17.126 (Appeals).
    5. Procedure for Consideration of Violations of Standards or Conditions of Approval. In the event of a violation of any condition of approval or of further violations of the provisions identified in subsection G of this section, the administrative hearing officer shall hold a noticed public hearing. The purpose of this public hearing is to receive testimony and determine whether violations of conditions of approval or of subsection G of this section have occurred. The administrative hearing officer may add to or amend the existing conditions of approval based upon the evidence presented, or alternatively may revoke the deemed approved activity’s deemed approved status. The determination of the administrative hearing officer shall become final ten calendar days after the date of decision unless appealed to the planning commission in compliance with subsection (H)(6) of this section. The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed to the council in compliance with subsection (H)(7) of this section.
    6. Appeal to Planning Commission. Appeals of the decisions of the administrative hearing officer may be filed in compliance with Chapter 17.126 (Appeals). In considering the appeal, the planning commission shall determine whether the established use conforms to the applicable deemed approved performance standards and may continue or revoke a deemed approved status, or require such changes in the existing use or impose such reasonable conditions of approval as are, in its judgment, necessary to ensure conformity to said performance standards.
    7. Appeal to Council. Appeals of the decisions of the planning commission may be filed in compliance with Chapter 17.126 (Appeals). In considering the appeal, the council shall determine whether the deemed approved activity conforms to the applicable deemed approved performance standards, and may approve or deny the revocation or require such changes therein or impose such reasonable conditions of approval as are in its judgment necessary to ensure conformity to said standards.
I. Enforcement Procedure. 
    1. Applicability. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to the enforcement of this section.
    2. Official Action. All officials, departments, and employees of the city vested with the authority to issue permits, certificates, or licenses shall adhere to, and require conformance with, this section.
    3. Infractions. Any person who violates, causes, or permits another person to violate any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction unless otherwise provided.
    4. Separate Offenses for Each Day. Any violator shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this section is committed, continued, allowed, or caused by such violator and shall be punishable accordingly.
    5. Any Violation a Public Nuisance. In addition to the penalties provided in this subsection, any use or condition caused or allowed to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such by the city.
    6. Injunction as Additional Remedy. Any violation of any provision of this section shall be and is declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief.
    7. Penalties. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine to the maximum allowed under state law. Any violation beyond the second conviction within a one-year period may be charged by the city attorney as a misdemeanor, and the penalty for conviction shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment to the maximum allowed under state law.
    8. Liability for Expenses. In addition to the punishment provided by law, a violator is liable for such costs, expenses, and disbursements paid or incurred by the city or any of its contractors in correction, abatement, and prosecution of the violation.
    9. Enforcement. The city shall designate the appropriate personnel to enforce the provisions of these regulations. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.050 Alcoholic beverage sales—Bar, live entertainment, late night service.
A. Purpose and Applicability. The provisions in this section shall apply to eating and drinking establishments—bars, live entertainment and taverns, and eating and drinking establishments—restaurant with late-night alcohol service as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) and where allowed in compliance with Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations). The purpose of this section is to protect and promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare, and to ensure operations are compatible with surrounding neighborhoods.
B. Alcohol Outlet Operational Requirements. The following standards shall apply to all alcohol outlets and shall be incorporated into conditions of approval of the associated minor use permit or conditional use permit:
    1. Noise. The proposed use shall operate in conformance with the city noise ordinance (Chapter 9.12, Noise Control) to maintain compatibility with the nearby residences and businesses. The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to minimize the potential for adverse noise and crowd impacts on adjacent establishments and nearby residences, including, but not limited to, ensuring that all windows and doors are closed no later than ten p.m., nightly.
    2. Hours of Operation. Hours of operation for the alcohol services shall not be outside the hours from eight a.m. until eleven p.m. each day of the week, unless otherwise specified by a use permit.
    3. Menu Service. Full food service shall be available at all times alcohol is served. The restaurant shall have full meals and restaurant service available during all hours of operation, consistent with the approved hours of operation for the proposed use, unless otherwise specified by the use permit.
    4. Events. Tables, chairs, and the general floor plan layout shall remain consistent with approved plans and may not be removed or modified for late night operation or special events to create a performance stage, dance floor, or similar area for performance/assembly unless approved by a separate city-issued permit.
    5. Entertainment. Entertainment shall maintain an ambient level, which is clearly incidental, that allows for normal conversation levels, and for which no cover fee or ticket is required. Live or amplified entertainment that meets the definition of a live entertainment venue shall not be allowed without the approval of a live entertainment permit. Upon review of a live entertainment permit, the hours of operation may be re-evaluated or restricted.
    6. Employee Training. All employees shall attend ABC LEAD Training or equivalent training. The property management shall be responsible for ongoing security/safety training to accommodate changes in personnel. The property management is responsible at all times for verifying the legal age of patrons, for monitoring patrons’ on-site alcohol consumption, and for declining to serve alcohol to patrons who demonstrate signs of intoxication or impairment associated with alcohol consumption, based on training provided to all staff. The property management shall not permit its patrons to leave the licensed premises with any alcoholic beverage or to consume alcoholic beverages on any property adjacent to the licensed premises under the control of the licensee(s).
    7. Security. The applicant shall submit a security plan for approval by the police department. The applicant shall maintain and operate a video recording system that records activity at all entrances and exits during all business hours. The video shall be of a quality suitable for later identification of customers and staff. It will be recorded in a manner that may be retrieved and provided to police immediately upon demand. Video data shall be retained for a minimum of seventy-two hours or as otherwise required by law.
    8. Alcohol License. Business shall be conducted in a manner that will not violate any provisions of the California Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, prohibiting the sale of alcohol to minors; maintaining the public health, morals, convenience, and safety; and taking reasonable steps to correct any objectionable conditions on the premises and immediately adjacent to the premises.
C. Required Findings. In order to grant approval of a minor use permit or conditional use permit, the review authority shall make the following findings in addition to findings contained in Section 17.110.070 (Required Findings):
    1. The use shall be consistent with the zoning regulations and the 2012 Alcohol Outlet Regulations to reduce public safety problems associated with alcoholic beverage sales and provide for properly maintained alcohol outlets so that negative impacts generated by these activities are not harmful to the surrounding environment;
    2. The use will not result in adverse effects to the health, peace, or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area;
    3. The use will not result in jeopardizing or endangering the public health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area;
    4. The use will not result in violations to any applicable provision of any other city, state, or federal regulation, ordinance or statute; and
    5. The use is compatible with and will not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood.
D. Restrictive Conditions. The review authority is allowed to impose conditions to satisfy the requirements of the municipal code and to impose more restrictive conditions than outlined in subsection C of this section prior to approving an alcohol outlet. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.060 Alcoholic beverages and motor fuel—Concurrent sales.
A. General Prohibition. Concurrent sales of motor fuel and alcoholic beverages at a service/fueling station other than beer or wine are prohibited. For purposes of this section, “alcoholic beverages and motor fuel—concurrent sales” shall mean the ability to purchase motor fuel and beer or wine at the same time or at the same place. More specifically, a service/fueling station that permits a customer to pay for motor fuel and beer or wine at the same location or utilizing a single financial transaction is engaging in concurrent sales of motor fuel and beer or wine and shall be subject to this section.
B. Permit Requirement and Use Regulations. The concurrent sales of motor fuel and beer or wine at a service/fueling station shall be subject to the approval of a minor use permit or conditional use permit per the provisions of the applicable zone as set forth in Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations), in addition to the following:
    1. There shall be no sales of beer or wine for on-site consumption;
    2. Beer or wine may be sold only in conjunction with selling groceries and other sundries and convenience items;
    3. There shall be no advertisement or display of beer or wine visible from off the premises;
    4. No beer or wine shall be displayed within five feet of the cash register or front door;
    5. No advertisement of beer or wine shall be displayed at motor fuel islands and no self-illuminating advertising for beer or wine shall be located on buildings or windows;
    6. No sales of beer or wine shall be made from a drive-in window;
    7. No display or sales of beer or wine shall be made from an ice tub;
    8. Employees on duty between the hours of ten p.m. and two a.m. who sell beer or wine shall be at least twenty-one years of age.
C. Required Findings. In order to grant approval of a use permit, the review authority shall make the following findings in addition to findings contained in Section 17.110.070 (Required Findings):
    1. The establishment of concurrent sales of motor fuel and beer or wine is consistent with the provisions of the Business and Professions Code Section 23790.5.
    2. The sale of beer or wine at this location does not jeopardize the public health, safety or welfare, and particularly, will not result in an over-concentration of businesses selling or serving alcoholic beverages within the vicinity.
    3. The sale of beer or wine at a service/fueling station is otherwise allowed within the same zone at this location and the sale of beer or wine concurrent with motor fuel would not result in the expansion of a nonconforming use. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.070 Bed and breakfast establishments.
A. Purpose and Applicability. The provisions in this section shall apply to bed and breakfast establishments, as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) and where allowed in compliance with Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations). The purpose is to establish standards for the development of bed and breakfast establishments within the residential and agriculture zones of the city upon conforming to set criteria and conditions. The intent of these standards is to ensure that the location, concentration, and design of bed and breakfast establishments are consistent with or do not negatively affect the character or function of the neighborhood and surroundings.
B. Applications and Approvals Required. In addition to the applicable permit requirements identified in Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations), review by the cultural heritage committee and architectural review commission may be required depending upon the type of changes proposed to any structure intended for use as a bed and breakfast establishment.
C. General Standards. The following standards apply to all bed and breakfast establishments in the R-3, R-4, and AG zone districts:
    1. The principal building of the bed and breakfast establishment shall be the primary residence of the owner or manager of the bed and breakfast use.
    2. Accessory buildings and structures may also be used for bed and breakfast guest rooms.
    3. A bed and breakfast establishment shall comply with all other provisions of the zone in which it is located and shall comply with all other ordinances of the city.
    4. A business license issued by the city is required and remittance of transient occupancy tax is required.
    5. The home shall not be used by the public or paying guests for the hosting of receptions, private parties involving persons other than paying guests, or the like.
    6. Meals, if provided, shall be served only to residents and overnight guests of the bed and breakfast establishment.
    7. There shall be no separate or additional kitchen facility for the guests.
    8. No alteration shall be allowed to the exterior of the dwelling or yard that alters the residential characteristics of the premises or jeopardizes/eliminates features of historical or architectural significance. Changes to any historical building shall be consistent with the Secretary of the Interior standards and shall be subject to cultural heritage committee and architectural review commission approval.
    9. No historical structure shall be removed to allow for a bed and breakfast establishment, nor shall such a structure be removed to provide parking for such a use.
D. Site Development and Performance Standards in the R-3 and R-4 Zones. These additional standards apply to bed and breakfast establishments in the R-3 and R-4 zones:
    1. The minimum parking setback for guest/employee spaces shall be fifteen feet from the front property line and any street side yard and five feet from the rear and side property lines. The parking area shall be screened from direct view of the public right-of-way by a completely planted visual barrier.
    2. All parking spaces and driveways shall be paved to city standards with decorative materials or, if a historic property, materials which maintain the historical character of the neighborhood and premises.
    3. The number of guest rooms allowed should be based on the city’s density unit calculation, with a rental room counting as a studio, and shall in no case exceed fifteen rooms. The manager’s quarters shall be valued based on number of bedrooms but in no case shall be less than one density unit. Other factors used in determining the appropriate number of guest rooms that may be allowed in any location shall include the relationship of the site to parking, access, character, size, and scale of surrounding uses.
    4. Sites with historic structures shall balance outdoor space for guest use with space required for off-street parking needs, as determined by the planning commission.
    5. Any other conditions deemed essential and desirable by the planning commission may be imposed on such a use.
E. Site Development and Performance Standards in the Agriculture (AG) Zone. These additional standards apply to bed and breakfast establishments in the agriculture (AG) zone:
    1. The establishment of a bed and breakfast establishment shall not result in the conversion of land in agricultural production.
    2. Factors used in determining the appropriate number of guest rooms that may be allowed in any location shall include the relationship of the site to parking, access, character, size, and scale of surrounding uses, and in no case shall the number of guest rooms allowed exceed fifteen.
F. Findings Required. In approving a bed and breakfast establishment and in addition to the findings required for the applicable use permit, the review authority shall make all of the following findings:
    1. The establishment of the bed and breakfast establishment is consistent with the general plan.
    2. The establishment of the bed and breakfast establishment will not be detrimental to a building, structure or feature of significant aesthetic, cultural, or historical interest or value.
    3. The establishment of the bed and breakfast establishment does not constitute undue concentration of such establishments that would negatively affect the appearance and/or function of the surrounding neighborhood.
    4. The establishment of the bed and breakfast establishment is compatible with and will not be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood and surrounding land use. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.080 Cannabis.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, enact strong and effective regulatory and enforcement controls in compliance with state of California law, protect neighborhood character, and minimize potential for negative impacts on people, communities, and the environment within the city of San Luis Obispo by establishing land use requirements and development standards for cannabis activities. Cannabis activity, as defined in Section 17.156.008 (C Definitions), includes the cultivation, possession, manufacturing, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, delivery, or sale of cannabis or a cannabis product for either personal or commercial use. Therefore, this section recognizes that cannabis activities require land use controls due to state legal constraints on cannabis activity, and the potential environmental and social impacts associated with cannabis activity. Nothing in this section is intended to affect or alter federal law, which identifies marijuana (cannabis) as a Schedule I controlled substance.
B. Applicability. Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow any conduct or activity relating to the cultivation, distribution, dispensing, sale, or consumption of cannabis that is otherwise illegal under local or state law, statute, rule or regulation. It is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the illegal use, consumption or cultivation of cannabis under state or local law and nothing herein is intended to interpret, alter, interfere with or in any way affect otherwise applicable federal law.
C. Definitions. See Chapter 17.156, Land Use Definitions (Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone). Terms used in this section that are defined terms under state cannabis statutes or regulations shall have the same meaning as the respective state definition, as now defined or as the definition may be amended by the state in the future, except as otherwise specifically provided in Chapter 17.156, Land Use Definitions (Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone), or Chapter 9.10, Cannabis Regulations.
D. Personal Cultivation. 
    1. Indoor Personal Cultivation. Indoor personal cultivation of cannabis does not require a permit and is allowed in all private residences subject to all the following minimum performance standards:
        a. All indoor personal cultivation shall occur only inside a private residence or fully enclosed and secure accessory building or structure to a private residence. Accessory building or structure for indoor personal cultivation of cannabis does not include a greenhouse or hoop structure.
        b. Structures and equipment used for indoor cultivation, such as indoor grow lights, shall comply with all applicable building, electrical and fire code regulations as adopted by the city.
        c. All accessory buildings and structures used for indoor cultivation shall comply with the city’s zoning regulations and building codes.
        d. Indoor personal cultivation of cannabis may occur inside a dwelling and/or an accessory building or structure, subject to the following restrictions:
            i. The cumulative cultivation for cannabis shall not exceed six cannabis plants per private residence.
            ii. All personal cultivation shall be conducted by persons twenty-one years of age or older, and the cumulative total of cannabis plants per private residence, indoor and outdoor, shall not exceed six cannabis plants, regardless of the number of persons residing on the property.
        e. Personal cultivation of cannabis shall not interfere with the primary occupancy of the building or structure, including regular use of kitchen(s) or bathroom(s).
        f. Cannabis cultivation must be concealed from public view at all stages of growth and there shall be no exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring at the property visible with normal unaided vision from any public place, or the public right-of-way. Personal cultivation of cannabis shall be shielded to confine light and glare to the interior of the structure.
        g. Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to preclude any landlord from limiting or prohibiting personal cultivation of cannabis by tenants.
        h. Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to authorize commercial cultivation of cannabis at a private residence.
        i. Personal cultivation of cannabis shall not create: offensive odors or excessive dust, heat, noise, light, glare, smoke, traffic, or hazards due to the use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes, or other unreasonable impacts to persons of normal sensitivity who are living, working or lawfully present in the vicinity of the personal cultivation.
        j. Cannabis cultivation areas in a private residence shall be locked at all times when the cultivator is not present.
    2. Outdoor Personal Cultivation. Outdoor personal cultivation of cannabis does not require a permit and is allowable at all private residences, subject to all of the following minimum performance standards:
        a. Outdoor personal cultivation of cannabis is not permitted in the front yard between the public right-of-way and the private residence. Outdoor personal cultivation is only permitted in a rear or side yard that is entirely enclosed by a solid, opaque fence that is associated with a private residence used for residential purposes.
        b. The cannabis plants shall be placed at a minimum setback of five feet from the edge of canopy to the property line.
        c. Cannabis cultivation must be concealed from public view at all stages of growth and there shall be no exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring at the property visible by normal unaided vision from a public place or the public right-of-way. Cultivation may occur within a greenhouse or hoop structure (as long as it complies with the performance standards), but mixed light cultivation is prohibited.
        d. All outdoor personal cultivation shall be conducted by persons twenty-one years of age or older.
        e. The cumulative total of cannabis plants cultivated outdoor shall not exceed six cannabis plants per parcel containing a private residence, regardless of the number of persons residing on the property, and regardless of the number of private residences on the parcel.
        f. Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to preclude any landlord from limiting or prohibiting cannabis cultivation by tenants.
        g. Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to authorize commercial cultivation of cannabis at a private residence outdoors.
        h. Outdoor personal cultivation of cannabis shall not create: offensive odors or excessive dust, heat, noise, light, glare, smoke, traffic, or hazards due to the use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes, or other unreasonable impacts to people of normal sensitivity living, working or lawfully present in the vicinity of the personal cultivation.
E. Commercial Cannabis Businesses. 
    1. Commercial Cannabis Operator Permit. 
        a. No person or entity shall operate or conduct a commercial cannabis activity or commercial cannabis business without first obtaining both a commercial cannabis operator permit from the city pursuant to Chapter 9.10, Cannabis Regulations, and a use permit from the city pursuant to this chapter to conduct the commercial cannabis activity at a specific location. Any permit authorizing commercial cannabis activity pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned upon the holder obtaining and maintaining a city commercial cannabis operator permit and the appropriate state license for the activity.
        b. A commercial cannabis activity pursuant to this chapter may be transferred, assigned, or bequeathed, by operation of law or otherwise as described in Section 9.10.120.
        c. The commercial cannabis operator permit must be renewed each year.
        d. Expiration of the use permit shall be consistent with Section 17.104.070.
    2. No Vested Right to Operate. No person shall have any entitlement or vested right to operate a cannabis business solely by virtue of licensing under these regulations. Operation of cannabis activity(ies) requires both the approval of a conditional use permit and a commercial cannabis operator permit under Chapter 9.10, which is a revocable privilege and not a right in the city. The applicant bears the burden of proving that all qualifications for licensure have been satisfied and continuously maintained prior to conducting a cannabis business at an otherwise allowed location within the city.
    3. State Application Required. Filing a local application for cannabis activity(ies) with the city does not constitute an application with the state of California. A separate state application and license process must be followed through with the state.
    4. Application Requirements. All commercial cannabis activities require qualification through the commercial cannabis operator selection approval process in Chapter 9.10, Cannabis Regulations, a state license and a use permit for a specific location pursuant to this chapter. The application for a use permit shall include the following information:
        a. Site plan, floor plans, and a general description of the nature, square-footage, parking and type of cannabis activity(ies) being requested.
        b. An operations plan including:
            i. A security plan to the approval of the chief of police, pursuant to criteria approved by resolution of the city council, including but not limited to on-site security measures both physical and operational and, if applicable, security measures for the delivery of cannabis associated with the commercial cannabis business and payment of taxes and fees;
            ii. Plan for restriction of access by minors;
            iii. Employee safety and training plan;
            iv. Odor, noise and light management plan;
            v. Estimated energy usage and energy efficiency plan;
            vi. Estimated water usage and water efficiency plans;
            vii. Waste management plan; and
            viii. For retail sales, provide an educational material dissemination plan.
        c. Proposed signage:
            i. Must comply with city’s sign regulations for size, area and type of sign, no exceptions allowed.
            ii. Internal illumination of signs is prohibited.
            iii. No portion of the cannabis plant may be used in any sign visible from the public right-of-way.
            iv. Provide sign size, height, colors, and design of any proposed signage at the site.
            v. Must include a sign inside the premises that states: “Smoking, ingesting, vaping, eating or consuming cannabis or cannabis products on this site or in a public place is prohibited.”
            vi. Must include a sign at each entrance of a retail storefront that prohibits persons under twenty-one years of age from entering.
        d. An analysis that demonstrates neighborhood compatibility and a plan for addressing potential compatibility issues.
        e. Applications for retail storefronts shall include a vicinity map showing at least one thousand feet of surrounding area and the distances to the following uses: any preschool, elementary school, junior high school, high school, public park or playground, six hundred feet from any licensed daycare center, and three hundred feet from a residentially zoned area. Youth centers do not require a buffer. Distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the property line of the site that contains the commercial cannabis activity to the nearest point of the property line of the enumerated use using a direct straight-line measurement.
        f. Proof of ownership, option to purchase, (or lease agreement or option to lease with landowner’s express written consent to the proposed commercial cannabis activity(ies) to be conducted on the premises) or other proof of right to apply for the permit at the location.
        g. A list of all other uses on the property.
    5. Commercial Cannabis Development Standards. Each cannabis business is required to meet the following standards:
        a. Qualification through the Chapter 9.10, Cannabis Regulations, commercial cannabis operator selection process to apply for a commercial cannabis operator permit. Submittal of a use permit application to conduct the commercial cannabis business within the zones specified for each type of commercial activity listed below.
        b. Commercial cannabis facilities shall be allowed in areas demarcated with CAN overlay zoning and as allowed in the underlying zone for each type of commercial cannabis activity.
        c. All commercial cannabis facilities shall be sited and/or operated in a manner that prevents cannabis odors from being detected off site. Commercial cannabis activities shall not create offensive or excessive odors, dust, heat, noise, light, glare, smoke, traffic, or hazards due to the use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes, or other unreasonable impacts to people of normal sensitivity living, working or lawfully present in the vicinity of the commercial facility.
        d. All commercial cannabis operations must be concealed from public view at all times and there shall be no exterior evidence of cannabis or cannabis products occurring at the property visible with normal unaided vision from any public place, or the public right-of-way. Commercial manufacturing of cannabis or cannabis products shall be shielded to confine light and glare to the interior of the structure.
        e. All commercial cannabis facilities shall include adequate measures that address enforcement priorities for commercial cannabis activities, including restricting access to the public and to minors and ensuring that cannabis and cannabis products are only obtained from and supplied to other permitted licensed sources within the state and not distributed out of state.
        f. The use permit to be issued under this chapter shall include, but is not limited to, the following conditions:
            i. The obtaining and maintaining of the commercial cannabis operator permit and appropriate state license.
            ii. Payment of all applicable current and future state and local taxes and all applicable commercial cannabis fees and related penalties established by the city council, including but not limited to application, administrative review, inspection, etc.
            iii. The commercial cannabis operator permit or a controlling interest in the permit may not be assigned, transferred or bequeathed, by operation of law or otherwise, unless permitted as described in Chapter 9.10, and the permit shall terminate automatically on such event.
            iv. Any commercial cannabis operator permit issued pursuant to this chapter and Chapter 9.10 expires after one year, unless renewed.
            v. Prohibition of on-site consumption of cannabis at: (A) at a commercial cannabis business or commercial cannabis activity location; (B) any other business, club or cooperative or event, regardless if open to the public or only to members; and (C) anywhere an entry or other fee is charged to attendees or the host or thing of value or consideration is received or exchanged.
            vi. Prohibition of the possession, storage, sale, distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, or the holding of license from the State Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control for the sale of alcoholic beverages, or operating a business that sells alcoholic beverages on or adjacent to the commercial cannabis activity site.
            vii. No cannabis products or cannabis accessories may be displayed in windows or visible from the public right-of-way or from places accessible to the general public.
            viii. Prohibition of minors and persons under the age of twenty-one on the premises, even if accompanied by a parent or guardian.
            ix. Outdoor storage of cannabis or cannabis products is prohibited.
    6. Commercial Cultivation. 
        a. Commercial Cannabis Cultivation. Commercial cannabis cultivation may be conditionally permitted indoors only, subject to the requirements of this section and the obtaining and maintaining of a commercial cannabis operator permit pursuant to Chapter 9.10, Cannabis Regulations, and appropriate state license, in the following zones:
            i. Service commercial (C-S);
            ii. Manufacturing (M);
            iii. Business park (BP).
        b. A maximum of seventy thousand square feet of cumulative canopy area (includes total canopy of either horizontal or vertical growing situations) for cultivation and nurseries shall be allowed for indoor commercial cannabis cultivation in the city within the zones identified above, including microbusinesses under subsection (E)(12) of this section.
        c. Outdoor commercial cannabis cultivation, including but not limited to cultivation in greenhouses, hoop structures, and by mixed light (part daylight/part artificial light), is prohibited. All commercial cannabis cultivation shall be conducted only inside a fully enclosed, legally permitted structure that meets all applicable building and other codes.
        d. Commercial cannabis cultivation conditional permits include the following:
            i. Specialty Cultivator. A maximum of no more than five thousand square feet of canopy of indoor cultivation (either in horizontal or vertical growing situations) and includes processing.
            ii. Small Cultivator. A maximum of no more than ten thousand square feet of canopy of indoor cultivation (either in horizontal or vertical growing situations) and includes processing.
            iii. Nursery, Cannabis. A maximum of no more than ten thousand square feet of indoor propagation area (either in horizontal or vertical growing situations).
        e. Development Standards. 
            i. Compliance with subsection (E)(5) of this section, Commercial Cannabis Development Standards.
            ii. Canopy areas shall be easily identifiable for inspection and measurement. Each unique area included in the total canopy calculation shall be separated by an identifiable boundary such as an interior wall or by at least ten feet of open space (see “Canopy” definition in Chapter 17.156).
            iii. All indoor cannabis cultivation shall be designed to accomplish zero net energy use from the start of the operation.
            iv. Pesticides and fertilizers shall be properly labeled, stored, and applied to avoid and prevent contamination through erosion, leakage, or inadvertent damage from rodents, pests, or wildlife.
    7. Manufacturing. 
        a. Manufacturing (Nonvolatile) Permissible. Nonvolatile cannabis or cannabis products manufacturing may be conditionally permitted indoors only, subject to the requirements of this section and the obtaining and maintaining of a commercial cannabis operator permit pursuant to Chapter 9.10, Cannabis Regulations, and appropriate state license, in the following zones:
            i. Service commercial (C-S);
            ii. Manufacturing (M);
            iii. Business park (BP).
        b. Manufacturing (Volatile) Prohibited. Cannabis or cannabis products manufacturing involving volatile solvents, processes, compounds or substances is prohibited.
        c. Development Standards. 
            i. Compliance with subsection (E)(5) of this section, Commercial Cannabis Development Standards.
            ii. Outdoor manufacturing of cannabis or cannabis products is prohibited.
            iii. A complete description of all products used in the manufacturing process including the cannabis supply chain, liquids, solvents, agents, and processes.
            iv. Storage protocol and hazard response plan.
            v. Employee safety and training equipment plan, plus materials safety data sheet requirements, if any.
    8. Distribution. 
        a. Commercial cannabis distribution may be conditionally permitted, subject to the requirements of this section and the obtaining and maintaining of a commercial cannabis operator permit pursuant to Chapter 9.10, Cannabis Regulations, and appropriate state license, in the following zones:
            i. Service commercial (C-S);
            ii. Manufacturing (M);
            iii. Business park (BP);
        b. Development Standards. 
            i. Compliance with subsection (E)(5) of this section, Commercial Cannabis Development Standards.
    9. Testing Laboratory. 
        a. Commercial cannabis testing may be conditionally permitted, subject to the requirements of this section and the obtaining and maintaining of a commercial cannabis operator permit pursuant to Chapter 9.10, Cannabis Regulations, and appropriate state license, in the following zones:
            i. Service commercial (C-S);
            ii. Manufacturing (M);
            iii. Business park (BP);
            iv. Office (O).
        b. Development Standards. 
            i. Compliance with subsection (E)(5) of this section, Commercial Cannabis Development Standards.
            ii. The cannabis testing laboratory, as proposed, will comply with all the requirements of the state for the testing of cannabis, including dual licensure and participation in an authorized track-and-trace program.
            iii. The owners, investors, permittees, operators, and employees of the cannabis testing laboratory will not be associated with, nor have any financial interest in, any other form of commercial cannabis activity.
            iv. The cannabis testing laboratory is accredited by an appropriate accrediting agency as approved by the state and further described in Health and Safety Code Section 5238 and as it may be amended.
            v. The cannabis testing laboratory operating plan demonstrates proper protocols and procedures for statistically valid sampling methods and accurate certification of cannabis and cannabis products for potency, purity, pesticide residual levels, mold, and other contaminants according to adopted industry standards.
    10. Retail—Storefront. 
        a. Commercial cannabis storefront retail may be conditionally permitted, subject to the requirements of this section and the obtaining and maintaining of a commercial cannabis operator permit, and the appropriate state license, in the following zones:
            i. Retail commercial (C-R);
            ii. Service commercial (C-S);
        b. Development Standards. 
            i. Compliance with subsection (E)(5) of this section, Commercial Cannabis Development Standards.
            ii. Only three retail storefronts, which must front arterial streets, will be allowed within the city. Selection of the retail commercial cannabis operator will be selected from qualified commercial cannabis operators as set forth in Chapter 9.10, Cannabis Regulations. One of the retail storefronts shall have a medicinal license and may also have an adult use license.
            iii. Retail storefronts shall be located at least one thousand feet from any preschool, elementary school, junior high school, high school, public park or playground, six hundred feet from any licensed day care center, and three hundred feet from any residentially zoned area. Youth centers do not require a buffer. Distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the property line to the nearest point of the property line of the enumerated use using a direct straight-line measurement.
            iv. Retail storefronts must be separated from each other by at least one thousand feet.
            v. Hours of operation shall be limited between nine a.m. to eight p.m.
            vi. Must include a sign at each entrance of a retail storefront that prohibits persons under twenty-one years of age from entering.
    11. Retail—Non-Storefront (Delivery Services). 
        a. Commercial cannabis non-storefront retail may be conditionally permitted, subject to the requirements of this section and the obtaining and maintaining of a commercial cannabis operator permit pursuant to Chapter 9.10, Cannabis Regulations, and the appropriate state license, in the following zones:
            i. Service commercial (C-S);
            ii. Manufacturing (M);
            iii. Business park (BP).
        b. Development Standards. 
            i. Compliance with subsection (E)(5) of this section, Commercial Cannabis Development Standards.
            ii. Hours of delivery shall be limited between six a.m. to ten p.m.
    12. Microbusiness. 
        a. Microbusinesses fall into two groups as described below and may be conditionally permitted, subject to the requirements of this section and the obtaining and maintaining of a commercial cannabis operator permit pursuant to Chapter 9.10, Cannabis Regulations, and the appropriate state license, in the following zones:
            i. Microbusinesses with no more than fifty percent of the gross receipts being from cultivation, distribution and manufacturing are allowed in the following zones:
                (a) Retail commercial (C-R).
            ii. Microbusinesses with no more than fifty percent of the gross receipts being from storefront retail sales are allowed in the following zones:
                (a) Manufacturing (M);
                (b) Business park (BP).
            iii. Microbusinesses located in the service commercial (C-S) zone are not limited by gross sales receipts from cultivation, distribution, manufacturing or retail sales.
        b. Microbusinesses are subject to the seventy thousand square feet of canopy cultivation citywide limitation (either in horizontal or vertical growing situations) and the limit of three retail storefronts fronting arterial streets citywide set forth in subsection (E)(10) of this section.
        c. Development Standards. 
            i. Compliance with subsection (E)(5) of this section, Commercial Cannabis Development Standards.
            ii. A maximum of seventy thousand square feet of cumulative canopy for cultivation and nurseries shall be allowed for indoor cultivation in the city within the allowed land use zones.
            iii. All indoor cannabis cultivation shall be designed to accomplish zero net energy use from the start of the operation.
            iv. Pesticides and fertilizers shall be properly labeled, stored, and applied to avoid and prevent contamination through erosion, leakage, or inadvertent damage from rodents, pests, or wildlife.
            v. Only three retail storefronts, which must front arterial streets, will be allowed within the city. Selection of the retail commercial cannabis operator will be selected from qualified commercial cannabis operators as set forth in Chapter 9.10, Cannabis Regulations. One of the retail storefronts shall have a medicinal license and may also have an adult use license.
            vi. Any microbusiness with a retail storefront shall require a planning commission use permit.
            vii. Retail storefronts shall be located at least one thousand feet from any preschool, elementary school, junior high school, high school, public park or playground, six hundred feet from any licensed day care center, and three hundred feet from any residentially zoned area. Youth centers do not require a buffer. Distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the property line to the nearest point of the property line of the enumerated use using a direct straight-line measurement.
            viii. Retail storefronts must be separated from each other by at least one thousand feet.
            ix. Hours of retail shall be limited to between nine a.m. to eight p.m. and delivery shall be limited to between six a.m. to ten p.m.
            x. Must include a sign at each entrance of a retail storefront that prohibits persons under twenty-one years of age from entering. (Ord. 1647 § 5 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.090 Convenience stores.
A. Purpose and Intent. It is a goal of the city to allow for the establishment of small-scale, low impact, locally oriented and easily accessible commercial enterprises near or within residential areas to serve the day-to-day needs of neighborhood residents and to promote walking, biking, and other forms of nonmotorized transportation for local trips. The standards in this section are intended to ensure convenience stores will serve persons who live or work in nearby neighborhoods, and who will normally not need a vehicle to get to the market. The standards are aimed to ensure such stores offer adequate food and supplies to attract customers who would otherwise drive to a large supermarket. Limits on hours and alcohol sales and other provisions are necessary to guard against such stores from becoming a nuisance to the neighborhood.
B. Standards. The following standards shall apply to all convenience stores:
    1. Maximum Size. Gross floor area shall not exceed four thousand five hundred square feet per business. Floor area for any accessory residential use shall not be counted toward the allowed store floor area.
    2. Height, Setback, and Lot Coverage. Convenience stores shall comply with the height, setback, and coverage requirements for the underlying zone, except that stores in residential zones shall comply with standards for the C-N zone.
    3. Loading and Deliveries. One curbside or off-street loading space shall be provided per business. Loading and deliveries shall be allowed only between the hours of eight a.m. and nine p.m.
    4. Hours of Operation. Convenience stores shall open for business no earlier than seven a.m. and shall close no later than ten p.m., and close no later than eight p.m. in residential zones, unless otherwise specified by use permit.
    5. Alcohol Sales. Convenience stores within residential zones may sell beer and wine but shall be prohibited from selling distilled spirits of any kind.
    6. Performance Standards. Convenience stores shall comply with Article 3 (Regulations and Standards Applicable to All Zones). In addition, all exterior trash enclosures, outdoor storage, heating or cooling equipment, refrigerators, and similar equipment shall be visually screened, and located and/or designed to avoid noise, odor, glare, or vibration impacts to neighboring properties.
    7. Architectural Review. Convenience stores shall be compatible with neighboring structures in terms of scale, massing, architectural style or character, colors and materials, access, exterior lighting, and landscaping.
    8. Required Findings. In acting to approve a convenience store in a residential zone, the review authority shall be required to make the following findings:
        a. That the convenience store is located on a site that is of sufficient size to accommodate the use proposed and any required site improvements;
        b. That the property will be developed and used in a manner that encourages and supports pedestrian, bicycle, and other forms of nonmotorized vehicle access by customers; and
        c. That the convenience store will not result in any adverse public health, safety, and general welfare impacts and in particular, that noise, traffic, lighting, odor control, and litter control impacts are sufficiently addressed. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.100 Day care.
A. Intent. The provisions identified in this section are intended to enable child and adult day care opportunities throughout the city, to ensure that day care facilities will be compatible with residential uses, and to comply with applicable sections of the Health and Safety Code of the state.
B. Permits Required. 
    1. Adult day care facilities serving six or fewer clients on site at one time and small family day care homes for eight or fewer children are considered residential uses for the purposes of zoning regulations. They may be established in all zones where dwellings are allowed. No discretionary permit is required.
    2. Adult day care facilities serving seven to twelve clients on site at one time and large family day care homes for children may be established in any zone where dwellings are allowed, subject to performance standards listed below. These facilities require written approval by the director as a director’s action. In accordance with applicable sections of the California Health and Safety Code, the director shall approve the use when he or she determines that the proposed facility:
        a. Complies with all applicable provisions of the fire code regarding health and safety;
        b. Complies with property development standards contained in Chapter 17.16 (Low Density Residential (R-1) Zone) and with city sign regulations;
        c. Has been issued a day care license from the State Department of Social Services; and
        d. Will satisfy performance standards of this section relating to noise, traffic, and parking.
    3. Day care facilities serving more than twelve adults or more than fourteen children require discretionary review consistent with Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone.
C. Performance Standards for Day Care Facilities Serving More Than Six Adults or More Than Eight Children. 
    1. Noise. The day care facility shall be subject to all applicable provisions of Chapter 9.12 (Noise Regulations). Where the day care facility is adjacent to housing in a residential zone, outdoor play and activities shall be prohibited prior to nine a.m.
    2. Traffic. Designated delivery and pick-up areas shall not pose any traffic or safety hazards. Operators of day care facilities shall provide carpool-matching services to all clients.
D. Day Care as an Accessory Use. When day care facilities are accessory to another use requiring a permit, only one permit application need be filed and acted on. As accessory uses to schools and churches, and where an employer provides on-site child care to fourteen or fewer children for the exclusive use of employees, day care is allowed by right, providing the primary use meets city parking standards.
E. Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall prohibit applicants from requesting a director’s action or variance from the strict interpretation of the zoning regulations to the extent allowed by said regulations. (Ord. 1657 § 18, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.110 Electronic game amusement centers.
A. Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of this section is to ensure that electronic game amusement centers defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) as a commercial recreation use—small scale and where permitted in Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations) are compatible with surrounding and adjacent uses and do not create an adverse impact on adjacent properties by reason of noise, parking, and litter.
B. Licenses Required. No electronic game amusement center shall be permitted without filing for and receiving approval of a license subject to the provisions of Chapter 5.52 (Electronic Games Amusement Center).
C. Operational Requirements. Electronic game amusement centers shall comply with the following requirements:
    1. Centers shall comply with all applicable laws and conditions of approval.
    2. No center shall be allowed:
        a. Within one thousand feet of the exterior limits of any public or private elementary school, junior high school, or high school.
        b. Within five hundred feet of the exterior limits of a PF zone or any zone where residential use is the principal allowed use.
    3. No person under eighteen years of age may enter, be, or remain in a center during such time as the San Luis Coastal Unified School District is conducting its regular daytime education program.
    4. Centers shall have at least one responsible adult supervisor on duty at all times whose primary responsibility shall be supervision of electronic game play.
    5. Noise attenuation measures shall be taken as required by conditions of approval.
    6. Centers shall be closed from two a.m. to six a.m. and for such time as required by conditions of the minor use permit or conditional use permit.
    7. Adequate space shall be provided for each electronic game so as to allow its use without overcrowding.
    8. Parking shall be as required by the minor use permit or conditional use permit for a center.
D. Facility and Operation Exceptions. Exceptions to any of the requirements listed in this section may be considered during the review process, provided all of the following findings can be made:
    1. The requested exception to the facility and operation requirements will not affect the ability of the electronic game amusement center to be compatible with surrounding land uses.
    2. The requested exception to the facility and operation requirements will not encourage school-age children from frequenting the electronic game amusement center while the San Luis Coastal Unified School District is conducting its regular daytime education program.
    3. The purpose and intent of the facility and operation requirements are still met with the approval of the requested exception. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.120 Food trucks (mobile food vendors).
A. Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of this section is to ensure that off-street food trucks, as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) and where permitted in Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations), are compatible with surrounding and adjacent uses and do not create an adverse impact on adjacent properties by reason of noise, parking, and litter.
B. Permit and Licenses Required. In addition to obtaining a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.113 (Temporary Use Permits), operators of food trucks shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 5.16 (Solicitors and Peddlers) and the following:
    1. Health Permit Required. The food truck operator must have a valid permit issued by the county department of health. All required county health permits must be in the possession of the food truck operator at all times during operations within the city.
    2. Business License Required. The food truck operator must have a valid business license issued by the city. As part of its application for a business license, the food truck operator shall furnish to the city evidence of insurance, as deemed acceptable in the reasonable discretion of the city, against liability for death or injury to any person as a result of ownership, operation, or use of its vending vehicles.
    3. Duration and Hours of Operation. No food truck shall operate for more than two consecutive days in the same location, and before six a.m. or after eleven p.m., including set up and clean up.
    4. Written Approval of Owner. The written approval of the owner of the location shall be obtained. A copy of this approval shall be provided to the director prior to operating at the location. The food truck operator shall maintain proof of the owner’s approval in the vehicle. The person operating the food truck shall present this proof upon the demand of a peace officer or city employee authorized to enforce these provisions.
    5. Consolidation. At the discretion of the director, the following requests may be reviewed and permitted as a single, consolidated operation: requests to operate more than one food truck by the same applicant or food truck business owner, multiple requests for mobile food vending vehicle on a private property, or in conjunction with a temporary use permit for a larger event.
C. Operational Requirements. Food truck operators operating on private property shall comply with the following requirements:
    1. Parking Location. The vehicle shall only be stopped, standing, or parked on surfaces paved with concrete, asphalt, or another all-weather material.
    2. Staffing. A minimum of one person shall attend a food truck during the permitted hours of operations.
    3. Food. Only the sale of food items for immediate consumption is permitted. Sale of food items in glass containers is prohibited.
    4. Vehicle Types. No food may be sold from a vehicle used a dwelling or recreational vehicle. Only commercial vehicles with current registration with the state are allowed to operate food trucks.
    5. Litter Removal. The food truck and surrounding property shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times. The food truck operator must remove litter caused by its products from any public and private property within a twenty-five-foot radius of the vending vehicle’s location.
    6. No Discharge of Liquid. The food truck operator shall not discharge any liquid (e.g., water, grease, oil, etc.) onto or into city streets, storm drains, catch basins, or sewer facilities. All discharges shall be contained and properly disposed of by the food truck operator.
    7. Noise. The food truck operator shall be subject to the noise provisions set forth in Chapter 9.12 (Noise Control). The operation shall at all times be conducted in a manner not detrimental to surrounding properties or residents by reason of lights, noise, activities, parking or other actions. The operator shall prohibit loitering at the site and shall control noisy patrons on site and those leaving the premises. No amplified music or loudspeakers shall be permitted.
D. Additional Conditions and Requirements. This section permits the director or designee to exercise the discretion to review and request additional information, take authorized action, and impose additional conditions that are more restrictive than allowed in this section. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.130 Fraternities and sororities.
A. Applicability. The provisions in this section shall apply to “fraternities and sororities,” as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) and where permitted in Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations). This section is intended to promote the quality of life in residential neighborhoods by ensuring that dwelling units housing multiple persons who are members of a fraternity or sorority provide adequate support facilities for the intensity of associated use, and that such uses are operated in a manner that is not detrimental to the neighborhood in which they are located due to excessive noise, inadequate off-street parking, general property maintenance, and similar conditions. The following standard conditions shall apply to all fraternities and sororities.
    1. Occupancy shall be limited to not more than one resident per sixty square feet of building area. The landlord shall allow the city to verify occupancy by allowing an inspection of the records or by a visual inspection of the premises. Any inspection shall be at a reasonable time and shall be preceded by a twenty-four-hour notice to the residents.
    2. The maximum number of persons allowed on site for routine meetings and gatherings shall not exceed the limit established by the applicable conditional use permit.
    3. The fraternity or sorority shall remain affiliated and in good standing with the Interfraternity Council of Student Life and Leadership at California Polytechnic University, San Luis Obispo. If the fraternity or sorority becomes unaffiliated or no longer held in good standing with California Polytechnic University, the conditional use permit shall be revoked.
    4. The landlord shall provide names and telephone numbers of responsible persons to the community development department and SLOPD neighborhood services manager on an annual basis. Responsible persons shall be available during all events and at reasonable hours to receive and handle complaints.
B. Required Findings. In acting to approve a conditional use permit for a fraternity or sorority, the review authority shall be required to make the following findings:
    1. As conditioned, the project will not be detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of persons living or working at the site or in the vicinity because conditions have been included that place limits on the number of persons allowed on site, restrict activities, provide adequate parking, and limit potential disturbances to neighboring properties. The project will be compatible with site constraints and the character of the neighborhood.
    2. The proposed project is consistent with General Plan Land Use Policy 2.6.5 and Housing Element Policy 8.6 to locate student housing projects, fraternities, and sororities in close proximity to the Cal Poly campus and other student-oriented uses and housing.
    3. As conditioned, the proposed use is consistent with the zoning regulations because the number of residents is consistent with the group housing maximum occupancy limits and the parking configuration is consistent with neighboring properties and results in an adequate number of parking spaces for residents. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.140 Home occupations.
A. Purpose and Applicability. The provisions set forth in this section are intended to allow the conduct of businesses in residential dwellings which are incidental to and compatible with surrounding residential uses, and includes the definition of “live/work.”
B. Permit Required. 
    1. The conduct of a home occupation requires the approval of a home occupation permit by the director, who may establish additional conditions to further the intent of this section. A permit is required when a person does business in his/her home, uses his/her home address as a business address on business licenses and tax certificates, or uses his/her phone as a business phone. Home occupations may be conducted from dwellings located in residential zones or from dwellings located in commercial zones where dwellings are an allowed or conditionally allowed use. Home occupation permits are not required for employees telecommuting.
    2. Upon receipt of a completed application for a home occupation use, a public notice shall be posted at the site of each proposed home occupation as required for a director’s action, Chapter 17.108 (Director’s Action). If any person informs the community development department of a question or objection concerning the proposed home occupation that cannot be satisfactorily resolved within five days of the posting, the director shall schedule a hearing for the application, as provided for in Chapter 17.110 (Minor Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits). If no questions or objections are received by the community development department within five days after posting, the director may issue the permit upon submission of all required information and without further notice or public hearing.
    3. State-licensed small-family child day care operations for six or fewer children are exempt from home occupation regulations (see State Health and Safety Code Section 1529.5).
    4. The provisions in this section shall apply to cottage food operations, as defined by Section 113758 of the State Health and Safety Code and subject to prior issuance of a permit for a cottage food operation from the county health agency, as required by Health and Safety Code Section 114365.
C. General Requirements. 
    1. Home occupations shall not have characteristics which would reduce residents’ enjoyment of their neighborhoods. The peace and quiet of residential areas shall be maintained.
    2. A home occupation use shall not allow any clients or customers without prior appointments and shall not allow more than six appointments or clients in any one day.
    3. Businesses with customer access shall maintain at least one on-site customer parking space in addition to the required residential parking. For the purposes of this section only, parking in a driveway that has a minimum depth of twenty feet from the back of sidewalk and is made available to customers during business hours of operation shall meet the definition of a parking space.
    4. Activities shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit or an enclosed accessory building. The appearance of all buildings shall be residential in nature. Horticultural activities may be conducted outdoors.
    5. Sales and rental activities may be conducted on premises; provided, that storage and display area shall not occupy more than five hundred square feet of the principal building and any permitted accessory structure.
    6. There shall be no advertising of the home occupation by street address, except that street addresses may be included on business cards and business correspondence originating from the home.
    7. For a home occupation use in a residential zone, no vehicle larger than a van or longer than twenty feet may be used in connection with a home occupation. A marked commercial vehicle used in conjunction with the occupation shall have no more than two square feet of advertising. Licensed vehicles and trailers used in connection with a home occupation are limited to one additional vehicle and/or trailer.
    8. The home occupation use and associated activities shall not encroach on any required parking, setback area, or open space area.
    9. Activities conducted and equipment or materials used shall not change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises, nor use utilities in amounts greater than normally provided for residential use.
    10. No use shall create or cause noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical interference, or other hazard or nuisance.
    11. No more than one employee other than residents of the dwelling shall be allowed to work on site within a residential district, and no more than two employees within a nonresidential district. Babysitters or domestic servants are not considered employees of a home occupation.
    12. Clients or customers shall not visit the home occupation between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m.
    13. If the home occupation is to be conducted from rental property, the property owner’s authorization for the proposed use shall be obtained.
    14. No delivery or commercial pick-up shall be by vehicles larger than a typical delivery van (FedEx, UPS, etc.).
D. Prohibited Uses. The following uses by their operation or nature may interfere with residential welfare and diminish the convenience intended for commercial zones, and therefore shall not be allowed as home occupations:
    1. Automotive repair (body or mechanical), or detailing, upholstery or painting of automobiles, when performed on the same site as the home occupation.
    2. Carpentry or cabinet making.
    3. Welding or machining.
    4. Medical offices, clinics, and laboratories, except that counseling is allowed when no more than one client visit or group session is held at one time.
    5. Appliance, radio, or television repair.
    6. Print shops or photograph development; digital photo production is allowed.
    7. Gun or ammunition sales, including off-site work and by mail order.
    8. Any other activity or use, as determined by the director to not be compatible with residential activities and/or to have the possibility of affecting the health or safety of residents, because of the potential for the use to create dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration or other impacts, or would be hazardous because of materials, processes, products, or wastes. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.150 Homeless shelters.
A. Purpose. The requirements of this section apply only to homeless shelters in the PF zone which may be established without a discretionary permit. Homeless shelters in other zones subject to discretionary review will be reviewed in the context of the city’s good neighbor policy adopted in Council Resolution No. 10525 (2014 Series) and may be subject to conditions of approval with requirements that vary from these standards.
B. Standards. The following standards shall apply to all homeless shelters:
    1. The shelter shall be operated by a responsible agency or organization with experience in managing or providing social services.
    2. The shelter shall provide at least one qualified on-site supervisor at all times, plus one attendant for each fifty occupants.
    3. No new homeless shelter shall be established within three hundred feet of an existing homeless shelter. This restriction may be modified by an administrative use permit.
    4. Homeless shelters proposed adjacent to residential neighborhoods shall require architectural review to ensure the shelter design provides for adequate privacy between uses and minimizes potential impacts of the proposed shelter to adjacent residences.
    5. Parking shall be supplied at a ratio of one vehicle space per ten beds, and one secured bicycle parking area designed to accommodate up to one bicycle per ten beds.
    6. Each homeless shelter shall be limited to a maximum occupancy of two hundred fifty persons (in total), including warming shelters and daytime facilities.
    7. A management plan shall be required to address how the immediate sheltering needs of individuals who may be turned away from the shelter will be handled. The management plan shall establish a maximum length of time for which clients may be accommodated. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.160 Homestay rentals.
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to allow owner-occupied homestay rentals as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) and where permitted in Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations) with reasonable standards to preserve neighborhood character and quality of life.
B. Permit Required. The conduct of a homestay rental requires the approval of a homestay permit by the director, who may establish additional conditions to further the intent of this section. If anyone informs the community development department of a reasonable objection concerning the proposed homestay within the public notification period, the director may schedule a hearing for the application pursuant to the requirements of a minor use permit.
C. Application Requirements. 
    1. Operators of homestays in all zones are required to obtain a homestay permit and a business license.
    2. The operator of the homestay shall pay transient occupancy tax and tourism business improvement district tax as required by the municipal code.
    3. The operator of the homestay shall annually provide verification of primary residence through the homeowner’s property tax exemption or other appropriate documentation.
    4. The operator of the homestay shall provide the name and contact information of a responsible party in the application if the owner-occupier anticipates he or she may not be on the premises at all times during the homestay rental.
D. Performance Standards. 
    1. Homestays shall comply with the property development and performance standards set forth in Article 2 (Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development and Design Standards) and Article 3 (Regulations and Standards Applicable to All Zones).
    2. All building and fire code regulations shall be met.
    3. The number of overnight guests shall be limited to four persons. Bedrooms shall meet the minimum size requirements as defined in the building code.
    4. At all times when a homestay rental is occurring, the owner or responsible party shall be within a fifteen-minute drive of the property. The owner or responsible party shall be available via telephone twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, to respond to complaints regarding the homestay. Contact information for the owner and responsible party shall be provided to homestay guests and adjacent neighbors and stated on the application.
    5. Upon sale or transfer of the home for which a homestay permit has been granted, a new homestay application shall be required within sixty days of the transfer. Failure to submit a new application as required within sixty days shall result in the termination of the existing allowed use.
    6. The homestay shall be limited to only the owner-occupied dwelling unit on the property.
    7. Any advertisements for the homestay shall include the business license number. On-site advertising of the homestay is prohibited.
E. Revocation of a Permit. 
    1. Violation of these requirements and standards shall constitute grounds for revocation of the homestay permit.
    2. At any time, the permit can be referred to an administrative review hearing if determined by the director upon receipt of substantiated written complaints from any resident, code enforcement officer, or police department officer, which includes information and/or evidence supporting a conclusion that a violation of the permit, or of city ordinances or regulations applicable to the property or operation of the homestay, has occurred. At the time of the permit review, to ensure compliance with applicable laws and conditions of permit, conditions of approval may be added, deleted or modified, or the permit may be revoked. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.170 Household pets boarding and kennels—Outdoor areas.
A. Purpose and Applicability. The provisions in this section shall apply to animal boarding/kennels and similar household pet board and care facilities, as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) and where allowed in compliance with Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations). The purpose of this section is to implement a humane policy that accommodates the comfort and convenience of caring for household pets by their humans within commercial facilities and ensures that operations are compatible with surrounding neighborhoods.
B. Permit Required. In addition to the permits required in Section 17.10.020 (Use Regulations by Zone), no person shall carry on the business of keeping household pets for breeding purposes or for medical treatment of household pets, or caring for household pets for hire, without first obtaining a permit pursuant to Chapter 6.20 (Animal Control Regulations).
C. Outdoor Facilities Standards. Outdoor facilities shall function as recreational and instructional areas for the dogs accepted in the kennel. Kennels with an outdoor facility for household pets shall not be allowed in any residential or mixed-use project, and shall comply with the following standards:
    1. Outdoor facilities are to be allowed only as an accessory use and structure to an allowed kennel.
    2. Outdoor facilities shall be located outside of any required setback area or street frontage area. A minimum ten-foot setback for outdoor facilities shall be required for zones where a setback area is not defined.
    3. Outdoor facilities are only allowed when an allowed kennel is in operation. In no event shall an outdoor facility operate between the hours of seven p.m. to eight a.m.
    4. All outdoor facilities shall be properly screened with walls and/or fencing. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.180 Manufacturing.
Where manufacturing is allowed, accessory sale of items made on the premises is allowed. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.190 Outdoor sales on commercial and residential lots.
A. Sales of Christmas Trees and Other Agricultural Products. Upon approval of a temporary use permit by the director, premises within nonresidential zones may be used for the sale of Christmas trees, pumpkins, flowers, seasonal produce, and the like, subject to the following requirements and any other conditions that the director deems necessary:
    1. Sales shall be limited to Christmas trees, pumpkins, flowers, seasonal produce and the like and related accessory items only, as specified in the letter of approval.
    2. Sales of Christmas trees shall not be conducted before Thanksgiving or after December 26th. The duration of pumpkin and seasonal produce sales shall be subject to director approval.
    3. The site shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. All sales items, sales equipment, temporary power poles, other temporary structures, and signs shall be kept behind a ten-foot setback from all street rights-of-way, and they shall be removed within ten days after the close of the sale. Trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided in a convenient location for customers.
    4. A camper or trailer for overnight security may be parked on site for the duration of the permit. Any such camper or trailer shall be set back at least ten feet from the street right-of-way.
    5. The applicant may be required to post a refundable deposit, set by the director, with the community development department to ensure site clean-up. Deposit shall be in the form of a cashier’s check and shall be made prior to occupying the site.
    6. Outdoor sales lots are subject to all fire safety measures, including location of fire extinguishers, as required by the Fire Marshal.
    7. Any Christmas trees sold for use in public facilities shall be flame-proofed with a State Fire Marshal-approved material by a state-licensed application.
    8. Applicants shall obtain a city business tax certificate. A copy of the director’s approval and the business tax certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous location at all times when the use is in operation.
    9. The applicant shall secure a building permit for any structure requiring a permit, associated with the use. The plan shall show the proposed vehicular circulation pattern, parking layout, and location of structures. Plans shall also demonstrate compliance with California Code of Regulations Title 24 requirements for handicap accessibility.
    10. The use shall comply with all requirements of the county health agency.
    11. Restroom facilities shall be provided either on site or on a nearby property to the satisfaction of the chief building official.
    12. No sales or display shall take place in the public right-of-way.
B. Other Outdoor Sales. 
    1. Outdoor sales of nonagricultural products, such as food carts, barbecues, and swap meets, shall be limited to the types of retail sales allowed in the location’s zone. Outdoor sales may be temporary, intermittent, or permanent. Outdoor sales do not include incidental outdoor display of merchandise associated with a business occupying a building on the site, nor sale of things usually sold outdoors, such as boats, vehicles, and building or landscape materials. See also Chapter 5.16 (Solicitors and Peddlers) and Chapter 5.48 (Sales on Streets and Sidewalks).
    2. Other outdoor sales require director’s action approval. Parking requirements, setbacks to sales or storage areas, safety and aesthetic screening, and other development standards usually related to buildings shall be established by permit approval.
C. Garage and Yard Sales. On any residentially developed lot, garage or yard sales are allowed a maximum of four times within a twelve-month period, subject to the following requirements:
    1. Each garage or yard sale shall not exceed three consecutive days.
    2. Each unit within multi-unit apartment or condominium project and common interest subdivisions may have up to four garage/yard sales in approved common areas with the permission of the homeowners’ association (for sales within common areas), property owner, or property manager.
    3. Items shall consist of normally accumulated household items (clothing, furniture, etc.). Items offered for sale may not include items acquired for resale.
    4. One on-site sign not to exceed four square feet shall be allowed during the sale. No other signs are allowed in the area and no signs may be displayed within a public right-of-way.
    5. Garage and yard sales are not allowed on vacant lots. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.200 Parking as a primary use.
Where parking as a primary use is permitted in compliance with Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone or Table 2-24: Airport Overlay Zone—Maximum Allowed Persons, discretionary permit approval may include deviations from otherwise applicable development standards. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.210 Recreational vehicles—Use as dwelling—Parked on a private lot.
A. Use for Living or Sleeping Prohibited on Private Property. No recreational vehicle, camper shell, automobile or similar device shall be used for living or sleeping quarters on private property, except in a lawfully operated mobile home park, travel trailer park, campground, or safe parking facility, except as provided in Section 17.86.230 (Safe Parking) and as otherwise provided in this section.
B. Overnight Camping Prohibited on Specified Public Properties. Within city streets, areas of the public right-of-way, and city-owned parking areas, parking of vehicles for purposes of overnight camping or sleeping is prohibited by and shall be subject to enforcement in accordance with Chapter 10.34.
C. Exception—Recreational Vehicle as Temporary Dwelling. A recreational vehicle may be parked in a residential parking space or driveway for periods not to exceed seven days in any one-month period for the purpose of housing guests of on-site residents only. Such recreational vehicle shall not be parked so as to prevent residents of any other dwellings on the site from using their assigned parking spaces, nor shall it discharge waste or sewage into the city’s sewage system. No hose, electrical cord, pipe, wire, or other device extending from the vehicle may be permitted.
D. Recreational Vehicle Parking—Where Permitted. 
    1. Recreational vehicles and trailers with current licenses may be parked in driveways consistent with Section 17.76.040 (Front Yard Parking).
    2. Unregistered and unlicensed boats, trailers, camper shells, recreational vehicles, jet skis, and similar devices, and parts of these items, may be parked in any side or rear yard outside of any required setback area. However, any such device or part so parked must be screened from any public right-of-way as set forth in Section 17.76.100 (Screening).
E. Recreational Vehicles as Tiny Houses in Residential Zones. Movable tiny houses shall be considered an additional type of accessory dwelling unit, allowed as an accessory use to single-unit residential dwelling unit, consistent with Government Code Section 65852.2(g), which allows cities to adopt less restrictive requirements than the state-mandated minimums for accessory dwelling units. A movable tiny house that meets the definition in this subsection may be built and occupied as a new detached accessory dwelling unit, subject to the director’s review and approval of a director’s action application, if it complies with the standards of this subsection.
    1. Development Standards. Movable tiny houses shall conform with the requirements for new detached accessory dwelling units, including but not limited to setbacks, height, and other applicable zoning requirements of the zone in which the site of the proposed movable tiny house is located, except as modified by this subsection.
        a. Number. No parcel may be approved for more than one movable tiny house in a twelve-month period. No parcel may contain more than one movable tiny house at a time. No parcel may contain both a movable tiny house and a conventional accessory dwelling unit.
        b. Renewal. The director shall renew the approval of a movable tiny home for a period of three to five years upon receipt of a complete application and completion of an inspection by the city to confirm continued compliance with the standards in this section.
        c. Maintenance. The site shall be maintained as set forth in Chapter 17.76 (Property Maintenance Standards).
        d. Location. The movable tiny house shall be located toward the rear of the property.
        e. Size. The maximum square footage or habitable floor space for a movable tiny house shall be four hundred square feet, as measured by exterior wall dimensions (lofts shall not be counted toward the maximum square footage). The movable tiny house shall have at least one hundred square feet of first floor interior living space.
        f. Replacement Parking. Where a movable tiny house occupies a required parking space, a replacement parking space is required. A replacement parking space may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the movable tiny house, including but not limited to covered spaces, uncovered spaces, or tandem spaces. Parking shall be permitted only in those locations specified in these zoning regulations.
        g. Design. The design of a tiny house shall resemble the general appearance, siding, and roofing of a traditional home.
        h. Energy Efficiency. Applications submitted for tiny houses shall demonstrate that the tiny home has been constructed to exceed ANSI energy standards through one of the following methods:
            i. Include insulation with values of R13 for the walls and R19 for the floor and ceiling; or
            ii. Ensure that the stud/joist/rafter spaces in the walls, floors and ceiling are completely filled with insulation.
    2. Parking Spaces. Movable tiny houses shall not require additional parking.
    3. Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment for a movable tiny house shall be incorporated into the structure and shall not be located on the roof.
    4. Utility Connections and Requirements. Movable tiny houses shall not require separate utility meters from the primary unit. Movable tiny houses may be off-grid and not connected to one or more utility systems, but only if the applicant provides sufficient proof, to the satisfaction of the director and the building official, that the movable tiny house has adequate, safe, and sanitary utility systems providing water, sewer, heating, cooling, and electric power.
    5. Addresses. Movable tiny houses shall not have separate street addresses from the primary unit.
    6. Foundation Requirements. Once sited on the parcel of the primary unit, movable tiny houses shall meet the following foundation requirements:
        a. The movable tiny house shall not have its wheels removed, and all wheels and leveling/support jacks shall sit on a concrete, paved, or compacted gravel surface sufficient to support its weight.
    7. Emergency and Rescue Openings. Movable tiny houses shall meet the requirements of Section R310 of the California Building Code for emergency escape and rescue openings. Egress roof access windows in lofts used as sleeping rooms shall be deemed to meet this requirement if installed such that the bottom of the opening is not more than forty-four inches above the loft floor, provided the egress roof access window complies with the minimum opening area requirements of California Building Code Section R310.2.1.
    8. Procedure Requirements. A director’s action application shall be required to establish a movable tiny house including the application materials and information required by Section 17.86.020 (Accessory dwelling units and guest quarters) for an accessory dwelling unit; an applicant for a movable tiny house shall submit proof that:
        a. The proposed movable tiny house is licensed and registered with the California Department of Motor Vehicles;
        b. The proposed movable tiny house has been certified by a qualified third-party inspector as meeting ANSI 119.2 or 119.5 requirements or comparable standards, or was built to meet ANSI 119.2 or 119.5 requirements as demonstrated by sufficient evidence satisfactory to the director; at a minimum this inspection shall verify that the unit is in good working order for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, including the absence of any exterior shell water leaks;
        c. The applicant is the property owner, or has sufficient written permission from the property owner, of the intended location of the proposed movable tiny house;
        d. Prior to the issuance of building permits, a covenant agreement shall be recorded which discloses the structure’s approved floor plan and status as a movable tiny home and agreeing that the property will be owner-occupied. This agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder to provide constructive notice to all future owners of the property. The covenant agreement also may contain authorization for annual inspections for compliance with the agreement and to verify continued compliance with requirements of this section and health and safety codes. If a property can no longer be occupied as the owner’s primary place of residence, the movable tiny home shall no longer be used as overnight sleeping quarters. (Ord. 1657 § 19, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.220 Recycling facilities.
A. Purpose and Applicability. The provisions in this section shall apply to recycling facilities, as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) and where allowed in compliance with Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations).
B. Reverse Vending Machines. 
    1. Accessory Use. Reverse vending machines may be installed as an accessory use to an allowed or conditionally allowed primary use on the same site.
    2. Location. Machines shall be located adjacent or as near as feasibly possible to the entrance of the commercial host use and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation. Machines can be located against a wall but not in parking areas.
    3. Identification. Machines shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative.
    4. Trash Receptacle. The owner or operator of the property shall provide a minimum forty-gallon garbage can for nonrecyclable materials located adjacent to the reverse vending machine.
C. Recycling Collection Facilities. 
    1. Size. Recycling collection facilities shall not exceed a building site footprint of three hundred fifty square feet.
    2. Equipment. No power-driven processing equipment, except for reverse vending machines, shall be used.
    3. Location. Facilities shall be located at least seventy-five feet away from properties zoned for residential use and cannot occupy parking spaces required for the main use unless a parking study shows available capacity during the hours of recycling facility operation.
    4. Setback. Facilities shall not be located within a required setback.
    5. Containers. Containers shall be constructed of durable waterproof and rustproof materials and secured from unauthorized removal of material.
    6. Identification. Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of accepted material, the name and telephone number of the facility operator, and the hours of operation.
    7. Site Maintenance. Recycling facility sites shall be maintained clean, sanitary, and free of litter and any other undesirable materials.
D. Recycling Processing Facilities. 
    1. Location. Facilities shall be at least one thousand feet from properties zoned for residential use.
    2. Screening. The facility shall be screened from public rights-of-way by solid masonry walls or located within an enclosed structure.
    3. Outdoor Storage. Exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures that are secured and maintained in good condition. Storage shall not be visible above the height of the required solid masonry walls.
    4. Identification. Facilities shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and hours of operation.
    5. Vector, Odor, and Noise Control. Operations shall comply with all city and county codes regarding vector, odor, and noise control.
E. Composting and Waste Disposal Facilities. 
    1. Maintenance—Pest Infestation Prohibited. Waste disposal facilities shall be maintained in such a manner that vermin and pest infestation cannot take place.
    2. Covering or Wetting to Prevent Dust. The owner, proprietor, or caretaker of any composting facility or solid waste landfill shall use a tarp or covering or wet down the waste disposal facility with water or chemical stabilizers at intervals sufficiently frequent to control dust. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.230 Safe parking.
A. Purpose and Intent. Safe parking provides homeless individuals and families with vehicles a safe place to temporarily park overnight to facilitate the transition to permanent housing. The provisions contained in this section enable safe parking in certain zones in the city subject to specific performance standards and permit requirements. These standards and requirements are intended to ensure that safe parking facilities will be compatible with surrounding uses and effective at facilitating participants’ transition to permanent housing.
B. Permit Required. The establishment of a safe parking use shall require a conditional use permit approval where allowed, consistent with Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone.
C. Accessory Use in Residential Zones. If located in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 zones, safe parking is only allowed when accessory to a public assembly or religious assembly facility. Safe parking is prohibited as a primary use in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 zones and in all applicable zones on properties that contain residential uses as the primary use.
D. Application Requirements. Whenever a social service provider (or, if the social service provider is not the property owner, a property owner who is affiliated with or can qualify as a social service provider) submits a conditional use permit application for consideration, as a part of the application, sufficient information shall be submitted to the community development department to determine whether the proposed safe parking facility complies with the provisions of this section. In addition to the required conditional use permit application checklist items, the application shall include the following:
    1. Site plan indicating the location of trash and recycling facilities, water, restroom facilities, exterior light fixtures, location and distances to residential properties, public transportation, and location of designated overnight parking spaces.
    2. Hours of operation.
    3. Monitoring and oversight program.
    4. Neighborhood relations plan.
    5. Sufficient information to determine that the applicant is a social service provider that is qualified to operate a safe parking program or is affiliated with a social service provider that demonstrates the experience and qualifications to manage the site and meet the performance standards identified in this chapter.
    6. Any other information the director may determine is necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section.
E. Performance Standards. 
    1. Social Services Provider. Safe parking facilities shall be managed by a qualified social service provider, subject to the approval of the director.
    2. Case Management. Participants shall be paired with a case manager and enrolled in a self-sufficiency program to facilitate the transition to permanent housing.
    3. Background Check. Prospective participants shall submit to a criminal history background check. Participant exclusion shall be determined by the social service provider on a case-by-case basis.
    4. Restroom, Water and Trash Facilities. Restroom, water and trash facilities shall be provided, maintained, and accessible to participants during safe parking facility hours.
    5. Residency Preference. Social service provider shall give preference to those with proof of residency in the county for a minimum period of six months within the last two years. Evidence of residency may include, but not be limited to, items such as rental agreements, mortgage, utility, hotel and medical facility bills, paystubs, and intake from homeless service programs.
    6. Buffer from Residential Use. Participant vehicles shall maintain a minimum buffer of fifty feet from any property that contains a residential use. Buffers less than fifty feet may be allowed through the use permit review process on a case-by-case basis when determined to be compatible with the neighborhood. Buffers greater than fifty feet may be necessary for neighborhood compatibility, which will be determined on a case-by-case basis as part of the conditional use permit review process.
    7. Authorized Vehicles Only. Social service provider shall ensure that only vehicles registered in the program are parked overnight during program hours. A parking permit shall be provided to all participants to be displayed in vehicle windows in a form to be approved by the public works director.
    8. Participant Information. At all times, the social service provider shall maintain a roster of the names and vehicle license numbers of each participant who is authorized to park overnight.
    9. Written Agreement with Participants. Only participants who have entered into a written agreement with a social service provider shall be allowed to use parking spaces overnight. The written agreement between the social service provider and participant shall include, but not be limited to, the following terms and conditions:
        a. Only one vehicle is allowed per participant.
        b. At least one participant per vehicle shall possess a current driver’s license, vehicle registration, and insurance for the vehicle that will be parked overnight. The social service provider shall keep a copy of all three on record.
        c. Vehicles may only be occupied by participants and approved registered household members. Guests shall not be allowed.
        d. Participants shall not use or possess any illegal drugs or alcohol either on their person or in their vehicle.
        e. Participants shall not use or possess any weapons or firearms of any kind in program vehicles.
        f. No fires of any kind shall be allowed.
        g. No music may be played that is audible outside participants’ vehicles.
        h. No cooking or food preparation shall be performed outside of the participants’ vehicles. Cooking inside vehicles is prohibited unless the vehicle was manufactured with cooking appliances.
        i. Camping tarps or equipment beyond the participants’ vehicles are prohibited.
        j. Participants shall maintain control of animals. Animals shall be kept on a leash at all times and animal waste shall be picked up immediately and disposed of properly.
        k. Participants shall not dump sewage or other waste fluids or solids, deposit excreta outside a vehicle, or park vehicles that leak excessive fluids (i.e., gasoline, transmission or radiator fluid, or engine oil).
F. Use Permit Considerations. Items to be determined by the planning commission as part of the conditional use permit review process on a case-by-case basis shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
    1. Number of Vehicles Allowed. The total number of vehicles allowed at each safe parking facility location.
    2. Hours of Operation. The days and hours of safe parking facility operation.
    3. Separation between Facilities. Sufficient distance between existing and proposed safe parking facilities.
    4. Neighborhood Relations Plan. A neighborhood relations plan shall be provided for each safe parking facility location to address any complaints in a timely manner, including consistency with any adopted good neighbor policy.
    5. Monitoring and Oversight. Monitoring and oversight shall be provided during safe parking facility hours.
    6. Restroom, Water and Trash Facility Plan. A restroom, water and trash facility plan shall be provided and include the location, hours of availability and maintenance program for site facilities.
G. Revocation of a Permit. The conditional use permit can be referred to the planning commission for reconsideration if determined by the director upon receipt of substantiated written complaints from any citizen, code enforcement officer, or police department officer, which includes information and/or evidence supporting a conclusion that a violation of the conditional use permit, or of city ordinances or regulations applicable to the property or operation of the facility, has occurred. At the time of review, to ensure compliance with applicable laws and conditions of conditional use permit, conditions of approval may be added, deleted, modified, or the conditional use permit may be revoked. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.240 Schools.
A. Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of this section is to ensure that schools as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) and where permitted in Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations) are compatible with surrounding and adjacent uses and do not create adverse impacts on adjacent properties.
B. Location—Schools. No school shall be located:
    1. Within one thousand feet of any business licensed for retail sale of cannabis or cannabis products;
    2. Within one thousand feet of any business which, as determined by the review authority, would pose a significant health risk to the school due to the presence of hazardous materials or conditions; or
    3. Any area identified in the airport land use plan as prohibiting such school use.
C. Schools—Primary and Secondary (Private). Unless otherwise regulated through a minor use permit or conditional use permit, the following regulations shall apply:
    1. Pick-up/Drop-off Plan. A plan and schedule for the pick-up and drop-off of children or clients shall be provided for review and approval by the director. The plan shall demonstrate that adequate parking and loading are provided on site to minimize congestion and conflict points on travel aisles and public streets. The plan shall also demonstrate that increased traffic will not cause traffic levels to exceed those levels customary in residential neighborhoods except for somewhat higher traffic levels during the morning and evening commute. The plan shall include an agreement for each parent or client to sign which includes, at minimum:
        a. A scheduled time for pick-up and drop-off with allowances for emergencies.
        b. Prohibitions of double-parking, blocking driveways of neighboring houses, or using driveways of neighboring houses to turn around.
    2. Recreational Open Space. If open space is not required as part of the minimum requirements of the zone in which a private school of general education is located, private schools of general education shall also provide:
        a. Two hundred square feet of usable outdoor recreation area for each child in grades K-3 that may use the space at any one time; and
        b. Four hundred thirty square feet of usable outdoor recreation area for each child in grades 4-12 that may use the space at any one time.
    3. Noise. Compliance with Chapter 9.12 (Noise Control) shall be required for zone in which the school is located.
D. Public School Tenant Uses. 
    1. Purpose, Scope, and Duration. In order to allow more complete use of space made available by declining student enrollment in public schools, certain commercial activities may be established in public schools not being used for public school purposes due to temporary or permanent school closure, in addition to the uses listed in Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone as allowed within the PF zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of these regulations to the contrary and in conformance with the general plan, the following provisions shall apply to such uses.
    2. Uses Allowed with Minor Use Permit Approval. The following uses may be established within public school buildings subject to approval of a minor use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.110 (Minor Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits) and subject to the standards in subsection (D)(5) of this section.
        a. Public and private educational programs different from those normally conducted at the school, such as full-time, adult programs at an elementary school, or professional, vocational or recreational classes.
        b. Storage of furnishings and records.
        c. Day care centers for children.
        d. Business and professional offices.
        e. Instructional services.
        f. Maintenance and repair services.
    3. Uses Allowed with Conditional Use Permit Approval. The following uses may be established on public school properties subject to approval of a conditional use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.110 (Minor Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits), and subject to the standards in subsection (D)(5) of this section.
        a. Business support services.
        b. Cultural institutions.
    4. Other Uses Allowed. Other uses may be allowed by minor use permit or by conditional use permit. Upon receipt of an application for a use not listed in subsection (D)(2) or (D)(3) of this section, the director shall determine whether the use is similar in character and impacts on its surroundings to one of those listed in subsection (D)(2) or (D)(3) of this section and shall determine the permit process required or shall determine that the use does not meet the intent of this section and therefore is not allowed.
    5. Development and Performance Standards. The following standards shall be conditions of approval for all types of permits. Whether these standards can reasonably be met shall be considered by the review authority when deciding if a permit should be approved for a specific use in a specific location:
        a. Parking as required by Chapter 17.72 (Parking and Loading) shall be provided.
        b. Adequate space for the function itself and supporting activities such as parking shall be provided, in addition to all other activities previously established at the school.
        c. The use will not require structural changes to the school building inconsistent with future school use of the building, unless written guarantee is provided by the permittee that the building will be restored for school use upon termination of the lease or permit.
        d. Minimal customer, client, or delivery traffic will occur, to the satisfaction of the review authority.
        e. Clients or customers shall not visit the leased space between eleven p.m. and seven a.m.
        f. Minimal employee activity will occur at night and on weekends, to the satisfaction of the review authority.
        g. Activities shall be conducted entirely within the school building or on established playing fields and shall not alter the appearance of the building or the playing fields, except as provided in subsection (D)(5)(c) of this section.
        h. No vehicle larger than a three-quarter-ton truck shall be used by any tenant at the lease site.
        i. Activities conducted and materials or equipment used shall not change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises until a building permit has been issued and the necessary improvements installed.
        j. No use shall cause noise, dust, vibration, offensive smell, smoke, glare or electrical interference, or other hazard or nuisance.
        k. All uses shall meet fire department standards for access, hydrant locations, and fire flow prior to occupancy. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.250 Service/fueling stations.
A. Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of this section is to ensure that vehicle services—service/fueling stations as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) and where permitted in Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations) are compatible with surrounding and adjacent uses and do not create adverse impacts on adjacent properties.
B. Standards. Service/fueling stations are subject to the following standards:
    1. Premises adjoining residential zones shall be screened from such zones by a minimum six-foot-high landscaped visual barrier, subject to the limitations of Section 17.70.070 (Fences, Walls, and Hedges).
    2. Street frontage between driveways shall have a low wall or other landscape barrier to prevent vehicles from being driven or parked on the sidewalk.
    3. Bells or other sound signals shall be turned off between ten p.m. and seven a.m. if the station is adjacent to a residential zone.
    4. Pump islands shall be located at least fifteen feet from any street right-of-way line or setback line, except that cantilevered roofs may extend to a point at least five feet from such lines.
    5. Repair work shall be performed and dismantled vehicles shall be stored inside a building or area screened so that such area is not visible from off the premises.
    6. Compliance with Chapter 17.74 (Performance Standards) and Chapter 5.36 (Service Stations) is required.
C. Additional Conditions and Requirements. This section permits the director to exercise the discretion to review, request from applicants additional information, take authorized action, and impose additional conditions that are more restrictive than allowed in this section. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.260 Temporary and intermittent uses.
A. Purpose and Intent. The provisions codified in this section provide for certain temporary and intermittent uses as defined in Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) and where permitted in Chapter 17.10 (Use Regulations). It establishes standards and procedures to ensure that such uses are compatible with their surroundings and the intent of these regulations.
In approving a temporary or intermittent use, the director may establish requirements related to, but not limited to, days and hours of operation, parking, temporary structures, and site planning, in addition to performance standards specified below. All such uses shall require issuance of a temporary use permit. The director shall determine the extent to which any permanent on-site parking and other facilities may satisfy the requirements for the proposed use. A temporary use approval is not intended to allow a land use that is not allowed in the primary zone, other than in the specific cases listed in subsection B of this section.
B. Specific Cases. 
    1. Real Estate Sales Office in Tract. A temporary real estate sales office may be established in a residential development for the initial sale of property in that development, upon approval via director’s action. Such an office may be located within a residence or a common or temporary building. If a temporary building is used, it shall be removed upon termination of the use.
    2. Mobile Home as Construction Office. 
        a. A mobile home may be used as a temporary office at a construction site for not more than six months upon written approval of the chief building official subject to any conditions deemed necessary to protect health, safety, and welfare. Upon written request received prior to expiration, the use may be continued for six-month periods, not to exceed a total of eighteen months, by the chief building official.
        b. A director’s action is required to allow a mobile home as a temporary construction office when the mobile home is not located on the same property as the construction site. The same time limitations as stipulated above for an on-site mobile home would apply, with approvals for extensions of the use made by the director. Also, with the chief building official’s approval, the mobile home may be occupied by a resident guard or caretaker, provided it is properly connected to city utilities or other safe means of waste disposal is ensured.
    3. Educational Conferences. Student housing complexes normally occupied for part of the year may be used during their vacant periods for educational conferences, provided a minor use permit is approved. The occupancy of such facilities during educational conferences shall not exceed the maximum established by any prior city approval for residential occupancy.
    4. Parades, Carnivals, Fairs, Festivals. Use of privately owned property for parades, carnivals, fairs, and festivals requires approval of a temporary use permit. Where these events involve public property, coordination with the city clerk’s office is required.
    5. Other Temporary or Intermittent Uses and Special Events. Upon approval of a temporary use permit, the director may approve other temporary or intermittent uses, including but not limited to musical events, auctions, estate sales, clothing outlet sales, nonprofit benefits, parking lot sales, and car shows. At the discretion of the director, certain small-scale events with limited duration, consisting of activities with no potential to detrimentally affect those working and living in the vicinity, may be allowed through director’s action. administrative action without a public hearing. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.270 Utilities facilities.
Utilities facilities, not including wireless telecommunications facilities, shall be established and maintained in accordance with the following standards, in addition to any conditions that may be imposed via the discretionary review process:
A. Utilities transmission stations and substations shall be screened from view from private properties and public rights-of-way by decorative block walls, landscaping, or a combination of walls and landscaping.
B. All such facilities shall be secured to prevent unauthorized access.
C. Where utility facilities are proposed to be placed on a sidewalk or other pedestrian or bicycle travel path within a public right-of-way, sufficient clearance, as determined by the director, shall be provided to allow for safe pedestrian and bicycle travel.
D. Aboveground utilities facilities shall be painted or otherwise have an exterior treatment that is neutral in color. Alternatively, the review authority may authorize the painting of artwork on such facilities, consistent with any such program or guidelines the city may establish. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.280 Vending machines.
Outdoor vending machines are allowed in all commercial zones subject to the following standards:
A. Vending machines shall be located along the face of a building or against a structure designed to accommodate them.
B. Vending machines shall be visible from access drives or public streets.
C. Vending machines shall occupy not more than ten percent of the length of the wall facing the street or access drive, or twenty feet, whichever is less.
D. Vending machines shall not obstruct private pedestrian walkways. A minimum of forty-four inches shall be kept clear of obstructions, or more if pedestrian traffic volume warrants.
E. Vending machines are not allowed on public sidewalks. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.86.290 Wireless telecommunications facilities.
A. Purpose. These regulations are established for the development, siting, and installation of wireless telecommunications facilities consistent with Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended; to protect and promote public health, safety, and welfare; and to preserve view corridors and avoid adverse visual and environmental impacts. These standards are not intended to be all-inclusive. Projects may be subject to additional standards deemed appropriate through discretionary permit processing to address site-specific conditions.
B. Exempt Facilities. The following wireless telecommunications facilities are exempt from the requirements of this section:
    1. Government-owned telecommunications facilities used primarily to protect public health, welfare, and safety.
    2. Facilities operated by providers of emergency medical services, including hospital, ambulance, and medical air transportation services for use in the provision of those services.
    3. Satellite dish antennas for residential and commercial use, solely for the use of the occupants of the site, subject to compliance with development standards identified in Section 17.70.160 (Satellite Dish Antenna).
    4. Any facility specifically exempted under federal or state law.
C. Planning Applications and Approvals Required. 
    1. Installation of a new wireless telecommunications facility or significant modification of an existing installation, as determined by the director, shall require minor use permit approval.
    2. The co-location of a new wireless telecommunications facility with an existing approved installation, or minor modification of an existing installation, shall only require director’s action for architectural review.
D. Building Permit Required. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be constructed, installed, or modified prior to obtaining a city building permit.
E. Site Development and Performance Standards. 
    1. Setbacks. All facility towers and accessory structures shall comply with the setback requirements of the applicable zone.
    2. Height. The height of any antenna or support equipment shall be determined as part of the administrative use permit on a case-by-case basis. All facilities shall be designed to the minimum necessary functional height.
    3. Site Access. Telecommunications facilities should use existing roads and parking whenever possible. New and existing access roads and parking shall be improved and surfaced where necessary to the satisfaction of the director.
    4. Aesthetics and Visibility. Facilities shall be creatively designed to minimize the visual impact to the greatest extent possible by means of placement, screening, and camouflage. The applicant shall use the smallest and least visible antennas possible to accomplish the coverage objectives. Each installation shall be designed to blend into its surroundings so that the antenna(s) and equipment are not apparent to the casual observer.
        a. Building-mounted facilities shall appear as an integral part of the structure. Equipment and antennas shall be compatible and in scale with existing architectural elements, building materials and site characteristics. Wall-mounted antennas shall be integrated architecturally with the style and character of the structure. If possible, antennas and equipment shall be located entirely within an existing or newly created architectural feature so as to be effectively unnoticeable.
        b. Ground-mounted support equipment shall be undergrounded or otherwise screened from view so as to be effectively unnoticeable.
        c. All connections and conduits between the base of the antenna(s) and support equipment shall be undergrounded. Connections and conduit above ground shall be fully enclosed to the satisfaction of the director. Electrical and telephone service to the support equipment shall be undergrounded.
        d. Ground-mounted antennas, poles, structures, equipment, or other parts of a telecommunications facility which would extend above a ridgeline so as to silhouette against the sky shall be discouraged. Where allowed, they shall be designed to be indistinguishable from the natural surroundings.
    5. Lighting. All telecommunications facilities not otherwise required to have lighting in compliance with Federal Aviation Administration rules shall be unlit, except when authorized personnel are actually present at night, and except for exempt facilities.
    6. Historic Buildings. Any wireless facility located on or adjacent to a historic building or site shall be designed to ensure consistency with the Secretary of the Interior standards for remodeling and rehabilitation.
    7. Equipment Upgrades. It shall be the responsibility of the owner/operator of a telecommunications facility to provide the city with a notice of intent to modify site equipment in any way. At the time of modification, co-location, or upgrade of facilities, existing equipment shall be replaced with equipment of equal or greater technical capacity and modified to reduce aesthetic impacts by reducing the size of the facility or introducing camouflaging techniques to the satisfaction of the director. Unused or obsolete equipment or towers shall be removed from the site within ninety days after their use has ceased.
    8. Number of Facilities per Site. The city shall retain the authority to limit the number of antennas with related equipment and providers to be located at any site and adjacent sites in order to prevent negative visual impacts associated with multiple facilities.
    9. Noise. Operations of wireless telecommunications facilities shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 9.12 (Noise Control) for the zone in which they are located.
    10. Backup Generators. Any facility utilizing temporary backup generators shall be required to meet or exceed air pollution control district standards. All generators shall be fitted with approved air pollution control devices. Projects that propose to include backup generators shall require review and approval from the air pollution control district. Project plans shall indicate location, size, horsepower, and type of fuel used for any proposed generator. Generators shall only be operated during power outages and for testing and maintenance purposes. Testing and maintenance shall only take place on weekdays between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m.
    11. Biological Impacts. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall minimize potential impacts to biological resources to the greatest extent possible.
    12. Radio Interference. Interference with municipal radio communication is prohibited. Any telecommunications facility that the city has reason to believe is interfering with municipal radio communication shall cease operation immediately upon notice from the city and shall be subject to minor use permit review and possible revocation. Testing shall be done prior to any permanent installation and frequencies shall be monitored at regular intervals after installation established by the minor use permit, at the expense of the facility owner/operator.
    13. Airport Operations. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be sited in locations where they will interfere with the operation of the San Luis Obispo airport. Wireless towers and related facilities within the airport planning area shall be referred to the airport manager or the airport land use commission for a determination of consistency with airport area standards.
    14. Radio Frequency and Electromagnetic Exposure. 
        a. Wireless telecommunications facilities operating alone or in conjunction with other telecommunications facilities shall not produce radio frequency radiation in excess of the standards for permissible human exposure as adopted by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Applications for facilities shall include a radio frequency radiation (RFR) report that measures the predicted levels of RFR emitted by the proposed facility. The radio frequency radiation report shall compare proposed project levels to levels allowed by the FCC and shall show output of the proposed facility in combination with other facilities located or proposed in the vicinity.
        b. The city may require one or more post-construction RFR reports as a condition of project approval, to verify that the actual levels of RFR emitted by the approved facilities, operating alone or in combination with other approved facilities, substantially conform to the pre-approval RFR report and do not exceed current standards for permissible human exposure to RFR as adopted by the FCC.
    15. Signs. Explanatory warning signs shall be posted at all access points to cellular telecommunications facilities in compliance with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) C95.2 color, symbol, and content conventions.
    16. Nuisance. Facility generators, mechanical equipment, construction, testing and maintenance shall be operated or performed in such a manner that no nuisance results. At the discretion of the director, upon receipt of written complaints, the minor use permit allowing a telecommunications facility may be scheduled for public review. At the hearing, conditions of approval may be added, deleted, or modified, or the minor use permit may be revoked.
    17. Interference with Public Services and Facilities. Telecommunications facilities within public parks shall not interfere with park operations or limit public use of park facilities. Installations in conjunction with other public facilities shall be held to a similar standard.
    18. City Inspection. The city shall have the right to access facilities after twenty-four hours’ written or verbal notice.
F. Abandonment. It shall be the responsibility of the owner/operator of a telecommunications facility to provide the city with a notice of intent to vacate the site a minimum of thirty days prior to ceasing operation. Any wireless telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of ninety days shall be removed within ninety days of the date upon which the operation ceased.
G. Revocation of a Permit. Wireless telecommunications service providers shall fully comply with all conditions related to any permit or approval granted under this section. Failure to comply with any condition shall constitute grounds for revocation. If a condition is not remedied within a reasonable period, the director may schedule a public hearing before the hearing officer to consider revocation of the permit. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.88 RESERVED

Chapter 17.90 RESERVED

Article 5. Nonconformities

Chapter 17.92 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES

Sections:
17.92.010    Intent.
17.92.020    Limits on reconstruction—Exceptions.
17.92.030    Large-scale retail establishments.

17.92.010 Intent.
A structure which lawfully existed on the effective date of applicable sections of the ordinance codified in this title, but which does not comply with one or more of the property development standards for the zone in which it is located, is a “nonconforming structure.” This chapter is intended to provide for the correction or removal of such structures as soon as practical, but not unduly encumber maintenance and continued use of otherwise sound structures. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.92.020 Limits on reconstruction—Exceptions.
A. A nonconforming structure that is involuntarily damaged to an extent of seventy-five percent or more of its replacement cost immediately prior to such damage, as determined by the chief building official, may be restored only if made to conform.
B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, nonconforming residences in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R 4, O, C-N, C-C, C-R, C-T, C-D, and C/OS zones that have been involuntarily damaged to an extent of seventy-five percent or more of their replacement value cost immediately prior to such damage, as determined by the chief building official, may be rebuilt at the same density and up to the same size under the following circumstances:
    1. All construction must conform to current building codes, zoning regulations, and design guidelines, except that the previously existing number of dwelling units and size of buildings will be allowed.
    2. A building permit for the replacement structure(s) must be obtained within three years of the date of the damage or destruction.
    3. Notwithstanding the above provisions, application for replacement structures of the same density and size may be denied if the director makes one of the following findings:
        a. The reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding will be detrimental or injurious to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons living or working in the neighborhood.
        b. The reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding will be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood.
        d. There no longer exists a zone in which the existing nonconforming use is permitted.
C. Changes to structural elements, interior partitions or other nonstructural improvements and repairs may be made to a nonconforming building. However, demolition, as defined in Section 17.158.012 (D Definitions), and reconstruction shall be permitted only if the structure is made to conform.
D. Decisions of the chief building official regarding replacement cost may be appealed to the council.
E. Exceptions to this chapter may be granted by the director for historic structures designated as such in any list or plan element adopted by the city, or for buildings that are over fifty years old where the existing building and any proposed additions or modifications are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood, as determined by the director.
F. Exceptions to this chapter may be granted by the director, through a director’s action, to allow additions to nonconforming structures occupied by conforming uses, subject to a finding of consistency with the intent of this chapter as follows:
    1. Conforming additions to residential structures may be approved by the director.
    2. The director may allow certain setbacks to be reduced to zero in some instances for minor additions to existing legal nonconforming structures (see Section 17.70.170(D)(2)(d)).
G. The value of additions allowed pursuant to subsections (F)(1) and (F)(2) of this section shall be excluded from calculation of replacement cost of the nonconforming structure. (Ord. 1657 § 20, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.92.030 Large-scale retail establishments.
Sections 17.26.030, 17.30.030, 17.32.030, 17.34.030, and 17.36.030 establish limits on the size of large-scale retail commercial buildings. When an otherwise lawful retail establishment existed on the effective date of the size limits, such structure shall be considered a development nonconformity but may be continued, structurally altered, repaired, or reconstructed so long as it is not increased, extended, or enlarged beyond the gross floor area of the building that existed on that date. To the extent practicable, the design guidelines for large-scale retail projects shall be applied to any alteration, reconstruction or repair that takes place after the effective date of the size limits. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.94 NONCONFORMING USES

Sections:
17.94.010    Definition and intent.
17.94.020    Regulations.
17.94.030    Nonconforming parking.

17.94.010 Definition and intent.
A nonconforming use is one which was legally established on the effective date of applicable sections of this title but which is not now an allowed or conditionally allowed use in the zone in which it is located. The intent of these regulations is to prevent the expansion of nonconforming uses, establish the circumstances under which they may be continued, and provide for their removal or change to a conforming use as soon as practical. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.94.020 Regulations.
A. Change of ownership, tenancy, or management of a nonconforming use shall not affect its legal, nonconforming status.
B. A nonconforming use may be continued and a nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use, provided:
    1. A nonconforming use which ceases for a continuous period of twelve months shall lose its nonconforming status and the premises on which the nonconforming use was located shall from then on be used for conforming uses.
    2. A nonconforming use may be replaced with another nonconforming use through approval via the director’s hearing process. In granting such approval, the director shall find that the new use has similar or less severe impacts on its surroundings in terms of noise, traffic, parking demand, hours of operation and visual incompatibility. The applicant shall submit evidence of the date when the original nonconforming use was established.
    3. A nonconforming single-unit dwelling used as a residence may be continued and added to consistent with the standards of the R-1 zone, including establishment of an accessory dwelling unit.
C. A lot occupied by a nonconforming use may be further developed by the addition of conforming uses and structures via the director’s hearing process.
D. For uses located in the east airport annexation area of the airport area specific plan, “office-government” uses in existence at the time of annexation will not be subject to the provisions of subsection (B)(1) of this section and the community development director may permit a similar nonconforming “office-government” use to be established even if the prior nonconforming use has ceased for more than twelve months, subject to the process and findings set forth in subsection (B)(2) of this section. (Ord. 1681 § 2, 2020; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.94.030 Nonconforming parking.
Nonconforming parking is addressed in Section 17.72.060 (Nonconforming Parking). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.96 NONCONFORMING LOTS

Sections:
17.96.010    Intent.
17.96.020    Regulations.

17.96.010 Intent.
A lot having less area, width, depth, or frontage than required by the subdivision regulations, as set forth in Title 16, for the zone in which it is located, but which was lawfully created prior to the effective date of regulations requiring such greater area or dimension, shall be considered a nonconforming lot. These regulations are intended to provide for the reasonable use of such nonconforming lots consistent with other standards adopted to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.96.020 Regulations.
A. If a nonconforming lot has been held in common ownership with any contiguous property at any time since November 18, 1977, and it otherwise meets the requirements for parcel merger under Government Code Section 66451.11, it may not be individually developed. The area within such a lot may be developed only after it has been merged with contiguous property or otherwise resubdivided in conjunction with the contiguous property to create one or more conforming parcels or one parcel which more nearly conforms.
B. In an R-1 or R-2 zone, the merger or resubdivision requirements set forth in subsection A of this section shall not apply to a nonconforming lot and contiguous commonly owned property where each of the parcels has an area, width, depth, and frontage equal to at least eighty percent of the minimum required in the subdivision regulations (Title 16).
C. If a nonconforming lot has not been held in common ownership with any contiguous property since November 18, 1977, it may be individually developed.
D. Property development standards of the applicable zone shall apply to nonconforming lots. However, the density standards shall not prevent construction of a single dwelling unit where otherwise permitted by this chapter. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Article 6. Permit Procedures

Chapter 17.102 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
17.102.010   Purpose and intent.
17.102.020   Discretionary actions and permits.
17.102.030   Additional permits may be required.
17.102.040   Burden of proof and precedence.

17.102.010 Purpose and intent.
This Article 6 establishes the overall structure for the application, review, and action on city-required permit and project review applications and identifies and describes those discretionary permits and other approvals required by these zoning regulations in Table 6-1: Review Authority. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.102.020 Discretionary actions and permits.
A. Director’s Actions. Except when combined with legislative actions or other nonadministrative actions defined in this article, the director, also defined in these zoning regulations as the designee of the director, is the designated review authority for the following quasi-judicial permits and actions, which are generally limited to interpretation of policy or relatively minor adjustments of zoning regulations standards. Additionally, the director has primary administrative authority over certain activities which require the determination of compliance with applicable zoning regulations provisions. The director, at the director’s sole discretion, may elevate the level of review to a higher review process and/or authority.
    1. Affordable Housing Incentives. An action authorizing a residential density bonus in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Affordable Housing Incentives).
    2. Development Review—Minor. An administrative action providing for the review of and action on certain development applications identified in Chapter 17.106 (Development Review).
    3. Director’s Action on Exceptions. An administrative action granting exception (modification or deletion) to certain specified development standards of these zoning regulations in cases where strict compliance would result in a hardship, as specified in and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.108 (Director’s Action).
    4. Home Occupation Permits. An administrative permit authorizing the operation of a specified home-based occupation in a particular location in compliance with the provisions of these zoning regulations and in compliance with procedures specified in Article 4, Section 17.86.140 (Home Occupations).
    5. Reasonable Accommodation. An administrative permit authorizing limited modifications to properties to accommodate a person with physical or mental impairments that substantially limit one or more major life activities in compliance with specific criteria and performance standards and in compliance with procedures specified in Chapter 17.112 (Reasonable Accommodation).
    6. Temporary Use Permits. An administrative permit authorizing specific limited term uses in compliance with specified conditions and performance criteria specified in Article 4, Section 17.86.260 (Temporary and Intermittent Uses).
    7. Zoning Regulations Interpretations. An administrative interpretation of certain provisions of these zoning regulations in an effort to resolve conflict or ambiguity in the regulations and to ensure their consistent application in compliance with Chapter 17.04 (Interpretation of the Zoning Regulations).
B. Director’s Hearing. Except when combined with legislative actions, the director, via a public hearing process, is the designated review authority for the following quasi-judicial permits and actions. A public hearing is required for the following quasi-judicial actions in compliance with Chapter 17.109 (Director’s Hearing).
    1. Development Review—Moderate. An administrative action providing for the review of and action on certain development applications identified in Chapter 17.106 (Development Review).
    2. Director’s Hearing on Exceptions. An administrative action granting exception (modification or deletion) to certain specified development standards of these zoning regulations in cases where strict compliance would result in a hardship, as specified in and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.109 (Director’s Hearing), and other than those exceptions cited in Chapter 17.108 (Director’s Action).
    3. Director’s Hearing on Various Permits. A quasi-judicial action authorizing the construction or alteration of specific development projects as set forth in Table 6-1 and as otherwise called for in these zoning regulations for projects subject to a director’s hearing. A public hearing is required in compliance with Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings).
    4. Minor Use Permits. A permit authorizing the operation of a specific use of land or a structure in a particular location in compliance with the provisions of these zoning regulations and in compliance with procedures specified in Chapter 17.110 (Minor Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits).
    5. Revocation of Director’s Hearing Actions and Minor Use Permits. A judicial process providing for the review of potential violations of conditions of approval for an authorized use or structure, and for the revocation of such approval based upon findings set forth in Chapters 17.108 and 17.109.
    6. Variances. An action granting exception to the development standards of these zoning regulations in cases where strict compliance would result in a unique hardship in compliance with Chapter 17.114 (Variances).
C. Planning Commission Permits and Actions. Except when combined with legislative actions, the planning commission is the designated review authority for the following quasi-judicial permits and actions. Additionally, the planning commission may review administrative permits and actions referred by the director. A public hearing is required for the following quasi-judicial actions in compliance with Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings).
    1. Adjustments to Standards in the Downtown-Commercial (C-D) Zone. A process for making adjustments, on a project-specific basis, to the development standards applicable to development in the C-D zone, as specified in Chapter 17.32 (Downtown-Commercial (C-D) Zone).
    2. Building Setback Lines. A process for adoption of official building setback lines, as specified in Chapter 17.80 (Street Regulations).
    3. Conditional Use Permits. A permit authorizing the operation of a specific use of land or a structure in a particular location in compliance with the provisions of these zoning regulations and the procedures specified in Chapter 17.110 (Minor Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits).
    4. Development Review—Major. A process providing for the review of and action on certain development applications identified in Chapter 17.106 (Development Review).
    5. PD Overlay Zone—Amendments to Final Development Plan. A process for reviewing proposed amendments to an adopted Planned Development Overlay (PD) Zone or final development plan as specified in Chapter 17.48 (Planned Development (PD) Overlay Zone).
    6. Planning Commission Hearing on Various Exceptions and Special Development Projects. A quasi-judicial action authorizing an exception (modification or deletion) to certain specified development standards of these zoning regulations and for the construction or alteration of specific development projects as set forth in Table 6-1 and as otherwise called for in these zoning regulations. A public hearing is required in compliance with Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings).
    7. Revocation of Conditional Use Permits. A judicial process providing for the review of potential violations of conditions of approval for an authorized use or structure, and for the revocation of such approval based upon findings set forth in Chapter 17.110.
D. Legislative Actions. The designated review authority for all legislative actions is the city council, based on recommendations provided by the planning commission. A public hearing is required for the following legislative actions in compliance with Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings):
    1. Development Agreements and Amendments. An agreement between the city and a party with legal or equitable interest in the real property relating to the development of property in compliance with Chapter 17.128 (Development Agreements).
    2. General Plan Text/Map Amendments. An action authorizing either a text amendment to the general plan or a map amendment changing the general plan land use designation of particular property in compliance with Chapter 17.130 (General Plan Amendments).
    3. Specific Plan and Amendments. A regulatory document prepared in compliance with Government Code Section 65450 et seq. for the systematic implementation of the general plan for a particular area as specified in Chapter 17.50 (Specific Plan Overlay Zone).
    4. Zoning Regulations Text/Zoning Map Amendments. An action authorizing either a text amendment to these zoning regulations or a map amendment changing the zoning designation of particular property in compliance with Chapter 17.124 (Amendments—Zoning Regulations and Zoning Map).
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
|                                      Table 6-1: Review Authority                                      |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
|         Type of Action          | Applicable Code |         Role of Review Authority (1) (2)          |
|                                 |     Section     |                                                   |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| "                               | "               |   Director   | Planning Commission | City Council |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Director’s Action                                                                                     |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Affordable Housing              | Ch. 17.140      | Decision     |                     |              |
| Incentives                      |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Development Review—Minor        | Ch. 17.106      | Decision     |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Director’s Action—Exceptions    | Articles 2, 3,  | Decision     |                     |              |
| - Antenna heights               | and 4           |              |                     |              |
| - AOZ uses and                  |                 |              |                     |              |
| calculations                    |                 |              |                     |              |
| for nonresidential              |                 |              |                     |              |
| intensity                       |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Fence heights                 |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Front yard                    |                 |              |                     |              |
| paving                          |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Historic structures           |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Homestay                      |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Lot merger                    |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Parking reductions—Shared     |                 |              |                     |              |
| parking                         |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Parking reductions            |                 |              |                     |              |
| (other than                     |                 |              |                     |              |
| shared parking)—up              |                 |              |                     |              |
| to 10% of required              |                 |              |                     |              |
| parking spaces                  |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Parking and                   |                 |              |                     |              |
| driveway designs                |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Parking lot                   |                 |              |                     |              |
| lights                          |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Trash enclosures              |                 |              |                     |              |
| in setbacks                     |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Director’s Action               | Arts. 2, 3, and | Decision     |                     |              |
| - Accent lighting               | 4               |              |                     |              |
| - Building height               |                 |              |                     |              |
| of 60 feet recommended          |                 |              |                     |              |
| by ARC                          |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Density slope                 |                 |              |                     |              |
| calculation                     |                 |              |                     |              |
| exception                       |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Education conference          |                 |              |                     |              |
| in student housing              |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Final development             |                 |              |                     |              |
| plan amendment—Minor            |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Home occupation:              |                 |              |                     |              |
| use in conflict                 |                 |              |                     |              |
| with regulations                |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Large family                  |                 |              |                     |              |
| day care                        |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Minor additions—zero          |                 |              |                     |              |
| setback                         |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Nonconforming                 |                 |              |                     |              |
| use replacement                 |                 |              |                     |              |
| or modification                 |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Outdoor sales                 |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Parking: off                  |                 |              |                     |              |
| site                            |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Parking lifts                 |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Special considerations        |                 |              |                     |              |
| overlay                         |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Tandem parking—nonresidential |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Temporary construction        |                 |              |                     |              |
| office (off                     |                 |              |                     |              |
| site)                           |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Trip reduction                |                 |              |                     |              |
| plan                            |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Two or more                   |                 |              |                     |              |
| single-unit                     |                 |              |                     |              |
| homes on lot                    |                 |              |                     |              |
| in R-1 zone                     |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Vehicle access                |                 |              |                     |              |
| in C-D zone                     |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Other (for                    |                 |              |                     |              |
| development                     |                 |              |                     |              |
| actions specified               |                 |              |                     |              |
| in these zoning                 |                 |              |                     |              |
| regulations                     |                 |              |                     |              |
| as requiring                    |                 |              |                     |              |
| a director’s                    |                 |              |                     |              |
| action)                         |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Home Occupation                 | Sec. 17.86.140  | Decision     |                     |              |
| Permits                         |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Reasonable Accommodation        | Ch. 17.112      | Decision     |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| PD Overlay Zone—Minor           | Ch. 17.48       | Decision     |                     |              |
| Amendments to                   |                 |              |                     |              |
| Final Development               |                 |              |                     |              |
| Plan                            |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Temporary Use                   | Sec. 17.86.260  | Decision (3) |                     |              |
| Permits                         | and Ch. 17.113  |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Zoning Regulations              | Ch. 17.04       | Decision     |                     |              |
| Interpretations                 |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Director’s Hearing                                                                                    |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Development Review—Moderate     | Ch. 17.106      | Decision     |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Director’s Hearing              | Arts. 2, 3, and | Decision     |                     |              |
| - Building height               | 4               |              |                     |              |
| exceptions (except              |                 |              |                     |              |
| in C-D zone,                    |                 |              |                     |              |
| which requires                  |                 |              |                     |              |
| planning commission             |                 |              |                     |              |
| review)                         |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Creek setback                 |                 |              |                     |              |
| exceptions                      |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Dish-type satellite           |                 |              |                     |              |
| antenna exceptions              |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Grocery store                 |                 |              |                     |              |
| floor area limitation           |                 |              |                     |              |
| exception                       |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Height exception—Office       |                 |              |                     |              |
| zone                            |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Lot coverage                  |                 |              |                     |              |
| requirement                     |                 |              |                     |              |
| exceptions                      |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Parking as                    |                 |              |                     |              |
| a primary use                   |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Parking reductions            |                 |              |                     |              |
| for mixed-use                   |                 |              |                     |              |
| development                     |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Performance                   |                 |              |                     |              |
| standards exceptions            |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Residential                   |                 |              |                     |              |
| conversion to                   |                 |              |                     |              |
| nonresidential                  |                 |              |                     |              |
| use                             |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Retail store                  |                 |              |                     |              |
| floor area limitation           |                 |              |                     |              |
| exception                       |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Revocation                    |                 |              |                     |              |
| of director’s                   |                 |              |                     |              |
| hearing approvals               |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Telecommunications            |                 |              |                     |              |
| facilities nuisances            |                 |              |                     |              |
| - Yard setback                  |                 |              |                     |              |
| exceptions                      |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Downtown Housing                | Ch. 17.142      | Decision     |                     |              |
| Conversions                     |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| High Occupancy                  | Ch. 17.148      | Decision     |                     |              |
| Residential                     |                 |              |                     |              |
| Use                             |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Minor Use Permits               | Ch. 17.110      | Decision     |                     |              |
| and MUP Revocations             |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Variances                       | Ch. 17.114      | Decision     |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Planning Commission Review                                                                            |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Building Setback                | Ch. 17.80       | Recommend    | Decision            |              |
| Lines                           |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Conditional Use                 | Ch. 17.110      | Recommend    | Decision            |              |
| Permits                         |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Development Review—Major        | Ch. 17.106      | Recommend    | Decision            |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Downtown Commercial             | Ch. 17.32       | Recommend    | Decision            |              |
| (C-D) Zone—Adjustments          |                 |              |                     |              |
| to Standards                    |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Downtown Commercial             | Ch. 17.32       | Recommend    | Decision            |              |
| (C-D) Zone—Significant          |                 |              |                     |              |
| Additions and                   |                 |              |                     |              |
| New Construction                |                 |              |                     |              |
| of Principal                    |                 |              |                     |              |
| Buildings                       |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Downtown Housing                | Ch. 17.142      | Recommend    | Decision            |              |
| Conversion Exceptions           |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Parking Reductions              | Sec. 17.72.050  | Recommend    | Decision            |              |
| in C-D Zone                     |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Parking Reductions              | Sec. 17.72.050  | Recommend    | Decision            |              |
| in All Other                    |                 |              |                     |              |
| Zones—More Than                 |                 |              |                     |              |
| 10% Reduction                   |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| PD Overlay Zone—Major           | Ch. 17.48       | Recommend    | Decision            |              |
| Amendments to                   |                 |              |                     |              |
| Final Development               |                 |              |                     |              |
| Plan                            |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Revocation of                   | N/A             | Recommend    | Decision            |              |
| Prior Planning                  |                 |              |                     |              |
| Commission Action               |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Safe Parking                    | Sec. 17.86.230  | Recommend    | Decision            |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| SF Overlay Zone—Review          | Ch. 17.52       | Recommend    | Decision            |              |
| Authority in                    |                 |              |                     |              |
| Specific Focus                  |                 |              |                     |              |
| Areas                           |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Legislative Actions—Council Review                                                                    |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Development Agreements          | Ch. 17.128      | Recommend    | Recommend           | Decision     |
| and Amendments                  |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| General Plan                    | Ch. 17.130      | Recommend    | Recommend           | Decision     |
| Amendments                      |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Planned Developments            | Ch. 17.48       | Recommend    | Recommend           | Decision     |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Specific Plans                  | Ch. 17.50       | Recommend    | Recommend           | Decision     |
| and Amendments                  |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Zoning Map Amendments           | Ch. 17.124      | Recommend    | Recommend           | Decision     |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Zoning Regulations              | Ch. 17.124      | Recommend    | Recommend           | Decision     |
| Amendments                      |                 |              |                     |              |
+---------------------------------+-----------------+--------------+---------------------+--------------+
Notes: 
(1)“Recommend” means that the review authority makes a recommendation to a higher decision-making body; “Decision” means that the review authority makes the final decision subject to appeal procedures outlined in Chapter 17.126 (Appeals).
(2)The review authority may defer action and refer the request to the higher level review authority for consideration and final decision.
(3)Director’s decision may be appealed to the city manager.
E. Multiple Permit Applications. 
    1. Concurrent Filing. An applicant for a development project that requires the filing of more than one application (e.g., conditional use permit, tentative map, etc.) shall file all related applications concurrently, together with all required application fees, unless these requirements for concurrent filing are waived by the director.
    2. Concurrent Processing. Multiple applications for the same project shall be processed concurrently and shall be reviewed and acted upon by the highest review authority designated by these zoning regulations for any of the applications. For example, a project for which applications for moderate development review project and a conditional use permit are filed shall have both applications decided by the planning commission, instead of the director being the final decision-making authority for the moderate development review project, as otherwise required by Table 6-1: Review Authority. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.102.030 Additional permits may be required.
A. A land use on property that complies with the permit requirement or exemption provisions of these zoning regulations shall also comply with the permit requirements of other municipal code provisions and any permit requirements of other agencies before construction or use of the property is commenced. All necessary permits shall be obtained before starting work or establishing a new use, with the exception that a demolition permit may be obtained and demolition work carried out prior to starting work or establishing a new use. Nothing in these zoning regulations shall eliminate the need to obtain any permits required by:
    1. Any other municipal code provisions, including building, grading, or other construction permits; a business license in compliance with Title 5 (Licenses, Permits, and Regulations), if required, or subdivision approval if required by Title 16 (Subdivisions); or
    2. Any applicable county, regional, state, or federal regulations.
B. Grading shall not be commenced, and no structure shall be altered, enlarged, erected, moved, or rebuilt subject to the provisions of this section, except in compliance with the approved permit and the conditions imposed. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.102.040 Burden of proof and precedence.
A. Burden of Proof. The burden of proof to establish the evidence in support of the required finding(s) for any permit or approval in compliance with these zoning regulations is the responsibility of the applicant.
B. Precedence. 
    1. Each permit or approval shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
    2. The granting of a prior permit or approval, or the denial of a permit, either on the subject property or any other property within the city does not create a precedent and is not justification for the granting or denial of a new permit under current review. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.104 PERMIT APPLICATION FILING AND PROCESSING

Sections:
17.104.010   Purpose and authority for land use and planning decisions.
17.104.020   Application preparation and filing.
17.104.030   Application fees.
17.104.040   Applicant indemnification.
17.104.050   Initial application review.
17.104.060   Inactive applications.
17.104.070   Expiration.

17.104.010 Purpose and authority for land use and planning decisions.
A. This chapter provides procedures and requirements for the preparation, filing, and initial processing of the land use permit applications and legislative actions required by the city and specified in these zoning regulations.
B. Table 6-1: Review Authority identifies the review authority responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of application required by these zoning regulations.
C. The architectural review commission has the authority to review and make recommendations to either the director or the planning commission, depending upon the type of project application, regarding compliance with applicable design guidelines. Section 2.48.050 (Projects Subject to Architectural Review) establishes the types of projects subject to architectural review (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.104.020 Application preparation and filing.
Application shall be made to the community development department in the form prescribed by the director, including, as may be necessary, site plans, written descriptions of activities to be conducted, technical studies of site characteristics, and any other materials set forth on the application form or otherwise prescribed by city policy. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.104.030 Application fees.
The council may, by resolution, establish fees for applications and procedures required by these regulations, to the extent such fees have a reasonable relationship to the costs incurred in processing the applications and providing public notice. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.104.040 Applicant indemnification.
A. Applicant Agreement. 
    1. At the time of submitting an application for a discretionary land use approval, the applicant shall agree as part of the application to defend (with legal counsel of city’s selection), indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its agents, attorneys, employees, and officers from any action, claim, or proceeding brought against the city or its agents, employees, and officers to annul, attack, set aside, or void a discretionary land use approval of the city.
    2. The required indemnification shall include damages awarded against the city, if any, costs of suit, attorney’s fees, and other costs and expenses incurred in connection with the action.
B. City Notification of Applicant. In the event that an action, claim, or proceeding referred to in subsection A of this section is brought, the city shall promptly notify the applicant of the existence of the action, claim, or proceeding and shall cooperate fully in the defense of the action, claim, or proceeding.
C. City Participation in Defense. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from participating in the defense of any action, claim, or proceeding if the city elects to bear its own attorney’s fees and costs and defends the action in good faith. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.104.050 Initial application review.
A. Review for Completeness. 
    1. Criteria for Review. The director shall review each application for completeness and accuracy before it is accepted as being complete and officially filed. The director’s determination of completeness shall be based on the city’s list of required application contents and related additional written instructions provided to the applicant in any preapplication conference and/or during the initial application review period.
    2. Notification of Applicant. As required by Government Code Section 65943, within thirty calendar days of application filing, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, either that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing, or that the application is incomplete and that additional information, specified in the director’s letter, shall be provided. This requirement shall not apply to any legislative actions.
    3. Submittal of Additional Information. 
        a. When the director determines that an application is incomplete, the time used by the applicant to submit the required additional information shall not be considered part of the time within which the determination of completeness shall occur.
        b. The additional specified information shall be submitted in writing or electronically, as required by the director.
        c. The director’s review of any information resubmitted by the applicant shall be accomplished in compliance with subsection (A)(1) of this section, along with another thirty-day period of review for completeness for each resubmittal necessary.
    4. Environmental Information. Upon review of an initial application or after an application has been accepted as complete, the director may require the applicant to submit additional information needed for the environmental review of the project in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the CEQA guidelines.
B. Referral of Application. At the discretion of the director, or where otherwise required by these development regulations or state or federal law, an application may be referred to any public agency that may be affected by or have an interest in the proposed project.
C. Multi-Unit Residential and Mixed-Use Developments. Where a multi-unit residential development or mixed-use development in which at least two-thirds of the square footage consists of residential use, and where such developments qualify for streamlined processing pursuant to Government Code Section 65400 et seq., the provisions of Government Code Section 65400 et seq. shall apply.
D. Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. The provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to wireless telecommunications facilities. The review for completeness and the processing of such applications shall comply with applicable Federal Communication Commission regulations. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.104.060 Inactive applications.
An application will be classified as “inactive” when the applicant has not responded within one hundred eighty days to submit items required by staff for further processing as provided in an incomplete letter. The applicant shall have the ability to otherwise demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that progress is being made toward compliance. The director shall determine when an application is in an “inactive status” and deemed to be withdrawn. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.104.070 Expiration.
If building permits are not issued for site development authorized by a discretionary permit within one year of the date of approval or such longer time as may be stipulated as a condition of approval, the permit shall expire with the building permit application. Upon written request received prior to expiration, the director may grant renewals of an approval for successive periods of not more than one year each, up to a total of three years. Requests beyond three years are subject to review by the planning commission. Approvals of such renewals shall be in writing and for a specific period. Renewals may be approved with new or modified conditions upon a finding that the circumstances under which the permit was originally approved have substantially changed. Renewal of a permit shall not require public notice or hearing, unless the renewal is subject to new or modified conditions. In order to approve a renewal, the director, or planning commission as applicable, must make the findings required for initial approval. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.106 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW

Sections:
17.106.010   Purpose and intent.
17.106.020   Applicability.
17.106.030   Levels of development review.
17.106.040   Recommendations from advisory bodies.
17.106.050   Application review.
17.106.060   Conditions of approval.

17.106.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a process for the appropriate review of development projects that do not require any discretionary permits or other types of review, and to ensure that all approved site and structural development:
A. Is compatible with the physical and environmental characteristics of the site and surrounding properties to minimize conflicts;
B. Provides for safe and convenient access and circulation for pedestrians and vehicles;
C. Exemplifies the best professional high-quality design practices;
D. Allows for and encourages individual identity for specific uses and structures;
E. Encourages the maintenance of a distinct neighborhood and/or community identity;
F. Minimizes or eliminates negative or undesirable visual impacts;
G. Provides for the adequate dedication of land for public purposes and the provision of public infrastructure associated with the subject development; and
H. Implements general plan policies, applicable design guidelines, and any other applicable city planning-related documents. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.106.020 Applicability.
A. Development Review Required. No one shall construct any structure, or relocate, rebuild, or significantly enlarge or modify any existing structure or site until development review has been completed and approved in compliance with this chapter.
B. Enlargements and Modifications. For the purposes of this chapter, the term “significantly enlarge or modify” shall be measured from the size of the original approval and be defined as follows:
    1. Residential Enlargement or Modification. Residential enlargements or modifications larger than one thousand square feet or twenty-five percent of the existing gross floor area before the addition, whichever is less.
    2. Nonresidential Enlargement or Modification. Nonresidential enlargement, modification, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or remodel equal to or exceeding twenty-five percent of the existing gross floor area of the structure before the construction.
    3. Mixed-Use Development. Mixed-use development enlargement, modification, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or remodel equal to or exceeding twenty-five percent of the existing gross floor area of the structure before the construction.
C. Exception—Accessory Structures. Accessory structures less than five hundred square feet in size shall not be subject to development review. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.106.030 Levels of development review.
A. Three Levels. Three levels of development review are hereby established, and the thresholds set forth below shall apply to development review.
B. Minor. Minor development review is a staff-level review process with public notice provided, with no public hearing required. The following projects shall be subject to minor development review, including but not limited to:
    1. New single-unit residence and additions to an existing single-unit residence where:
        a. Architectural review is required as a condition of a subdivision approval, use permit, or other discretionary entitlement;
        b. The developer proposes to construct three or more units not defined to be a “small residential development project” per Chapter 2.48 (Architectural Review Commission);
        c. The director determines that the site is a “sensitive site” as set forth in the architectural review commission’s procedures manual;
        d. A covered required parking space or spaces are proposed to be converted to another use and replacement parking is proposed, except in conjunction with an accessory dwelling unit application;
        e. The project site is within or along a creek or waterway, as defined by the city’s floodplain management policy;
        f. The scale and character of the proposed dwelling contrasts significantly with adjacent or neighboring structures.
    2. Projects that include a public or private roof top deck, or upper level balconies or open space on a third floor or above.
    3. Building addition or remodel, that is considered minor or incidental to a larger, previously approved project, as determined by the director.
C. Moderate. Moderate development review is a discretionary director-level review process that includes public notice with a public hearing conducted as required by the applicable advisory body or review authority, including but not limited to:
    1. Multi-unit residential developments up to ten units;
    2. New single-unit subdivisions up to ten units;
    3. Nonresidential development with up to ten thousand gross square feet of new construction;
    4. A project is located on a property included on the city’s inventory of historic resources, or is near a historic resource where the development might adversely impact the historic resource;
    5. All development located on hillsides having a natural slope gradient of twenty percent or greater when no other discretionary review is required;
    6. Building addition or remodel, that is considered a significant enlargement or modification to a previously approved project, as described in Section 17.106.020(B) (Enlargements and Modifications).
D. Major. Major development review is a discretionary planning commission review process that includes public notice with a public hearing conducted as is required for all planning commission actions.
    1. Multi-unit residential developments with more than ten units;
    2. New single-unit subdivisions with more than ten units;
    3. Nonresidential development with more than ten thousand gross square feet of new construction;
    4. Significant additions and new construction of principal buildings in the C-D zone;
    5. Any project for which an EIR is required. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.106.040 Recommendations from advisory bodies.
A. For each level of development review, an advisory body may provide a recommendation to the review authority as applicable or required. In particular, review of an application subject to the architectural review commission as set forth in Section 2.48.090 (Architectural Review Procedures) shall occur:
    1. For moderate development review, the architectural review commission shall conduct a public hearing and forward its recommendations to the director. The director shall consider the recommendations but shall not be bound by them in taking final action on the application.
    2. For major development review, the architectural review commission shall conduct a public hearing and forward its recommendations to the director. The director shall have the authority to either:
        a. Incorporate the architectural review commission’s recommendation into the staff report prepared for the public hearing by the planning commission; or
        b. Modify the architectural review commission’s recommendation and forward that modified recommendation, together with the original recommendation, in the staff report prepared for the public hearing by the planning commission. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.106.050 Application review.
A. Each application for development review shall be reviewed to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose of this chapter, applicable development standards and regulations of these zoning regulations, and adopted design guidelines and policies that may apply.
B. The following criteria shall be considered during the review of a development review application, including but not limited to:
    1. Compliance with these zoning regulations and all other applicable city regulations and policies;
    2. Efficient site layout and design;
    3. Applicable environmental review;
    4. Compatibility with neighboring properties and developments with regard to setbacks, building heights, massing, location of parking facilities, and similar site design and building design features that shape how a property appears within a broader, definable neighborhood or zone context;
    5. Efficiency and safety of public access and parking and loading facilities;
    6. The compatibility in scale and aesthetic treatment of proposed structures with public areas;
    7. The adequacy of proposed driveways, landscaping, parking spaces, on-site and off-site parking, pedestrian improvements;
    8. The placement and use of private open spaces;
    9. The use of design techniques such as façade articulation, use of varied building finishes and materials, varied rooflines, and stepped-back stories to break up building massing;
    10. Privacy considerations with regard to the placement and orientation of balconies and windows;
    11. Appropriate open space and use of water-efficient landscaping both to enhance overall site design and to provide privacy screening;
    12. Consistency with the general plan and any applicable specific plan; and
    13. Consistency with any adopted design guidelines, policies, and standards applicable to the property.
C. On-Site Inspection. An application for development review may require that the director perform an on-site inspection of the subject parcel before confirming that the request complies with all of the applicable criteria and provisions. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.106.060 Conditions of approval.
A. Project Conditions. In approving a development review application, the review authority may impose conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would be in compliance with this section and the required findings.
B. Requirements for Dedication and Infrastructure. The conditions may include requirements for the offers of adequate dedication of land for public purposes and the provision of public infrastructure to the extent necessitated by the development. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.108 DIRECTOR’S ACTION

Sections:
17.108.010   Purpose and intent.
17.108.020   Applicability.
17.108.030   Application filing, processing, and review.
17.108.040   Required findings.
17.108.050   Conditions of approval.

17.108.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the director to act on certain applications on an administrative basis, without a public hearing, due to the minor nature of a proposed improvement, use of land, or allowed deviation from specified development standards in Table 6-1 and as further described in this chapter. Notwithstanding these provisions, the director shall have the authority to refer any application subject to this chapter to a director’s hearing or to the planning commission for consideration. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.108.020 Applicability.
The director is authorized to act administratively on the following applications and take the following actions:
A. Interpretation of these zoning regulations, as set forth in Chapter 17.04 (Interpretation of the Zoning Regulations).
B. Determination of parking requirements for uses not listed in Table 3-4.
C. Parking approvals for expansion of uses with nonconforming parking, as set forth in Chapter 17.72 (Parking and Loading).
D. Reasonable accommodations, as set forth in Chapter 17.112 (Reasonable Accommodation).
E. Home occupation permits, as set forth in Section 17.86.140 (Home Occupations).
F. Temporary use permits, as set forth in Section 17.86.260 (Temporary and Intermittent Uses).
G. Minor modifications to the following specific development standards:
    1. Antenna Height. Additional height for satellite dish antenna in a residential zone by up to ten percent.
    2. Bicycle Parking. The required type of bicycle parking facilities and required location of bicycle parking facilities may be modified based upon the type of use proposed and/or the configuration of a development site.
    3. C-D Zone Limitation on New Driveways. In order to maintain pedestrian orientation and the continuity of sidewalks within the C-D zone, the installation of new driveway approaches is subject to the director’s review and approval of director’s action, as set forth in Section 17.32.030(B) (Limitation on New Driveways).
    4. C-D Zone Residential Parking. A reduction in parking spaces based on a project-specific parking study prepared per city specifications.
    5. Fence and Wall Heights. Up to a ten percent increase in the maximum required fence or wall height. A public notice shall be posted at the site of each proposed fence height exception. If no questions or objections are received by the community development department within five days after posting, the director may issue a letter of approval upon submission of all required information and without further notice or public hearing. If anyone informs the community development department of an objection concerning the proposed fence or wall height exception within five days of the posting, the director shall schedule a hearing for the application as provided for minor use permits. In granting any such exception, the director shall make the finding that no public purpose would be served by strict compliance with applicable fence and wall standards.
    6. Lighting. 
        a. Accent Lighting. All accent lighting to ensure compliance with the provisions of Section 17.70.100 (Lighting and Night Sky Preservation).
        b. Athletic Fields. Athletic field lighting of intensity greater than fifty foot-candles but not more than one hundred foot-candles.
        c. Billboards—Upgrades. Upgrades to existing lighting fixtures on outdoor advertising signs (billboards) that reduce light pollution, provided the illumination is not increased.
        d. Temporary. Any temporary lighting that does not meet the requirements of Section 17.70.100 (Lighting and Night Sky Preservation), subject to the findings set forth in that chapter for temporary lighting.
        e. Alternate Materials and Methods of Installation. As set forth in Section 17.70.100 (Lighting and Night Sky Preservation).
    7. Parking and Driveway Design Standards. As set forth in Chapter 17.72 (Parking and Loading).
    8. Planned Development—Minor Modification. Minor modifications to an approved planned development plan, as set forth in Chapter 17.48 (Planned Development (PD) Overlay Zone).
    9. Screening Requirements for Mechanical and Electrical Equipment. As set forth in Article 2 and Section 17.76.100 (Screening).
    10. Screening Requirements for Outdoor Sales and Storage. As set forth in Article 2 and Section 17.76.100 (Screening). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.108.030 Application filing, processing, and review.
A. Application Filing. An application for a director’s action shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.104 (Permit Application Filing and Processing). The application shall include the information and materials specified in the department handout for director’s action applications, together with the required fee. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.108.040 (Required Findings).
B. Application Review. Each application for a director’s action shall be reviewed to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose of this chapter and applicable development standards and regulations of these zoning regulations, and any adopted design guidelines and policies that may apply.
    1. A director’s action is initiated when the department receives a complete application package, including the required information and materials specified in the department handout and any additional information required to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project or request.
    2. Upon receipt of a complete application, the director shall review the location, design, configuration, and the effect of the proposed project or action on adjacent properties, streets, and alleys by comparing the application materials to applicable standards in these zoning regulations and determining whether the findings required in Section 17.108.040 (Required Findings) can be made.
    3. Within thirty days after the director’s action application has been deemed complete, the director shall either approve or deny the application and, if approved, may impose conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare and ensure compliance with this chapter and all applicable city regulations and policies.
C. On-Site Inspection. An application for a director’s action may require that the director perform an on-site inspection of the subject parcel before confirming that the request complies with all of the applicable criteria and provisions identified in this chapter. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.108.040 Required findings.
A. Required Findings. The director may approve a director’s action application only after first making all of the following findings. The proposed interpretation, determination, or modification to standards:
    1. Is consistent with the intent of these zoning regulations and applicable general plan policies;
    2. Is consistent with or an improvement to the character of the neighborhood or zone;
    3. Provides adequate consideration of and measures to address any potential adverse effects on surrounding properties such as, but not limited to, traffic, vehicular and pedestrian safety, noise, visual and scale, and lighting.
With regard to cases of granting exceptions to the strict application of development standards, the following additional finding shall be made:
    4. While site characteristics or existing improvements make strict adherence to the zoning regulations impractical or infeasible, the project nonetheless conforms with the intent of these regulations.
B. Failure to Make Findings. The director shall deny the application if any one or more of the required findings cannot be made. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.108.050 Conditions of approval.
In approving a director’s action application, the director may impose conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.108.040 (Required Findings). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.109 DIRECTOR’S HEARING

Sections:
17.109.010   Purpose and intent.
17.109.020   Applicability.
17.109.030   Application filing, processing, and review.
17.109.040   Required findings.
17.109.050   Conditions of approval.

17.109.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the director to act on certain applications via a public hearing as described in this chapter. Notwithstanding these provisions, the director shall have the authority to refer any application subject to this chapter to the planning commission for consideration. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.109.020 Applicability.
The director is authorized to act administratively on the applications and take the actions set forth in Table 6-1: Review Authority. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.109.030 Application filing, processing, and review.
A. Application Filing. An application for a director’s hearing shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.104 (Permit Application Filing and Processing). The application shall include the information and materials specified in the department handout for director’s hearing applications, together with the required fee. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.109.040 (Required Findings).
B. Application Review. Each application for a director’s hearing shall be reviewed to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose of this chapter and applicable development standards and regulations of these zoning regulations, and any adopted design guidelines and policies that may apply.
    1. A director’s hearing shall be scheduled when the department receives a complete application package, including the required information and materials specified in the department handout and related additional information required to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project or request.
    2. Upon receipt of a complete application, the director shall review the location, design, configuration, and the effect of the proposed project or action on adjacent properties, streets, and alleys by comparing the application materials to applicable standards in these zoning regulations and determining whether the findings required in Section 17.109.040 (Required Findings) can be made.
C. On-Site Inspection. An application for a director’s hearing may require that the director perform an on-site inspection of the subject parcel before confirming that the request complies with all of the applicable criteria and provisions identified in this chapter.
D. Public Hearing. 
    1. Before acting on any director’s hearing application, the director shall hold a hearing at which information and arguments may be presented. Notice of the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be given in compliance with Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings).
    2. Decisions of the director shall be rendered in writing within ten days of the final hearing at which action is taken. The decision shall state the conditions of approval, if any, or the reasons for denial. The director’s decision shall be final unless appealed. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.109.040 Required findings.
A. Required Findings. The director may approve a director’s hearing application only after first making all of the following findings. The proposed application and project:
    1. Are consistent with the intent of these zoning regulations and applicable general plan policies;
    2. Are consistent with or an improvement to the character of the neighborhood or zone;
    3. Provide adequate consideration of and measures to address any potential adverse effects on surrounding properties such as, but not limited to, traffic, vehicular and pedestrian safety, noise, visual and scale, and lighting.
B. Failure to Make Findings. The director shall deny the application if any one or more of the required findings cannot be made. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.109.050 Conditions of approval.
In approving a director’s hearing application, the director may impose conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.109.040 (Required Findings). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.110 MINOR USE PERMITS AND CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS

Sections:
17.110.010   Purpose and intent.
17.110.020   Application requirements.
17.110.030   Procedure—Minor use permit.
17.110.040   Procedure—Conditional use permit.
17.110.050   Conditions of approval.
17.110.060   Criteria for approval.
17.110.070   Required findings.
17.110.080   Requirement for and compliance with use permits.
17.110.090   Permit to run with the land.

17.110.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide two distinct procedures for reviewing land uses that may be appropriate in the applicable zone, but whose effects on a site and its surroundings cannot be determined without discretionary review and consideration of the site context. Use permits allow flexibility in providing for, regulating, or preventing particular uses so they will be compatible with existing or desired conditions in their neighborhoods or zones. Use permit approval is required for certain uses so that their detrimental effects can be reduced or avoided and potential conflicts in land use can be prevented.
Where the term “use permit” is used in this chapter, it shall mean and encompass minor use permit and conditional use permit. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.110.020 Application requirements.
An application for a minor use permit or conditional use permit shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.104 (Permit Application Filing and Processing). It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.110.070 (Required Findings). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.110.030 Procedure—Minor use permit.
A. Hearing, Decision, and Referral. 
    1. Before acting on any minor use permit application, the director shall hold a hearing at which information and arguments may be presented. Notice of the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be given in compliance with Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings).
    2. Decisions of the director shall be rendered in writing within ten days of the final hearing at which action is taken. The decision shall state the conditions of approval, if any, or the reasons for denial. The director’s decision shall be final unless appealed.
    3. At his or her discretion, the director may refer a minor use permit to the planning commission when he/she determines the application involves a major policy issue or public controversy that would be resolved more suitably by the planning commission. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.110.040 Procedure—Conditional use permit.
A. Hearing and Decision. 
    1. Before acting on any use permit application, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing conducted according to its procedure. Notice of the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be given in compliance with Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings).
    2. Decisions of the planning commission shall be rendered in writing within ten days of the final hearing at which action is taken. The decision shall state the conditions of approval, if any, or the reasons for denial. The planning commission’s decision shall be final unless appealed.
    3. When a conditional use permit is before the planning commission, the planning commission may act to impose additional or relax any property development standards capable of being so altered under relevant sections of these regulations. The intent of this provision is to enable the planning commission to deal with various aspects of project design in a comprehensive way, without postponement of action on a project for separate hearings. Conditional use permit findings and procedures shall apply as provided in relevant sections of these regulations. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.110.050 Conditions of approval.
A. Conditions Allowed. Conditions imposed by the director, planning commission, or council may include, but are not limited to, the following:
    1. Modification or limitation to activities, including times and types of operations;
    2. Special yards or open spaces;
    3. Fences, walls, or landscape screens;
    4. Provision and arrangement of parking and vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
    5. On-site or off-site street, sidewalk or utility improvements, and maintenance agreements;
    6. Noise generation and attenuation;
    7. Dedication of right-of-way or easements or access rights;
    8. Arrangement of buildings and use areas on the site;
    9. Special hazard reduction measures, such as slope planting;
    10. Minimum site area;
    11. Other conditions which may be found necessary to address unusual site conditions;
    12. Establishment of an expiration date, after which the use must cease at that site;
    13. Recycling and solid waste plans.
B. Limitation. Conditions may not be imposed that restrict the use to a specific person or group. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.110.060 Criteria for approval.
In deciding whether a proposal is acceptable at a given location, the director, planning commission, and council shall consider whether the proposal could be established and maintained without jeopardy to persons or property within or adjacent to the proposed site and without damage to the resources of the site and its surroundings. Appropriate criteria may be found in the following sources, without limitation:
A. General plan elements (such as land use, circulation, housing, noise, seismic safety, public safety, open space and conservation);
B. Specific plans and special studies;
C. Community design guidelines;
D. Compliance with applicable environmental mitigation measures; and
E. Standards and recommendations of agencies commenting on environmental documents for the proposal or for similar projects. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.110.070 Required findings.
A. In order to grant a minor use permit or conditional use permit, the director or planning commission, or on appeal, the council, shall be required to make the following findings:
    1. The proposed use is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan;
    2. The proposed use is allowed within the applicable zone and complies with all other applicable provisions of these zoning regulations and the municipal code;
    3. The design, location, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed activity will be compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity;
    4. The site is physically suitable in terms of:
        a. Its design, location, shape, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed use;
        b. Traffic generation and the provision of public and emergency vehicle (e.g., fire and medical) access;
        c. Public protection services (e.g., fire protection, police protection, etc.); and
        d. The provision of utilities (e.g., potable water, schools, solid waste collection and disposal, storm drainage, wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal, etc.).
    5. The establishment and subsequent operation or conduct of the use will not, because of the circumstances and conditions applied in the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the general public or persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the use, or be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity of the use.
B. The director, planning commission, or council may deny the proposal or attach conditions as deemed necessary to secure the purposes of these regulations. Actions on minor use permits and conditional use permits shall be justified by written findings, based on substantial evidence in view of the whole record. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.110.080 Requirement for and compliance with use permits.
A. The modification or addition to a use requiring use permit approval shall itself be subject to use permit approval. The addition of an allowed use to a premises occupied by a conditionally allowed use shall require use permit approval of the type required for the existing use. The director shall determine when such an addition or change is of such a minor or incidental nature that the intent of these regulations can be met without further use permit control.
B. Any conditions established pursuant to these regulations shall be met before the use is established, except that the director, planning commission or, on appeal, the council, may establish a schedule for certain conditions to be met after establishment of the use. Continuance of the use shall then be contingent on complying with the schedule for meeting applicable conditions. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.110.090 Permit to run with the land.
A minor use permit or conditional use permit approved in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall run with the land and continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the business, parcel, service, structure, or use that was the subject of the permit application in the same area, configuration, and manner as it was originally approved in compliance with this chapter. If the operation of the use for which the use permit was issued ceases for a continuous period of one year, the provisions of this section shall not apply, and a new application shall be required for any new owner or operator. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.112 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION

Sections:
17.112.010   Purpose and intent.
17.112.020   Requests for reasonable accommodation.
17.112.030   Application requirements.
17.112.040   Process for approval.
17.112.050   Conditions of approval.
17.112.060   Required findings.
17.112.070   Occupancy requirement.
17.112.080   Appeals.

17.112.010 Purpose and intent.
The reasonable accommodation provisions allow for flexibility in the application of regulations and procedures to ensure equal access to housing. The provisions set forth in this chapter provide a procedure under which a disabled person may request a reasonable accommodation in the application of zoning requirements. This chapter is based on requirements of the federal and state fair housing laws and is designed to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.112.020 Requests for reasonable accommodation.
A. Request. A request for reasonable accommodation in the application of land use and zoning regulations may be made by a disabled person, his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities. A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the siting, development, and use of housing or housing related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers. A reasonable accommodation cannot waive a requirement for a minor use permit or conditional use permit when otherwise required or result in approval of uses otherwise prohibited by the city’s land use and zoning regulations.
B. Assistance. If an applicant needs assistance in making the request, the planning division will endeavor to provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is available to the applicant.
C. Balancing Rights and Requirements. The city will attempt to balance the privacy rights and reasonable request of an applicant for confidentiality with the land use requirements for notice and public hearing, factual findings, and rights to appeal in the city’s request for information, considering an application, preparing written findings, and maintaining records for a request for reasonable accommodation. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.112.030 Application requirements.
Whenever a request for reasonable accommodation is submitted for consideration, as a part of the application, sufficient information shall be submitted to the community development department to determine whether the reasonable accommodation request complies with the provisions of this chapter. In addition to the required director’s action application checklist items, the application shall include the following:
A. The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the fair housing laws. Identification and description of the disability which is the basis for the request for accommodation, including current, written medical certification, and description of disability and its effects on the person’s medical, physical, or mental limitations.
B. The rule, policy, practice, and/or procedure of the city for which the request for accommodation is being made, including the zoning code regulation from which reasonable accommodation is being requested.
C. Type of accommodation sought.
D. The reason(s) why the accommodation is reasonable and necessary for the needs of the disabled person(s). Where appropriate, include a summary of any potential means and alternatives considered in evaluating the need for the accommodation. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.112.040 Process for approval.
A. Director’s Action. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the director if no approval is sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation. The director may refer the matter to any advisory commission or committee, as appropriate and authorized by these zoning regulations.
B. Other Review Authority. Requests for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the authority responsible for reviewing the other application. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.112.050 Conditions of approval.
Conditions imposed by the director or other review authority may include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Inspection of the property periodically, as specified, to verify compliance with this chapter and any conditions of approval.
B. Removal of the improvements, where removal would not constitute an unreasonable financial burden, when the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists.
C. Time limits and/or expiration of the approval if the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists.
D. Recordation of a deed restriction requiring removal of the accommodating feature once the need for it no longer exists.
E. Measures to reduce the impact on surrounding uses.
F. Measures in consideration of the physical attributes of the property and structures.
G. Other reasonable accommodations that may provide an equivalent level of benefit and/or that will not result in an encroachment into required setbacks, exceedance of maximum height, lot coverage, or floor area ratio requirements specified for the zone.
H. Other conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.112.060 Required findings.
The approval of a reasonable accommodation shall require that the director or other review authority first find that:
A. The housing will be used by a disabled person;
B. The requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to a disabled person;
C. The requested accommodation would not pose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; and
D. The requested accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.112.070 Occupancy requirement.
A modification approved under this chapter is considered a personal accommodation for the individual applicant and does not run with the land. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.112.080 Appeals.
The director shall administer and interpret these requirements, subject to the applicable codes and city procedures. Decisions of the director or other review authority are appealable subject to the zoning regulations appeal provisions (Chapter 17.126). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.113 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS

Sections:
17.113.010   Purpose and applicability.
17.113.020   Procedure.
17.113.030   Findings.
17.113.040   Conditions of approval.

17.113.010 Purpose and applicability.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to allow for those short-term and intermittent activities set forth in Section 17.86.260 (Temporary and Intermittent Uses) that would be compatible with adjacent and surrounding uses when conducted in compliance with this chapter.
B. Applicability. Those uses identified in Section 17.86.260 (Temporary and Intermittent Uses) shall require a temporary use permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The following temporary uses are exempt from the requirement for a temporary use permit:
    1. On-site contractor’s construction/storage uses in conjunction with an approved construction project on the same site.
    2. Emergency public health and safety facilities and uses, as determined by the director.
    3. Garage and yard sales involving the sale of personal property conducted in a residential zone. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.113.020 Procedure.
A. An application shall be in the form prescribed by the director, shall state the precise nature of proposed temporary or intermittent use, and shall be accompanied by any required fees.
B. The application shall be filed with the department at least thirty days before the date that the proposed temporary use is scheduled to take place.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.113.030 (Findings).
D. Following receipt of a completed application, the director shall investigate the facts necessary for action consistent with the purpose of this chapter.
E. The director, through a director’s action, may approve a temporary use permit, deny the application, or defer action and refer to the application to the planning commission for review and final decision.
F. Given the abbreviated time frame between the action of the director on an application for conducting a proposed temporary or intermittent use and the date for such use, the action by the director may be appealed to the city manager. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.113.030 Findings.
The director may approve a temporary use permit application, with or without conditions, only if he/she first makes all of the following findings:
A. The operation of the requested temporary use at the location proposed, within the time period specified, and subject to appropriate conditions will not jeopardize, endanger, or otherwise constitute a menace to the public convenience, health, safety, or general welfare;
B. The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the temporary use without material detriment to the use and enjoyment of other properties located adjacent to and in the vicinity of the site;
C. The proposed site is adequately served by streets or highways having sufficient width and improvements to accommodate the kind and quantity of traffic that the temporary use will or could reasonably be expected to generate;
D. Adequate temporary parking to accommodate vehicular traffic to be generated by the temporary use will be available either on site or at alternate locations acceptable to the director;
E. The location for the proposed temporary use would not adversely interfere with existing uses on the subject property, and would not impede or adversely impact pedestrian access ways and/or vehicular circulation patterns; and
F. The applicant agrees in writing to comply with any and all of the conditions imposed in the approval of the temporary use permit. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.113.040 Conditions of approval.
A. May Impose Conditions. In approving a temporary use permit application, the director may impose conditions that are deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the permit would be in compliance with this chapter, Section 17.86.260 (Temporary and Intermittent Uses), and the findings required by Section 17.113.030 (Findings).
B. Appropriate Conditions. The conditions may address any pertinent factors affecting the operation of the temporary activity or use, and may include the following:
    1. Fixed Period of Time. Unless otherwise stated in the permit, a provision for a fixed period of time.
    2. Operating Hours and Days. Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the temporary use.
    3. Temporary Pedestrian and Vehicular Circulation. Provision for adequate temporary pedestrian and vehicular circulation, parking facilities (including vehicular ingress and egress), and public transportation, if applicable.
    4. Regulation of Nuisance Factors. Regulation of nuisance factors including prevention of glare or direct illumination on adjacent parcels, dirt, dust, gases, heat, noise, odors, smoke, trash, and vibration.
    5. Regulation of Temporary Structures. Regulation of temporary structures and facilities, including their number, placement, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards.
    6. Sanitary and Medical Facilities. Provision for sanitary and medical facilities, as appropriate.
    7. Waste Collection, Recycling, and/or Disposal. Provision for solid, hazardous, and toxic waste collection, recycling, and/or disposal.
    8. Police/Security and Safety Measures. Provision for police/security and safety measures, as appropriate.
    9. Outdoor Lighting. Regulation of outdoor lighting.
    10. Special Sales. If special sales are proposed, limitations on the location where sales may occur, the number of vendors, and the scope of goods to be sold.
    11. Food Sales. If food sales are involved, obtainment of all appropriate health permits.
    12. Performance Bond. Submission of a performance bond or other security measures satisfactory to the director to ensure that any temporary structures and facilities used will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the activity and that the property will be restored to its former condition, or better, as determined by the director.
    13. Other Conditions. Other conditions that would ensure the operation of the proposed temporary use in an orderly and efficient manner, and in full compliance with the purpose of this section. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.114 VARIANCES

Sections:
17.114.010   Purpose and applicability.
17.114.020   Procedure.
17.114.030   Burden of proof.
17.114.040   Required findings.

17.114.010 Purpose and applicability.
A. Purpose. The variance procedure is intended to allow minor relaxation of certain standards by the director that would otherwise prevent a property from being used in the same manner as other, similar property, where the intent of these regulations is not compromised by such minor relaxation.
B. Applicability. Yards, height limits, lot coverage, floor area ratio, and parking space requirements may be relaxed. No variance to land use regulations or density standards may be granted. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.114.020 Procedure.
A. An application shall be in the form prescribed by the director, shall state the precise nature of the grounds for the variance sought, and shall be accompanied by any required fees.
B. Notification requirements and actions of the director shall be as provided for minor use permits in Section 17.110.030 (Procedure—Minor Use Permit). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.114.030 Burden of proof.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required in Section 17.114.040 (Required Findings). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.114.040 Required findings.
In order to approve a variance, the director or, on appeal, the planning commission or council, must make each of the following findings:
A. That there are circumstances applying to the site, such as size, shape, or topography, which do not apply generally to land in the vicinity with the same zoning;
B. That the variance will not be in conflict with the purpose and intent of these zoning regulations, the general plan, or any applicable specific plan;
C. That the variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege—an entitlement inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity with the same zoning; and
D. That the variance will not adversely affect the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working on the site or in the vicinity. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Article 7. Administration of Zoning Regulations

Chapter 17.120 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY

Sections:
17.120.010   Purpose.
17.120.020   Community development director.
17.120.030   Planning commission.
17.120.040   Architectural review commission.
17.120.050   City council.

17.120.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to describe and establish the authority and responsibilities of the director, planning commission, architectural review commission, and council in the administration of these zoning regulations. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.120.020 Community development director.
A. Definition of the Term “Director.” When used in these zoning regulations or any permit or condition approved in compliance with these zoning regulations, the term “director” shall be as defined in Article 9 (Definitions) and shall include designee(s) of the director.
B. Duties and Authority. The director shall:
    1. Have the responsibility to perform all of the functions designated by state law, including but not limited to the following:
        a. Annual report related to implementation of the general plan in compliance with Government Code Section 65400;
        b. Review of public works projects for conformity to the general plan in compliance with Government Code Section 65401; and
        c. Review of acquisition of property for conformity to the general plan in compliance with Government Code Section 65402;
    2. Perform the duties and functions prescribed in these zoning regulations, including the review of administrative development projects, in compliance with Table 6-1: Review Authority, Government Code Section 65901 et seq., and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA);
    3. Perform other responsibilities assigned by the council or city manager; and
    4. Delegate the responsibilities of the director to community development department staff under the supervision of the director. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.120.030 Planning commission.
The planning commission shall have the duties and authority as established in Chapter 2.12 (Planning Commission). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.120.040 Architectural review commission.
The architectural review commission shall have the duties and authority as established in Chapter 2.48 (Architectural Review Commission). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.120.050 City council.
The city council, referred to in these zoning regulations as the council, in matters related to the city’s planning process shall perform the duties and functions prescribed in the municipal code and these zoning regulations, which include the following:
A. Review Authority on Specified Planning Matters. Final decisions on development agreements, zoning regulation amendments, general plan amendments, specific plans and amendments, zoning map amendments, environmental documents related to any of the foregoing, and other applicable policy or regulatory matters related to the city’s planning process as specified in the city charter, the municipal code, and these zoning regulations;
B. Appeals. The review of appeals filed from planning commission decisions; and
C. Compliance. The above-listed functions shall be performed in compliance with Table 6-1: Review Authority and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.122 PUBLIC NOTICES AND HEARINGS

Sections:
17.122.010   Purpose.
17.122.020   Notice of hearing.
17.122.030   Scheduling of hearing.
17.122.040   Hearing procedure.
17.122.050   Effective date of decision.

17.122.010 Purpose.
This chapter provides procedures for public hearings required by these zoning regulations. When a public hearing is required, advance notice of the hearing shall be given, and the hearing shall be conducted, in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.122.020 Notice of hearing.
A. Generally. When these zoning regulations require a public hearing before a decision on a permit or other discretionary entitlement, the public shall be provided notice of the hearing in compliance with Government Code Sections 65090, 65091, 65094, 65096, and 66451.3; Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.; and as required by this chapter.
B. Content of Notice. Notice of a public hearing shall include all of the following information, as applicable:
    1. Hearing Information. The date, time, and place of the hearing and the name of the review authority; a brief description of the city’s general procedure concerning the conduct of hearings and decisions (e.g., the public’s right to appear and be heard); and the phone number, street address, and email or website address of the city community development department where an interested person could call or visit to obtain additional information.
    2. Project Information. The date of filing and the name of the applicant; the city’s file number assigned to the application; a general explanation of the matter to be considered; and a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the property that is the subject of the hearing.
    3. Statement on Environmental Document. If a proposed negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, final environmental impact report, or statement of exemption from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) has been prepared for the project in compliance with CEQA, the hearing notice shall include a statement that the review authority will also consider approval (or recommendation of adoption/approval for an application requiring council action) of the proposed negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, certification of the final environmental impact report, or statement of exemption.
    4. Statement Regarding Challenges of City Actions. A notice substantially stating all of the following: “If you challenge the (nature of the proposed action) in court, you may be limited to raising only those issues you or someone else raised at the public hearing described in this notice, or in written correspondence delivered to the (public entity conducting the hearing) at, or before, the public hearing” in compliance with Government Code Section 65009(b)(2).
    5. Statement Regarding Commission’s Recommendations. For council items that involve a recommendation from the planning commission, the notice shall contain the planning commission’s recommendations.
C. Method of Notice Distribution. Notice of a public hearing required by this chapter, and any other type of notice specified in Article 6 (Permit Procedures), shall be given as follows, as required by Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091:
    1. Mailing. Notice shall be mailed or delivered not less than five days before the scheduled hearing to the following:
        a. Project Site Owners, Agent(s), and Applicant. The owners of the property being considered in the application, the owners’ agent(s), and the applicant, in addition to the owner(s) of any mineral rights for maps in compliance with Government Code Section 65091(a)(2);
        b. Local Agencies. Each local agency expected to provide roads, schools, sewage, streets, water, or other essential facilities or services to the property which is the subject of the application, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected;
        c. Affected Owners. All owners of real property as shown on the latest assessment rolls of the city or of the county, located within a radius of three hundred feet, or a different radius as specified in the actual permit requirements of Article 6 (Permit Procedures), of the exterior boundaries of the parcel that is the subject of the hearing; and any other person whose property might, in the judgment of the director, be affected by the proposed project;
        d. Affected Occupants. All occupants/tenants of owners at addresses located within a radius of three hundred feet, or a different radius as specified in the actual permit requirements of Article 6 (Permit Procedures), of the exterior boundaries of the parcel that is the subject of the hearing; and
        e. Persons Requesting Notice. Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the director or city clerk.
    2. Alternative to Mailing. If the number of property owners to whom notice would be mailed in compliance with subsection (C)(1) of this section is more than one thousand, the director may choose to provide the alternative notice allowed by Government Code Section 65091(a)(4).
    3. Additional Notice. In addition to the types of notice required above, the director may require any additional notice with content or using a distribution method (e.g., posting on the city’s website) as the director determines is necessary or desirable, including posting a notice on the property. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.122.030 Scheduling of hearing.
After the completion of any environmental document required by CEQA and a community development department staff report, a matter requiring a public hearing shall be scheduled on the next available agenda (director, planning commission, or council, as applicable) reserved for public hearings, but no sooner than any minimum time period established by state law. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.122.040 Hearing procedure.
A. Time and Place of Hearing. A hearing shall be held at the date, time, and place for which notice was given.
B. Continued Hearing. Any hearing may be continued from time to time without further notice; provided, that the chair of the hearing body announces the date, time, and place to which the hearing will be continued before the adjournment or recess of the hearing.
C. Deferral of Final Decision. 
    1. The review authority may announce a tentative decision and defer its action on a final decision until appropriate findings and/or conditions of approval have been prepared.
    2. The date of the final action shall be as described in the motion, ordinance, or resolution that incorporates the findings and/or conditions.
D. Summary Information. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying, shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case.
E. Formal Rules of Evidence or Procedure Not Applicable. Formal rules of evidence or procedure applicable in judicial actions and proceedings shall not apply in any proceeding subject to these zoning regulations, except as otherwise required by the city charter or the municipal code, in compliance with Government Code Section 65010. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.122.050 Effective date of decision.
A. Director’s or Planning Commission’s Decision. The decision of the director or planning commission is final and effective after five p.m. on the tenth day following the actual date the final decision is rendered if no appeal of that decision has been filed in compliance with Chapter 17.126 (Appeals).
B. Council’s Decision. 
    1. Adopted by Ordinance. A decision of the council adopted by ordinance is final and shall become effective on the thirty-first day following the date the ordinance is actually adopted by the council, unless otherwise provided in the adopting ordinance. For example, an ordinance adopted on October 1st will actually be effective on November 1st.
    2. Adopted by Resolution. A decision of the council adopted by resolution is final and shall be effective on the date the decision is rendered.
    3. Contingent on Future Date or Event. The council may take a final action and make it contingent on a future date or event. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.124 AMENDMENTS—ZONING REGULATIONS AND ZONING MAP

Sections:
17.124.010   Scope.
17.124.020   Authority to initiate an amendment to the zoning regulations.
17.124.030   Authority to initiate a change of zone.
17.124.040   Processing, notice, and hearings.

17.124.010 Scope.
An amendment to these zoning regulations which changes any property from one zone to another shall be adopted as set forth in this chapter. Any other amendment to these zoning regulations may be adopted as other ordinances and amendments to the municipal code are adopted. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.124.020 Authority to initiate an amendment to the zoning regulations.
An amendment to these regulations may be initiated by:
A. A resolution of intention of the council;
B. An application by the director or any other person or agency in the form prescribed by the director. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.124.030 Authority to initiate a change of zone.
An application to change the zone of a property or properties from one zone to another may be initiated by:
A. Any owner of real property in the city or his/her authorized agent;
B. A resolution of intention of the council;
C. The director. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.124.040 Processing, notice, and hearings.
A. Planning Commission Action. 
    1. Before taking any action on a proposed zone change, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be given in each of the following ways at least ten calendar days before the hearing:
        a. Publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city;
        b. Posting each street frontage of the property to be rezoned, or the nearest street access if the property does not abut a dedicated street; and
        c. First-class mail to owners of the property to be rezoned and of property within a radius of three hundred feet, as listed in the most recent annual revision of the county assessor’s roll.
    2. Failure to post or notify by mail shall not invalidate any amendments duly adopted.
    3. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to approve or deny a zone change application. Its action shall be a written recommendation to the council, including any required findings.
B. Council Action. Before taking action on a recommendation of the planning commission, the council shall hold a public hearing for which notice shall be given as provided in Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.126 APPEALS

Sections:
17.126.010   Standing to appeal.
17.126.020   Time to file appeal.
17.126.030   Content of appeal filing.
17.126.040   Course of appeals.
17.126.050   Hearings and notice.

17.126.010 Standing to appeal.
Any person may appeal a decision of any official body, except that administrative decisions requiring no discretionary judgment, as provided in Chapter 1.20, may not be appealed. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.126.020 Time to file appeal.
Appeals must be filed within ten calendar days of the rendering of a decision which is being appealed. If the tenth day is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the appeal period shall extend to the next business day. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.126.030 Content of appeal filing.
The appeal shall concern a specific action and shall state the grounds for appeal. Applicable fees for the appeal shall be paid as established by council resolution. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.126.040 Course of appeals.
A. Decisions of the director shall be appealed to the planning commission. Such appeals shall be filed with the director.
B. Decisions of the planning commission shall be appealed to the council. Such appeals shall be filed with the city clerk.
C. The director or city clerk, as applicable, shall have the authority to combine multiple appeal filings for a single public hearing. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.126.050 Hearings and notice.
A. Action on appeals shall be “de novo” review and shall be considered at the same type of hearing and after the same notice that is required for the original decision.
B. Once an appeal has been filed, it shall be scheduled for the earliest available meeting, considering public notice requirements and scheduled hearings, unless the appellant agrees to a later date. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.128 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS

Sections:
17.128.010   Purpose and scope.
17.128.020   Authority.
17.128.030   Initiation of hearings.
17.128.040   Applications—Legal interest.
17.128.050   Fees.
17.128.060   Preapplication review.
17.128.070   Application—Contents.
17.128.080   Public notice.
17.128.090   Failure to receive notice.
17.128.100   Planning commission hearing and recommendation.
17.128.110   City council hearing.
17.128.120   City council action.
17.128.130   Development agreement—Contents.
17.128.140   Development agreement—Adoption by ordinance—Execution of contract.
17.128.150   Recordation of executed agreement.
17.128.160   Ordinance, regulations, and requirements applicable to development.
17.128.170   Subsequently enacted state and federal laws.
17.128.180   Enforcement—Continuing validity.
17.128.190   Amendment—Time extension—Cancellation.
17.128.200   Review for compliance—Director’s authority.
17.128.210   Violation of agreement—Council review and action.
17.128.220   Modification or termination for violations.
17.128.230   Consequences of termination.
17.128.240   Irregularity of proceedings.
17.128.250   Coordination of approvals.

17.128.010 Purpose and scope.
Development agreements specify the rights and responsibilities of the city and developers. Used in conjunction with subdivision approval, annexation, rezoning, or architectural approval, development agreements establish the terms and conditions under which development projects may proceed. Development agreements are best used for large, complex, or phased projects which require extended construction time and which involve numerous public improvements such as streets, utilities, flood improvements, schools, parks and open space, and other improvements of community-wide benefit. Under a development agreement, projects may proceed under the rules, standards, policies, and regulations in effect at the time of original project approval. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.020 Authority.
This chapter establishes procedures and requirements for development agreements for the purposes specified in and as authorized by Article 2.5, Chapter 4, Title 7 of the Government Code, Section 65864 et seq. The planning commission may recommend and the council may enter into a development agreement for the development of real property with any person having a legal or equitable interest in such property, as provided in this chapter. At its sole discretion, the council may, but is not required to, approve a development agreement where a clear public benefit or public purpose can be demonstrated. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.030 Initiation of hearings.
Hearings on a development agreement may be initiated: (A) upon the filing of an application as provided below; or (B) by the council by a simple majority vote. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.040 Applications—Legal interest.
Any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property or such other interest as specified in Section 17.128.070(A)(3)(b) may apply for a development agreement, except that a person may not file, and the director shall not accept, an application which is the same as, or substantially the same as, an application which was denied within the previous year, unless the application is initiated or otherwise authorized by the council. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.050 Fees.
The council shall establish, and from time to time may amend, a schedule of fees to cover the city’s costs of processing applications for development agreements and conducting an annual review as required by the Government Code. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.060 Preapplication review.
Before submitting an application and support materials, applicants shall discuss the proposal with the director. At such review, the applicant should present a preliminary site plan and show basic features of the proposed project, including its public purposes and/or benefits. For large or complex projects, the applicant may request council review of the preliminary concept. Such a review shall be at the council’s sole discretion and would allow the council to review and comment on a proposal early in the review process. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.070 Application—Contents.
A. A development agreement application shall include the following information:
    1. A planning application and processing fee;
    2. The names and addresses of the applicant and of all persons having a legal or equitable interest in all or a part of the property proposed to be used;
    3. Evidence that the applicant:
        a. Has a legal or equitable interest in the property involved, or
        b. Has written permission from a person having a legal or equitable interest to make such application;
    4. Location of the subject property by address and vicinity map;
    5. Legal description of the property, including a statement of total area involved;
    6. A plan showing the location of all property included in the request for action, existing and proposed land uses, property lines and dimensions, topography, significant natural features, setbacks, the location of all highways, streets, alleys and the location and dimensions of all lots or parcels of land within a distance of three hundred feet from the exterior boundaries of the property described in the application;
    7. Mailing list including addresses of all tenants occupying the subject property and properties within three hundred feet of the subject property boundaries; and a mailing list of owners of adjacent properties within three hundred feet of the subject property boundaries, as shown on the county assessor’s latest available assessment roll;
    8. The proposed development agreement, together with all explanatory text, plans, maps, drawings, pictures and other information as may be required to evaluate such proposal, and as further described in Section 17.128.130; and
    9. Such other information as the director may require.
B. The director may waive the filing of one or more of the above items where the required information is filed with an application for a rezoning, use permit, variance, subdivision approval, or other development entitlement to be considered concurrently with the development agreement.
    1. The director may reject any application that does not supply the required information or may reject incomplete applications.
    2. The accuracy of all information, maps, and lists submitted shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.080 Public notice.
A. Director Responsibilities. When the director certifies that the application is complete, the item shall be scheduled for planning commission hearing, and the director shall give notice of the public hearing, as provided below.
B. Manner of Giving Public Notice. Public notice shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.090 Failure to receive notice.
The failure to receive notice by any person entitled thereto by law or this chapter does not affect the authority of the city to enter into a development agreement. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.100 Planning commission hearing and recommendation.
The planning commission shall consider the proposed development agreement and shall make its recommendation to the council. The recommendation shall include whether or not the proposed development agreement meets the following findings:
A. The proposed development agreement is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan;
B. The proposed development agreement complies with these zoning regulations, the subdivision ordinance, and other applicable ordinances and regulations;
C. The proposed development agreement promotes the general welfare, allows more comprehensive land use planning, and provides substantial public benefits or necessary public improvements, making it in the city’s interest to enter into the development agreement with the applicant; and
D. The proposed project and development agreement:
    1. Will not adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of persons living or working in the surrounding area; and
    2. Will be appropriate at the proposed location and will be compatible with adjacent land uses. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.110 City council hearing.
After the recommendation of the planning commission, the city clerk shall give notice of a public hearing before the council in the manner provided for in Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.120 City council action.
A. Referral. After it completes the public hearing and considers the planning commission’s recommendation, the council may approve, conditionally approve, modify, or disapprove the proposed development agreement. The council may refer matters not previously considered by the planning commission during its hearing back to the planning commission for review and recommendation.
B. Approval. The development agreement may be approved if the council makes the findings for approval listed in Section 17.128.100. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.130 Development agreement—Contents.
A. Development agreements shall include the following:
    1. The duration of the agreement, including a specified termination date if appropriate;
    2. The uses to be permitted on the property;
    3. The density or intensity of use permitted;
    4. The maximum height, size, and location of buildings permitted, as well as other pertinent development standards;
    5. The reservation or dedication of land for public purposes to be secured, including, but not limited to, rights-of-way, open space preservation, and public access easements;
    6. Proposed exceptions from zoning regulations or other development standard, and findings where required;
    7. The time schedule established for periodic review as required by Section 17.128.200.
B. Development agreements may also include additional terms, conditions, and restrictions in addition to those listed in subsection A of this section. These additional terms may include, but are not limited to:
    1. Development schedules providing that construction of the proposed development as a total project or in phases be initiated and/or completed within specified time periods;
    2. The construction of public facilities required in conjunction with such development, including but not limited to vehicular and pedestrian rights-of-way, public art and other landscape amenities, drainage and flood-control facilities, parks and other recreational facilities, and sewers and sewage treatment facilities;
    3. Method of financing such improvements and, where applicable, reimbursement to developer or city;
    4. Prohibition of one or more uses normally listed as permitted, accessory, subject to director’s action or subject to a minor use permit or conditional use permit in the zone normally allowed by right;
    5. Limitations on future development or special terms or conditions under which subsequent development approvals not included in the agreement may occur;
    6. The requirement of a faithful performance bond where deemed necessary to and in an amount deemed sufficient to guarantee the faithful performance of specified terms, conditions, restrictions and/or requirements of the agreement. In lieu of a bond, the applicant may deposit with the city clerk certificates of deposit or other security acceptable to the finance director;
    7. Specific design criteria for the exteriors of buildings and other structures, including colors and materials, landscaping, and signs;
    8. Special setbacks, open spaces, trails, staging areas, buffer areas, fences and walls, public art, landscaping, and parking facilities, including vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress;
    9. Performance standards regulating such items as noise, vibration, smoke, dust, din, odors, gases, garbage, heat, and the prevention of glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties;
    10. Limitations on operating hours and other characteristics of operation which the council determines could adversely affect the reasonable use and enjoyment of surrounding properties.
    11. Incorporate or reference any environmental mitigation measures to reduce potentially significant environmental impacts, if applicable. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.140 Development agreement—Adoption by ordinance—Execution of contract.
A. The development agreement shall be approved by the adoption of an ordinance. Upon the adoption of the ordinance, the city shall enter into the development agreement by the execution thereof by the mayor or city manager.
B. No ordinance shall be finally adopted until it has been executed by the applicant and all other parties to the agreement. If the applicant has not executed the agreement or agreement as modified by the council and returned the executed agreement to the city clerk within sixty days following council approval, the approval shall be deemed withdrawn, and the council shall not finally adopt such ordinance, nor shall the city manager execute the agreement.
C. Such sixty-day time period may be extended upon approval of the council. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.150 Recordation of executed agreement.
Following the execution of a development agreement, the city clerk shall cause the executed agreement to be recorded with the county recorder. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.160 Ordinance, regulations, and requirements applicable to development.
Development projects covered by a development agreement shall comply with the general plan, zoning regulations, subdivision ordinance, and other applicable codes, ordinances, rules, regulations, and official policies in effect on the date of execution of the development agreement; provided, however, that a development agreement shall not:
A. Be construed to prevent the application of later adopted or amended ordinances, rules, regulations, and policies which do not conflict with such existing ordinances, rules, regulations and policies under the development agreement;
B. Prevent the approval, conditional approval, or denial of subsequent development applications pursuant to such existing or later adopted or amended ordinances, rules, regulations, and policies; or
C. Preclude the city from adopting and implementing emergency measures regarding water or sewer deficiencies when the council determines that such action is necessary to protect public health and safety. If such action becomes necessary, the council reserves the right to suspend water or sewer service on an equitable basis until such deficiencies are corrected. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.170 Subsequently enacted state and federal laws.
In the event that state or federal laws or regulations enacted after execution of a development agreement prevent or preclude compliance with one or more provisions of such agreement, the provisions of such agreement shall be deemed modified or suspended to the extent necessary to comply with such laws or regulations. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.180 Enforcement—Continuing validity.
A. Unless and until amended or canceled in whole or in part as provided in Section 17.128.190 or 17.128.210, a development agreement shall be enforceable by any party to the agreement, regardless of any change in regulations which alters or amends the regulations applicable to the project covered by a development agreement, except as specified in Sections 17.128.160 and 17.128.170.
B. The development agreement shall be binding upon, and the benefits of the agreement shall inure to, all successors in interest to the parties to the agreement. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.190 Amendment—Time extension—Cancellation.
A development agreement may be amended, extended, or canceled, in whole or in part, by mutual consent of all parties to the agreement or their successors in interest. Procedures for amendment, time extensions, or cancellation of the development agreement by mutual consent shall be the same as provided for initiation and consideration of such agreement. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.200 Review for compliance—Director’s authority.
A. Every development agreement entered into by the council shall provide for director review of compliance with the development agreement at time intervals as specified in the agreement, but not less than once every twelve months.
B. The director shall determine whether the applicant or his or her successor in interest has or has not complied with the agreement. If the director determines that the terms or conditions of the agreement are not being met, all parties to the agreement shall be notified by registered or certified mail or other method guaranteeing proof of delivery, also indicating that failure to comply within a period specified may result in legal action to enforce compliance, termination, or modification of the agreement.
C. It is the duty of the applicant or his or her successor in interest to provide evidence of good faith compliance with the agreement to the director’s satisfaction at the time of the director’s review. Refusal by the applicant or his or her successor in interest to provide the required information shall be prima facie evidence of violation of such agreement.
D. If, at the end of the time period established by the director, the applicant or his or her successor in interest has failed to comply with the terms of the agreement or has not submitted evidence substantiating such compliance, the director shall notify the council of his or her findings, recommending such action as he or she deems appropriate, including legal action to enforce compliance or to terminate or modify the agreement. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.210 Violation of agreement—Council review and action.
A. When the director notifies the council that a development agreement is being violated, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the council to consider the matter. Procedures for conduct of such hearing shall be the same as provided for initiation and consideration of a development agreement.
B. If the council determines that the applicant or his or her successor in interest is in violation of a development agreement, it may take one of the following actions:
    1. Schedule the matter for council hearing for modification or possible termination of the agreement. Procedures for hearing notice shall be the same as provided in Section 17.128.080; or
    2. Continue the matter for further consideration. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.220 Modification or termination for violations.
A. After the hearing required by Section 17.128.210(A), the council may terminate or modify the agreement upon finding that:
    1. Terms, conditions, and obligations of any party to the development agreement have not been met; or
    2. The scope, design, intensity, or environmental effects of a project were represented inaccurately; or
    3. The project has been or is being built, operated, or used in a manner that differs significantly from approved plans, permits, or other entitlements; or
    4. Parties to the agreement have engaged in unlawful activity or have used bad faith in the performance of or the failure to perform their obligations under the agreement.
B. Such remedial action may include, but is not limited to, changes to project design or uses, operating characteristics, or necessary on-site or off-site improvements which are determined to be reasonably necessary to protect public health, safety, or welfare, and to correct problems caused by or related to noncompliance with the terms of the agreement. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.230 Consequences of termination.
Upon termination of the development agreement, the owner shall otherwise comply with city codes, regulations, development standards, and other applicable laws in effect at the time of termination of the agreement. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.240 Irregularity of proceedings.
No action, inaction, or recommendation regarding the proposed development agreement shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect, or omission as to any matter pertaining to the application, notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation, or any other matters of procedure whatsoever unless, after an examination of the entire record, the court is of the opinion that the error was prejudicial and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.128.250 Coordination of approvals.
A. Public Hearings. Where an application for a development agreement is concurrently filed with an application for a zone change, use permit, variance, minor subdivision or tract map, or annexation and the applications may be feasibly processed together, public hearings may be concurrently held.
B. Zoning or Subdivision Exceptions. Yards, permit height, coverage, parking requirements, density, and other design standards may be modified or relaxed during consideration of a development agreement. The council may modify or relax development or subdivision standards when: (1) such modification or relaxation is otherwise allowed by this municipal code, (2) the council makes findings as required by zoning and subdivision regulations, and (3) the council determines that such modification or relaxation of standards is consistent with the general plan and reasonably necessary to allow the safe, efficient, and/or attractive development of the subject property. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.130 GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS

Sections:
17.130.010   Purpose.
17.130.020   Authority to initiate an amendment.
17.130.030   Schedule for and coordination of amendments.
17.130.040   Processing, notice, and hearings.

17.130.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly processing of general plan amendments in a manner consistent with the overall goals of the community’s planning program and the requirements of California law. In particular, this chapter is intended to:
A. Assure that the general plan is amended for good reason and with due consideration of community-wide interests;
B. Help achieve and maintain internal consistency of general plan elements and conformance between the plan and implementing techniques, such as zoning; and
C. Establish rights and assign responsibilities for the persons and agencies involved in general plan administration so each can perform fairly and effectively. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.130.020 Authority to initiate an amendment.
A. Initiation of Amendment by the City Council. The council may initiate general plan amendments at any time by directing staff to prepare the necessary analysis and scheduling the proposed amendment for consideration at a hearing, as provided in Section 17.130.030 (Schedule for and Coordination of Amendments).
B. Applications to Initiate Amendments. Any person may request an amendment of the general plan by filing an application with the community development department. Such application shall include:
    1. A description of the proposed amendment, including, as may be necessary, additions or modifications to the text and graphics of adopted general plan elements or reports.
    2. A statement explaining how the proposed change will better reflect community desires as expressed in general plan goals and policies.
    3. If the amendment involves change of a basic goal or policy, why the change is warranted by new information or reevaluation of community needs.
    4. An analysis of how the proposed change will beneficially and detrimentally affect adjacent areas or shared resources. This analysis may take the form of a draft environmental impact report.
    5. A description of how the amendment of one policy may reinforce or conflict with related policies, including those in other elements.
    6. Such other supporting data as the director may require to enable evaluation of the proposal.
    7. A fee sufficient to cover the expected costs incurred in processing the application, to be established by resolution of the council.
C. Early Council Consideration of an Application. The director shall have the authority, prior to processing a general plan amendment application in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, to forward any such application to the council for early policy consideration to allow the council to determine whether the proposed amendment is consistent with overall policy direction in the general plan. The council, upon making specific findings in reference to specific general plan provisions, may direct the director to reject the application as inconsistent with overall general plan policy direction. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.130.030 Schedule for and coordination of amendments.
A. Limited to Four Times Annually. Any element of the general plan may be amended not more than four times each year. Each amendment may include more than one change to the general plan. Such amendments may be scheduled at any time deemed necessary or convenient. The planning commission may review individual amendments as often as necessary, but the council must consider them in no more than four batches per year so that cumulative effects of such amendments can be considered.
B. Coordination of Amendments. Changes in policy or land use designations which involve more than one element shall be made as concurrent amendments to the related elements in order to maintain internal plan consistency. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.130.040 Processing, notice, and hearings.
A. Planning Commission Actions. 
    1. Public Hearings—Notice. The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing before taking action on any general plan amendment. Notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten calendar days before the hearing by publication of the notice, describing the nature of the proposed amendment(s), in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
    2. Resolution. The recommendation for approval of the planning commission of any amendment to the general plan shall be by resolution of the planning commission adopted by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of its total voting members.
    3. Transmittal to Council. The planning commission’s recommendation shall be transmitted to the council in the form of a resolution with findings.
    4. Other Situations. When neither a majority of the planning commission recommends approval nor a majority of a quorum recommends denial, the planning commission may transmit the amendment to the council with a report explaining the situation and stating the recommendations of the individual commissioners.
B. City Council Actions. 
    1. Public Hearings—Notice. Upon transmittal of the resolution from the planning commission, the council shall hold at least one public hearing on proposed general plan amendments. Notice of the time, place, and subject of the hearing shall be given as provided in Chapter 17.122 (Public Notices and Hearings).
    2. Resolution. Any amendment of the general plan shall be adopted by resolution of the council, adopted by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the total membership of the council.
    3. Referral of Council Changes. In adopting any general plan amendment which has been approved by the planning commission, the council shall not make any substantive changes or additions involving issues not considered by the planning commission in their review until the proposed change or addition has been referred to the planning commission for a report and the report has been filed with the council. Failure of the planning commission to report within forty calendar days after the referral, or such longer period as may be designated by the council, shall be deemed to be approval of the change or addition. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.132 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
17.132.010   Delegation of authority.
17.132.020   Violations.

17.132.010 Delegation of authority.
The director shall be responsible for enforcing these zoning regulations and shall issue no permit in conflict with them. Any such permit issued shall be void. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.132.020 Violations.
A. General Regulations and Requirements. The director shall enforce these zoning regulations in accordance with provisions of this code and any other procedures as may be adopted by resolution of the council. The provisions of Chapter 1.12 (General Penalty) shall apply to violations of these zoning regulations.
B. Time Limits for and Revocation of Use Permits, Variances, and Home Occupation Permits. 
    1. A director’s action, minor use permit, conditional use permit, or variance shall be automatically revoked if not used within one year, unless a longer period is specified in the approval, or unless an extension is granted.
    2. All types of approvals, permits, and variances may be revoked by the body which originally approved them, upon determining that any of the conditions have been violated. Procedures for revocation shall be as prescribed for issuance of the permit or variance, including written notice to the permittee at least ten calendar days before the hearing. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Article 8. Housing-Related Regulations

Chapter 17.138 INCLUSIONARY HOUSING REQUIREMENTS

Sections:
17.138.010   Purpose.
17.138.020   Applicability and exclusions.
17.138.030   Definitions.
17.138.040   General standards.
17.138.050   Procedures.
17.138.060   In-lieu housing fee.
17.138.070   Affordable housing fund established.
17.138.080   Real property dedication.
17.138.090   Incentives.
17.138.100   Project application.
17.138.110   Required agreements.
17.138.120   Program requirements.
17.138.130   Eligibility screening.
17.138.140   Affordability restrictions.
17.138.150   Shared equity purchase program.
17.138.160   Early resale of shared equity properties.
17.138.170   Management and monitoring.
17.138.180   Enforcement and appeals.
17.138.190   Severability.

17.138.010 Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this chapter are: (A) to promote the public welfare by increasing the production and availability of affordable rental housing units; (B) to establish an inclusionary housing requirement which implements general plan policies guiding land use and housing development; and (C) to ensure that affordable housing units established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are located in a manner that provides for their integration with market rate units. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.020 Applicability and exclusions.
A. This chapter shall apply to development projects consisting of five or more residential lots or new dwelling units, and to commercial development projects consisting of two thousand five hundred square feet or more of gross floor area.
B. The following types of development projects are excluded:
    1. Residential developments of four units or less;
    2. New commercial developments of less than two thousand five hundred square feet of gross floor area;
    3. Residential and commercial building additions, repairs, or remodels, provided that such work does not increase the number of existing dwellings by four or more units or result in an increase in gross floor area of two thousand five hundred square feet;
    4. The conversion of less than five dwelling units to condominiums within any five-year period;
    5. Commercial condominium conversions which do not result in the creation of new dwellings;
    6. Affordable housing projects in which one hundred percent of the dwellings to be built will be sold or rented in conformance with the city’s affordable housing standards;
    7. Emergency projects or projects which the council determines are necessary to protect public health and safety;
    8. Development projects which the director determines are essentially noncommercial or nonresidential in nature, which provide educational, social, or related services to the community and which are proposed by public agencies, nonprofit agencies, foundations, and other similar organizations;
    9. Projects which replace or restore a structure damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake, or other disaster within three years prior to the application for the new structure(s);
    10. Projects for which an approved tentative map or vesting tentative map exists, or for which a construction permit was issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the permittee has performed substantial work and incurred substantial liabilities and which continue to have unexpired permits. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below. For all other definitions, the provisions of Article 9 (Definitions) of this title shall apply.
A. “Affordable” means housing which can be purchased or rented by a household with very low, low, or moderate income, as described in the city’s affordable housing standards.
B. “Building valuation” shall mean the total value of all construction work for which a construction permit is required, as determined by the chief building official using the Uniform Building Code.
C. “Density bonus” means a density increase over the maximum density otherwise allowable under the zoning regulations.
D. “Development project” shall mean an activity for which a subdivision map or construction permit is required, including new buildings and building additions or remodels, but not including changes in ownership, occupancy, management, or use.
E. “Expansion area” means a land area proposed for annexation to the city or annexed after the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
F. “Housing authority” refers to the housing authority of San Luis Obispo (HASLO).
G. “Inclusionary housing unit” means a dwelling which is built under the provisions of this chapter, and which meets the city’s affordable housing standards.
H. “Low-” or “lower-income households” shall have the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5; provided the income of such persons and families shall not exceed eighty percent of the median income within the county.
I. “Market value” shall mean the highest price a willing buyer would pay and a willing seller would accept, both being fully informed and in an open market, as determined by an appraiser or other qualified professional.
J. “Moderate-income households” shall include those persons and families whose incomes exceed eighty percent but are less than or equal to one hundred twenty percent of the median income within the county.
K. “Real property” shall mean land and improvements, if any, including anything permanently affixed to the land, such as buildings, walls, fences, and paved areas.
L. “Residential project” shall mean development projects which result in the subdivision of land and/or the construction or conversion of dwellings, including, but not limited to, single-unit attached or detached homes, apartments, condominiums, live/work studios, mobile homes, and group housing.
M. “Very low-income” shall have the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50105, defined as “persons and families whose incomes do not exceed the qualifying limits for very low-income families as established and amended from time to time in compliance with Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, and as published in the California Administrative Code.” (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.040 General standards.
A. Methods of Meeting Requirements. New development projects shall satisfy the inclusionary housing requirements, as specified in Tables 2 and 2A of the general plan housing element (also included below) which require that all nonexempt development projects shall contribute toward the production of affordable housing by constructing at least one affordable dwelling unit or paying an in-lieu fee. To meet the requirements, the developer shall comply with one or more of the following methods:
    1. Construct the required number of affordable dwelling units, as specified in Table 2 of the housing element, as adjusted by Table 2A of the housing element; or
    2. Pay an in-lieu fee as described in Table 2, as adjusted by Table 2A. For development projects in which the adjustment factor under Table 2A equals zero, the minimum adjustment factor shall be 0.25 (resulting in a minimum in-lieu fee of 1.25 percent of the building valuation for development projects and commercial developments in expansion areas, and 3.75 percent of building valuation for residential developments in expansion areas); or
    3. Dedicate real property for affordable housing; or
    4. Provide for the rehabilitation of existing housing units that are vacant and in poor physical condition or are otherwise uninhabitable; or
    5. Use a combination of the above methods, to the approval of the director.
+----------+-------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| Housing Element Table 2—Inclusionary Housing Requirement                         |
+----------+-------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| Type of Housing Development                                                      |
+----------+-------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
|                              | Residential—Adjust      | Commercial              |
|                              | Requirements per        |                         |
|                              | Table 2A Below          |                         |
+----------+-------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| Location | In City Limits    | Build 3% low-5 or       | Build 2 ADUs per        |
|          |                   | 5% moderate-income      | acre, but not less      |
|          |                   | affordable dwelling     | than 1 ADU per project; |
|          |                   | units (ADUs2), but      | or3                     |
|          |                   | not less than 1         | pay in-lieu fee equal   |
|          |                   | ADU per project;        | to 5% of building       |
|          |                   | or3                     | valuation.              |
|          |                   | pay in-lieu fee equal   |                         |
|          |                   | to 5% of building       |                         |
|          |                   | valuation.4             |                         |
+----------+-------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| "        | In Expansion Area | Build 5% low-5 and      | Build 2 ADUs per        |
|          |                   | 10% moderate-income     | acre, but not less      |
|          |                   | ADUs, but not less      | than 1 ADU per project; |
|          |                   | than 1 ADU per project; | or                      |
|          |                   | or                      | pay in-lieu fee equal   |
|          |                   | pay in-lieu fee equal   | to 5% of building       |
|          |                   | to 15% of building      | valuation.              |
|          |                   | valuation.              |                         |
+----------+-------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
Notes:
1Residential developments of four or less dwellings and commercial developments of two thousand five hundred gross square feet of floor area or less are exempt from these requirements.
2Affordable dwelling units must meet city affordability criteria listed in Goal 2.1 of the housing element.
3Developer may build affordable housing in the required amounts, pay in-lieu fee based on the above formula, or dedicate real property, or a combination of these, to city approval.
4“Building valuation” shall mean the total value of all construction work for which a permit would be issued, as determined by the chief building official.
5Low income includes the subsets of extremely low and very low income categories.
+-----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Housing Element Table 2A—Inclusionary Housing Adjustment Factors                               |
+-----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Project Density | Inclusionary Housing Requirement Adjustment Factor2                          |
| (Density        |                                                                              |
| Units/Net       |                                                                              |
| Acre)1          |                                                                              |
+-----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| "               | Average Unit Size (square feet)                                              |
+-----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| "               | Up to 1,100 | 1,101—1,500 | 1,501—2,000 | 2,001—2,500 | 2,501—3,000 | >3,000 |
+-----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| 36 or more      | 0           | 0           | 0.75        | 1.0         | 1.25        | 1.5    |
+-----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| 24—35.99        | 0           | 0           | 0.75        | 1.0         | 1.25        | 1.5    |
+-----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| 12—23.99        | 0           | 0.25        | 1.0         | 1.25        | 1.5         | 1.75   |
+-----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| 7—11.99         | 0           | 0.5         | 1.0         | 1.25        | 1.5         | 1.75   |
+-----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| <7              | 0           | 0.5         | 1.25        | 1.5         | 1.75        | 2.0    |
+-----------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
Notes:
1Including allowed density bonus, where applicable.
2Multiply the total base inclusionary housing requirement (either housing or in-lieu percentage) by the adjustment factor to determine requirement. At least one enforceably restricted affordable unit is required per development of five or more units.
B. Affordable Housing Standards. Affordable dwelling units constructed must meet city affordable housing standards and must be consistent with affordability policies in the general plan housing element.
C. Concurrent Development. The required inclusionary units shall be constructed concurrently with market value units unless the developer and the director agree within an affordable housing agreement to an alternative development schedule. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.050 Procedures.
A. Fractional Numbers. In determining the number of dwellings that are required to be built pursuant to Table 2, fractional units shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number unit.
B. Determining Adjustment Factor Using Project Density and Average Unit Size. To determine the adjustment factor in Table 2A, project density shall be calculated by dividing the total number of density units proposed (including density bonus where applicable) by the development project site’s net area. Average floor area shall be calculated by dividing the total gross floor area of all dwellings (excluding garages) within the development project by the total number of dwellings. Dedicated open space shall not be included in a site’s net area.
C. Mixed-Use Development Projects. For mixed-use development projects with five or more dwellings, the inclusionary housing requirement is determined by: (1) using Table 2 to calculate the base inclusionary requirement for the commercial use, and (2) using Table 2A to adjust the base requirement based on project density and average unit size, as described in subsection B of this section. For mixed-use development projects with fewer than five dwellings, the base inclusionary housing requirement for the commercial use shall apply.
D. Timing. The inclusionary housing requirement shall be met prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the first unit in a building, or the first building in a complex to be constructed or remodeled; or for subdivisions, prior to final map approval; or prior to building permit issuance, for projects for which a certificate of occupancy is not issued; or as otherwise agreed to by the director as part of tentative map, rezoning, minor use permit, conditional use permit, or other development approval.
E. Affordable Housing Agreement. To meet the requirement, the developer may enter into an agreement with the city, the housing authority of San Luis Obispo (HASLO), nonprofit housing provider, or other qualified housing provider approved by the director to construct, refurbish, convert, operate, and maintain the required affordable housing. Such affordable housing agreements shall be to the approval of the director and shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.060 In-lieu housing fee.
A. Payment of In-Lieu Fee. The developer may, at his or her discretion, choose to pay a fee to the city in lieu of constructing affordable dwellings to meet this requirement.
B. Amount and Method of Payment. The dollar amount and method of payment of the in-lieu fee shall be as described in Table 2 of Appendix N of the general plan housing element, and where applicable, as adjusted by Table 2A in Appendix N of the general plan housing element, to the approval of the director. For subdivisions in which the construction valuation is not known, the director shall estimate the average construction valuation based on lot area, land value, and applicable city development standards. The developer shall use the estimated average construction valuation to determine the amount of in-lieu fees.
C. Timing. In-lieu fees shall be paid prior to release of occupancy of the first dwelling within a residential development; or for residential subdivisions to be built out by others, prior to final subdivision map approval; or prior to occupancy for new commercial buildings or remodels; or prior to building permit issuance, for projects for which a certificate of occupancy is not issued; or as otherwise provided by written agreement between the developer and city, to the approval of the director. For mixed-use developments, these regulations shall apply to whichever occupancy release is first issued. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.070 Affordable housing fund established.
The city hereby establishes an affordable housing fund. The fund shall be administered by the finance director and shall be used exclusively to provide funding for the provision of affordable housing and for reasonable costs associated with the development of affordable housing, at the discretion of the council. In-lieu fees collected shall be deposited into the affordable housing fund, to the satisfaction of the director of finance. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.080 Real property dedication.
A. Irrevocable Offer to Dedicate Real Property. At the discretion of the council, an irrevocable offer to dedicate real property equal or greater in value to the in-lieu fee which would otherwise be required may be offered to the city, or to an affordable housing provider designated by the city, instead of providing the required number of affordable dwellings or paying in-lieu fees. The city shall have the option of negotiating with the applicant regarding dedications of properties with greater value than the in-lieu fee to achieve an equitable dedication. In considering an offer to dedicate real property, the council must find that the dedication of real property will provide equal or greater public benefit than constructing affordable units or paying in-lieu fees, based on the following criteria and additional criteria set forth in Government Code Sections 65915(g)(2)(A) through (H):
    1. Valuation of the land and/or improvements to be dedicated relative to other methods of meeting the requirement;
    2. Suitability of the land and/or improvements for housing, including general plan conformity, size, shape, topography, and location; and
    3. Feasibility of developing affordable housing, including general plan consistency, and availability of infrastructure.
B. Real Property Valuation. The valuation of real property offered in lieu shall be determined by the director, based upon an appraisal made by a qualified appraiser mutually agreed to by the developer and the city. Costs associated with the appraisal, title insurance and transfer, recordation, and related costs shall be borne by the developer.
C. Agreement and Timing. The real property dedication shall be by deed or other instrument acceptable to the city and shall be completed by recordation through the office of county clerk-recorder prior to occupancy release of the first residential unit or commercial building in the development; or prior to building permit issuance, for projects for which a certificate of occupancy is not issued; or as otherwise provided by written agreement between the developer and the city. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.090 Incentives.
A. Eligibility for Incentives. The developer may be eligible to receive or to request development incentives in return for constructing affordable housing in connection with a development project, pursuant to Chapter 17.140 (Affordable Housing Incentives), as part of a city planning application. Incentives or other forms of financial assistance may be offered by the city to the extent that resources are available for this purpose and to the degree that such incentives or assistance will help achieve the city’s housing goals.
B. Affordable Housing Agreement. Any incentives provided by the city, beyond those incentives to which a developer may be automatically entitled to under Chapter 17.140 (Affordable Housing Incentives), shall require council approval and shall be set out in an affordable housing agreement. The form and content of such agreement shall be to the approval of the city attorney and the director. Developers are further encouraged to utilize other local, state or federal assistance, when available, to meet the affordable housing standards. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.100 Project application.
A. Method of Application. An applicant/developer proposing a project for which affordable housing is required shall submit a statement with the standard planning application, describing the inclusionary housing proposal. The developer’s statement shall include:
    1. A brief description of the proposal, including the method chosen to meet the inclusionary housing requirement; number, type and location of affordable units; term of affordability; preliminary calculation of in-lieu fees; or offer of land dedication;
    2. How the proposal meets general plan policies and inclusionary housing requirements;
    3. Plans and other exhibits showing preliminary site layout, grading, building elevations, parking and other site features, location of affordable dwelling units, and (where applicable) market value dwelling units;
    4. Description of incentives requested, including exceptions from development standards, density bonuses, fee waivers or other incentives; and
    5. Other information which the director determines necessary to adequately evaluate the proposal, including but not limited to the method proposed to award occupancy of the affordable units. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.110 Required agreements.
A. Submittal of an Affordable Housing Agreement. Applicants and developers for development projects subject to this chapter shall, as a condition of development approval, submit an affordable housing agreement on forms provided by the city. The draft agreement shall be reviewed by the director and city attorney for compliance with project approvals, city policies and standards, and applicable codes. Following approval and signing of the agreement by the parties, the final agreement shall be recorded, and relevant terms and conditions shall be recorded as a deed restriction on those lots or affordable units subject to affordability requirements. The affordable housing agreement shall be binding to all future owners and successors in interest.
B. Exemption for In-Lieu Fees Payment. An affordable housing agreement shall not be required for projects which meet their inclusionary housing requirement through the payment of in-lieu fees. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.120 Program requirements.
Only households qualifying as very low, low, or moderate income, pursuant to the affordable housing standards, shall be eligible to rent, purchase, or occupy inclusionary units developed or funded in compliance with this requirement. For-sale inclusionary housing units shall be owner-occupied for the term of the affordable housing agreement. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.130 Eligibility screening.
The housing authority or other housing provider designated by the city shall screen prospective renters or buyers of affordable units. Renters or buyers of affordable units shall enter into an agreement with the city. Occupants must be selected by means of an open, public process which ensures that individuals of a group of interested participants have equal probability of selection. Private selection of individuals by project owners is not permitted for any affordable units. (Ord. 1657 § 21, 2019: Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.140 Affordability restrictions.
Developers of affordable units for sale shall specify the type of affordability restriction to be applied. The developer shall choose to either: (A) participate in a shared equity purchase program, as described in Section 17.138.150, or (B) enter into an affordable housing agreement to ensure that affordability is maintained for the longest period allowed or required by state law, but not less than thirty years. Affordable rental units shall be affordable for the longest period allowed or required by state law, but not less than thirty years. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.150 Shared equity purchase program.
A. Under this program, the qualified buyer of a designated affordable dwelling unit shall enter into a shared equity agreement with the city. Said agreement shall be recorded as a lien against the purchased property, at no interest, securing and stating the city’s equity share in the property. The city’s equity share shall be calculated by the director, and shall be the decimal percentage of the property’s value resulting from:
    1. The difference between the property’s market value and the actual price paid by the homeowner, divided by the market value; and/or, when applicable;
    2. The amount of subsidy provided by the city to the homeowner to purchase the property, divided by the property’s market value.
B. Upon sale, the city’s equity share shall be repaid to the city from the proceeds of the sale, less the city’s percentage share of title insurance, escrow fees, and documentary transfer taxes, at the close of escrow. The proceeds from the sale shall be deposited into the city’s affordable housing fund and shall be used for the purposes set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 33334.2(e). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.160 Early resale of shared equity properties.
In the event of “early resale,” owners of properties subject to the shared equity purchase program shall either: (A) pay an equity recapture fee to the city as described in the schedule below, in addition to the city’s equity share, or (B) sell the property to another eligible household. “Early resale” shall mean the sale, lease, or transfer of property within six years of the initial close of escrow. If the owner chooses to pay the equity recapture fee, the recapture fee shall be paid to the city upon resale at close of escrow, based on the following schedule:
+----------------+---------------------------------+
| Table 8-1: Percent of Equity Build-Up Recaptured |
+----------------+---------------------------------+
| Year           | % of Equity Build-Up Recaptured |
+----------------+---------------------------------+
| 0—3            | 100%                            |
+----------------+---------------------------------+
| 4              | 75%                             |
+----------------+---------------------------------+
| 5              | 50%                             |
+----------------+---------------------------------+
| 6              | 25%                             |
+----------------+---------------------------------+
| 7 and after    | 0%                              |
+----------------+---------------------------------+
The recapture amount shall be determined prior to the calculation of escrow closing costs. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.170 Management and monitoring.
Inclusionary rental units shall be managed and operated by the property owner, or the owner’s agent, for the term of the affordable housing agreement. Sufficient documentation shall be submitted to ensure compliance with this chapter, to the satisfaction of the director. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.180 Enforcement and appeals.
A. Enforcement. No final subdivision map shall be approved, nor building permit issued, nor shall any other development entitlement be granted for a development project which does not meet these requirements. No inclusionary unit shall be rented or sold except in accordance with these requirements and the affordable housing standards.
B. Appeals. The director shall administer and interpret these requirements, subject to applicable codes and city procedures. Decisions of the director are appealable, subject to Chapter 17.126 (Appeals). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.138.190 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of the provision to other persons or situations shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.140 AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVES

Sections:
17.140.010   Purpose.
17.140.020   Definitions.
17.140.030   Application process.
17.140.040   Standard incentives for housing projects.
17.140.050   Standard incentives for mixed-use projects.
17.140.060   Standard incentives for conversion of apartments to condominium projects.
17.140.070   Alternative or additional incentives.
17.140.080   Agreements for affordable housing.
17.140.090   Fees.
17.140.100   Affordability standards.
17.140.110   Occupant qualifications.

17.140.010 Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this chapter are to encourage housing projects which incorporate units affordable to very low-, lower-, and moderate-income households, and qualifying seniors, or the donation of land for affordable housing within the city, and which conform to city development policies and standards, by providing density bonuses, or other equivalent incentives, as required by Government Code Section 65915 et seq. This chapter is a summary of Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918. Where there is a conflict between the State Density Bonus Law and the zoning regulations, the State Density Bonus Law shall prevail. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.140.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below. For all other definitions, the provisions of Article 9 (Definitions) of this title shall apply.
A. “Affordable” shall mean residential rent costs or sales prices which conform to the standards issued by the director and updated periodically to reflect state and/or federal housing cost indices.
B. “Common interest development” means any of the following: a community apartment project, a condominium project, a planned development, or a stock cooperative as set forth in Civil Code Section 1351.
C. “Density” means residential density as defined in Section 17.70.040 (Density).
D. “Density bonus” means a density increase over the maximum density otherwise allowable under the zoning regulations and land use element of the general plan.
E. “Housing development” means a development project for five or more residential units; also includes a subdivision or common interest development.
F. “Maximum allowable residential density” means the maximum density allowed under the zoning regulations and land use element of the general plan.
G. “Senior citizen housing development” means a residential development developed, substantially rehabilitated, or substantially renovated for senior citizens (fifty-five years or older) that has at least thirty-five dwelling units. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.140.030 Application process.
A. The developer may submit a preliminary proposal for the development of affordable housing prior to the submittal of any formal requests for general plan amendments, zoning amendments, or subdivision map approvals.
B. Any request for a density bonus or other incentives shall be in writing, and shall include the following information, as well as any additional information required by the director:
    1. The name of the developer;
    2. The location of the proposed project;
    3. The density allowed under the zoning regulations, as well as the proposed density;
    4. The number and type (bedroom count) of dwellings and identification of those dwellings which are to be affordable to each household income category;
    5. Whether the dwellings will be offered for sale or for rent;
    6. The proposed sales price, financing terms, rental rates or other factors which will make the dwellings affordable to very low-, lower-, and moderate-income households. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.140.040 Standard incentives for housing projects.
A. This section shall apply only to housing projects consisting of five or more dwelling units. Per state law, projects that provide affordable housing are allowed up to a thirty-five percent density bonus based on the tables outlined below for the respective affordability levels. In addition, the director may approve a density bonus in excess of thirty-five percent at the request of the developer, as well as other concessions and incentives outlined in Section 17.140.070.
B. All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
C. For the purpose of this section, “total units” or “total dwelling units” does not include units added by a density bonus awarded pursuant to this section or any local law granting a greater density bonus.
D. Ten Percent Low-Income Dedication. When a developer agrees to construct at least ten percent of the total units of a housing development for persons or families of lower income, the director shall grant the developer, upon the developer’s request, a density bonus; the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
|  Table 8-2: Density Bonus for Percentage of Low-Income Dedicated Units  |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
|    Percentage Low-Income Units     |      Percentage Density Bonus      |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| 10                                 | 20                                 |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| 11                                 | 21.5                               |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| 12                                 | 23                                 |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| 13                                 | 24.5                               |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| 14                                 | 26                                 |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| 15                                 | 27.5                               |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| 17                                 | 30.5                               |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| 18                                 | 32                                 |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| 19                                 | 33.5                               |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| 20                                 | 35                                 |
+------------------------------------+------------------------------------+
E. Five Percent Very Low-Income Dedication. When a developer agrees to construct at least five percent of the total units of a housing development for very low-income households, the director shall grant the developer, upon the developer’s request, a density bonus; the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Table 8-3: Density Bonus for Percentage of Very Low-Income Dedicated Units |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
|   Percentage Very Low-Income Units   |      Percentage Density Bonus       |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 5                                    | 20                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6                                    | 22.5                                |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 7                                    | 25                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 8                                    | 27.5                                |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 9                                    | 30                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 10                                   | 32.5                                |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 11                                   | 35                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
F. Twenty Percent Senior Citizen Housing Development Dedication. When a developer agrees to construct a senior citizen housing development, or mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons, the director shall grant the developer, upon the developer’s request, a density bonus; the density bonus shall be twenty percent of the number of senior housing units.
G. Ten Percent Common Interest Development for Moderate-Income Dedication. If a developer agrees to construct at least ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development for persons or families of moderate income, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase, the director shall grant the developer, upon the developer’s request, a density bonus; the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Table 8-4: Density Bonus for Percentage of Moderate-Income Dedicated Units |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
|   Percentage Moderate-Income Units   |      Percentage Density Bonus       |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 10                                   | 5                                   |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 11                                   | 6                                   |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 12                                   | 7                                   |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 13                                   | 8                                   |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 14                                   | 9                                   |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 15                                   | 10                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 16                                   | 11                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 17                                   | 12                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 18                                   | 13                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 19                                   | 14                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 20                                   | 15                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 21                                   | 16                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 22                                   | 17                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 23                                   | 18                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 24                                   | 19                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 25                                   | 20                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 26                                   | 21                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 27                                   | 22                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 28                                   | 23                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 29                                   | 24                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 30                                   | 25                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 31                                   | 26                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 32                                   | 27                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 33                                   | 28                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 34                                   | 29                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 35                                   | 30                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 36                                   | 31                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 37                                   | 32                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 38                                   | 33                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 39                                   | 34                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 40                                   | 35                                  |
+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
H. Land Donation Dedication. If a developer for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the city for affordable housing in accordance with this chapter and the provisions set forth in Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918, the applicant shall be entitled to a fifteen percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density for the entire development. The director shall grant the applicant, upon the applicant’s request, a density bonus; the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Table 8-5: Density Bonus for Land Donation Dedication for Affordable Housing |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
|   Percentage Very Low-Income Units    |       Percentage Density Bonus       |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 10                                    | 15                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 11                                    | 16                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 12                                    | 17                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 13                                    | 18                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 14                                    | 19                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 15                                    | 20                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 16                                    | 21                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 17                                    | 22                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 18                                    | 23                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 19                                    | 24                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 20                                    | 25                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 21                                    | 26                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 22                                    | 27                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 23                                    | 28                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 24                                    | 29                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 25                                    | 30                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 26                                    | 31                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 27                                    | 32                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 28                                    | 33                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 29                                    | 34                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 30                                    | 35                                   |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
I. Housing for Transitional Foster Youth, Disabled Veterans, and Homeless Persons. If a developer agrees to construct as least ten percent of the total dwelling units in a housing development for transitional foster youth, as defined in Education Code Section 66025.9, or for disabled veterans, as defined in Government Code Section 18451, or for homeless persons, as defined in the Federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, the director shall grant the developer, upon the developer’s request, a density bonus of twenty percent. The units shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction of fifty-five years and shall be provided at the same affordability level as very low-income units.
J. An applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus.
K. Parking Requirements. 
    1. Upon the request of the developer, parking ratios of a development meeting the criteria of this section, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, shall be as follows:
        a. Studio to one bedroom: one on-site parking space per unit.
        b. Two to three bedrooms: two on-site parking spaces per unit.
        c. Four or more bedrooms: two and one-half parking spaces per unit.
        d. Senior housing: 0.5 spaces per bedroom.
    2. Housing developments occupied exclusively by extremely low, very low, or low income households, as defined by the state, may provide one car and one bicycle space per dwelling unit.
    3. If the total number of parking spaces required for a development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
    4. For purposes of this section, a development may provide on-site parking through tandem or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking.
    5. An applicant may request additional parking incentives or concessions beyond those provided in this section. (Ord. 1657 § 22, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.140.050 Standard incentives for mixed-use projects.
When an applicant for a commercial development partners with a housing developer proposing to provide affordable housing, the city shall grant to the commercial developer a development bonus pursuant to Government Code Section 65915.7 (Commercial development incentives for affordable housing). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.140.060 Standard incentives for conversion of apartments to condominium projects.
A. For the purposes of this section, “other incentives of equivalent financial value” shall not be construed to require the city to provide cash transfer payments or other monetary compensations but may include the reduction or waiver of requirements which the city might otherwise apply as conditions of conversion approval.
B. For purposes of this section, “density bonus” means an increase in units of twenty-five percent over the number of apartments to be provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion.
C. When an applicant for approval to convert apartments to condominium units agrees to provide at least thirty-three percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons and families of low or moderate income, or fifteen percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to lower-income households, and agrees to pay for the reasonable, necessary administrative costs incurred by the city pursuant to this section, the director shall grant a density bonus or provide other incentives of equivalent financial value as it finds appropriate.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city to approve a proposal to convert apartments to condominiums.
E. An applicant shall not be eligible for a density bonus under this section if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentives were provided under Section 17.140.040, 17.140.050, or 17.140.070.
F. The city shall grant the developer’s request for development incentive(s) unless the council makes written findings of fact that the additional incentive(s) are not required to achieve affordable housing objectives as defined in Section 50062.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or to ensure that sales prices for the targeted dwelling units will be set and maintained in conformance with city affordable housing standards. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.140.070 Alternative or additional incentives.
A. When a developer agrees to construct housing for households of very low-, lower-, or moderate-income households, or for qualifying senior households, or for qualifying transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons, and desires an incentive other than a density bonus as provided in Section 17.140.040 (Standard Incentives for Housing Projects), or when an applicant for approval to convert apartments to a condominium project agrees to provide housing for households of very low, lower, or moderate income, or for qualifying senior households, the developer shall receive the following number of incentives or concessions:
    1. One incentive or concession for housing developments that include at least ten percent of the total units for lower-income households, at least five percent for very low-income households, at least ten percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development, or at least ten percent for qualifying transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons,
    2. Two incentives or concessions for housing developments that include at least twenty percent of the total units for lower-income households, at least ten percent for very low-income households, at least twenty percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development, or at least twenty percent for qualifying transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons,
    3. Three incentives or concessions for housing developments that include at least thirty percent of the total units for lower-income households, at least fifteen for very low-income households, at least thirty percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development, or at least thirty percent for qualifying transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons,
B. Alternative incentive proposals shall include information set forth in Section 17.140.030 (Application Process), as well as a description of the requested incentive. Alternative incentive proposals shall be considered by the planning commission and may include but are not limited to one or more of the following:
    1. A reduction in site development standards or modification of Title 17 requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces, that would otherwise be required that results in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs;
    2. Approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land use will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing project will be located;
    3. Density bonus in excess of that provided in Section 17.140.040;
    4. Deferral of application and development review processing fees;
    5. Deferral of park land in-lieu fees or park land dedication requirement; and
    6. Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the city that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions shall also include provisions for assuring continued availability of designated units at affordable rents or sales prices as required by state law.
C. Proposals for approval to convert apartments to a condominium project shall include those relevant items set forth in Section 17.140.030(B), plus the requested incentive, an estimate of the incentive’s financial value in comparison with the financial value of the density bonus as set forth in Section 17.140.060, and the basis for the comparison estimate. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city to provide cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation. The city may reduce or waive requirements which the city might otherwise apply as conditions of conversion approval.
D. Proposals to construct a housing development that includes affordable units and includes a childcare facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the housing development shall comply with Government Code Section 65915(h)(1).
E. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the planning commission to approve any alternative incentive or concession. The planning commission shall approve the requisite number of incentives or concessions afforded by this section. However, the details surrounding the incentives or concessions shall be at the discretion of the planning commission.
F. The planning commission action on any alternative incentive proposal shall be by resolution. Any such resolution shall include findings relating to the information required in subsection B or C of this section. (Ord. 1657 § 23, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.140.080 Agreements for affordable housing.
Prior to the issuance of construction permits for any project incorporating a density bonus or other concession or incentive as provided in this chapter, the city and the project owner(s) shall enter into an agreement in a form acceptable to the city attorney, to be recorded in the office of the county recorder. The agreement shall specify mechanisms or procedures to assure the continued affordability and availability of the specified number of dwelling units to very low-, lower-, and moderate-income households, and/or qualifying seniors, and/or qualifying transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons. The agreement shall also set forth those items required by this section. The agreement shall run with the land and shall be binding upon all heirs, successors or assigns of the project or property owner, and shall ensure affordability for the maximum period established by state law. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.140.090 Fees.
A. No fee in addition to normal project application fees shall be charged for a request for a density bonus pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.140.040, 17.140.050, or 17.140.060, except for reasonable, necessary administrative costs incurred by the city.
B. A fee not to exceed the amount charged for “preapplication concept review” may be charged for proposals submitted pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.140.070. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.140.100 Affordability standards.
A. The city shall publish and revise as needed a schedule of rental rates and sales prices for dwellings which will be affordable to households with incomes as provided in this chapter. The schedule shall substantially conform with the affordability standards as established by state or federal law.
B. The maximum rental rates and sales prices as revised, generally on an annual basis, shall remain in effect for projects receiving density bonuses or additional incentives under this chapter as provided in the affordable housing agreement, but in no case less than the minimum term required by state law. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.140.110 Occupant qualifications.
A. The affordable dwellings developed pursuant to this chapter shall be available to qualified occupants without regard to race, religion, national origin, sex, occupation or other affiliation. Occupants may be screened on the basis of age only to qualify those occupants seeking housing designed for the elderly.
B. The city housing authority or other third party acceptable to the community development director shall screen prospective occupants so that dwellings developed pursuant to this chapter shall be occupied by households with the appropriate qualifying incomes, ages, or other qualifying status. Owners of projects shall enter into agreements with the housing authority for such screening services.
C. Preference in occupant screening shall be given to those employed within the city or the immediately surrounding area, to the extent that this provision does not conflict with state or federally funded housing assistance programs which may apply to a particular project or other applicable law. This section is to ensure that those households having the greatest difficulty obtaining housing at market value within the city shall be able to occupy affordable housing made available pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.142 DOWNTOWN HOUSING CONVERSION REGULATIONS

Sections:
17.142.010   Purpose and intent.
17.142.020   Definitions.
17.142.030   Land uses affected.
17.142.040   No net housing loss.
17.142.050   Exceptions.
17.142.060   Public hearing required.
17.142.070   Conditions of approval.

17.142.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the desire and intent of the city to preserve housing in the downtown planning area shown in Figure 8-1. It is also the intent of the city to preserve housing that is affordable to very low-, low-, and moderate-income households and to encourage mixed residential and commercial uses, where appropriate, to implement general plan goals. The provisions of this chapter are intended to achieve these goals by regulating the conversion of downtown housing to nonresidential uses. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.142.020 Definitions.
Where not defined below, terms shall be as defined in Article 9 (Definitions) of this title.
A. Downtown Core. As shown in Figure 8-1: Downtown Planning Area and Downtown Core.
B. “Conversion” means a change in the primary use of at least fifty-one percent of the floor area of a legally permitted dwelling or building from residential to nonresidential use, or physical change in design of fifty-one percent of an individual dwelling’s or building’s floor area to accommodate nonresidential uses.
C. “Net housing loss” means the number of residential units removed through demolition, remodeling, or conversion to nonresidential uses exceeds the number of dwellings added through new construction, additions, remodeling, or relocation within the downtown core, or in the area outside the downtown core but within the downtown planning area. The cumulative number of dwellings added and residential units removed based on city final building inspections, within each of the above areas, shall be determined separately, and shall be based on the number of dwellings existing on March 30, 2004, as determined by the director.
D. “Replacement unit” means a dwelling which is built, moved, or remodeled to replace a residential unit lost through demolition or remodeling or conversion to nonresidential use.
E. “Subarea” means the geographic area corresponding to either the downtown core, or the area outside the downtown core but within the downtown planning area, as shown in Figure 8-1.Figure 8-1. Downtown Planning Area and Downtown Core
[IMAGE: <17.142.020_Fig8-1.jpeg>]
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.142.030 Land uses affected.
Provisions of this chapter shall apply to properties that contain one or more dwelling units and to all group housing, including “boarding house,” “residential care facilities,” “caretaker quarters,” “lodging—hotels and motels,” “bed and breakfast inn,” and “fraternities and sororities” which have one or more individual rooms for rent, as defined in Article 9 (Definitions) and listed in Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone of Article 2 (Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development Standards). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.142.040 No net housing loss.
A. Development projects within the downtown planning area shall not result in a net housing loss. If the director determines that a development project would result in a net housing loss, the developer shall replace residential units to be removed, whether the units to be removed are occupied or not. Residential units shall be replaced on a one-for-one basis within the downtown planning area and shall be built concurrently with the development project. Replacement units may be of any size, type, or tenure, consistent with this title and as approved consistent with the ministerial or discretionary requirements of this title for the units to be built. Replacement units shall be located within the same subarea as the units removed, but need not be located on the same site as previously existed.
B. Development projects shall meet the following standards, subject to the approval of the director:
    1. Vacation of Unit. Each tenant shall have the right to remain no fewer than sixty days from the date of city approval of a development project application. The director or council may grant an extension to this right to remain for a period of time not to exceed an additional thirty days.
    2. No Increase in Rent. A tenant’s rent shall not be increased during the period provided in subsection (B)(1) of this section.
    3. Affordability of Units. The development project shall include dwelling units affordable to low- and moderate-income persons, at rents or sales prices that meet the city’s affordable housing standards. The number of dwellings to be rented or sold at affordable levels shall equal the maximum number of affordable dwellings that existed within the twenty-four-month period immediately prior to the application for the conversion permit, but in no case less than that required under the inclusionary housing affordable housing requirement in the general plan housing element.
    4. Tenant Relocation Assistance. For very low-, low-, or moderate-income residents displaced by the development project, the developer shall provide relocation assistance, subject to the approval of the director. Such assistance may include, but is not limited to, giving tenants the first right of refusal to purchase or rent affordable replacement units, reimbursement of moving costs, and/or providing rental assistance. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.142.050 Exceptions.
A. The council may grant exceptions to the provisions of this chapter, subject to the findings listed in subsection B of this section. In granting an exception, the council may establish conditions to ensure the intent of general plan policies is met, as described in Section 17.142.070 (Conditions of Approval). The application requirements and procedures for an exception shall be as required for a conditional use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.110 (Minor Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits).
B. To grant an exception, the city council must make each of the following findings:
    1. Approval of an exception is consistent with the general plan and specifically, with housing element policies regarding no net housing loss, affordable housing, and mixed uses in the downtown planning area.
    2. Granting the exception will not adversely affect affordable housing opportunities for very low-, low-, or moderate-income persons, either individually or cumulatively.
    3. The proposed project will not result in a significant loss of housing when compared with the total number of existing dwellings in the downtown core or downtown planning area outside the core.
    4. Granting the exception will further the achievement of other community goals, such as removing substandard or dangerous housing, improving physical accessibility, rehabilitating a historic structure, or downtown beautification.
    5. It is physically infeasible to rehabilitate or relocate the housing to be removed or converted.
    6. No public purpose would be served by the strict enforcement of the no net loss policy due to mitigating factors (include specific mitigating factors). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.142.060 Public hearing required.
Prior to acting on an exception request, the city council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be given to the residents of the proposed conversion and to owners and residents within three hundred feet of the affected property. The affected property shall be posted, and an advertisement shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten days before the public hearing. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.142.070 Conditions of approval.
The city council may establish conditions of approval which provide for the general health, safety, and welfare of residents displaced by the proposed development, and to achieve the intent of general plan housing conservation policies and mitigate the loss of housing. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.144 RESIDENTIAL GROWTH MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS

Sections:
17.144.010   Purpose and justification.
17.144.020   Allocations.
17.144.030   Periodic city council review and consideration of revisions.

17.144.010 Purpose and justification.
A. The regulations codified in this chapter are intended to assure that the rate of population growth will not exceed the city’s ability to accommodate new residents and to provide municipal services consistent with the maximum growth rates established in the general plan. Also, these regulations are to assure that those projects which best meet the city’s objectives for affordable housing, infill development, open space protection, and provision of public facilities will be allowed to proceed with minimum delay.
B. San Luis Obispo is a charter city, empowered to make and enforce all laws concerning municipal affairs, subject only to the limitations of the city charter and the constitution and laws of the state. Regulation of the rate of residential development is a reasonable extension of municipal authority to plan overall development in furtherance of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
C. According to the general plan land use element, the city should achieve a maximum annual average population growth rate of one percent. The reserve of developable land within the city and the capacity of proposed annexations could sustain growth rates which would exceed the objectives of the general plan.
D. The growth rate policies of the general plan reflect the city’s responsibility to accommodate a reasonable share of expected state and regional growth.
E. To avoid further imbalance between the availability of jobs and of housing within the city, the general plan also manages expansion of growth-inducing activities. The burdens of growth management are not being placed solely on the residential sector since it largely responds to demands caused by other sectors.
F. Considering the likely levels of housing demand and construction throughout the housing market area, nearly coinciding with San Luis Obispo County, these regulations are not expected to affect the overall balance between housing supply and demand in the market area. These regulations will not impede and may help meet the needs of very low-, low-, and moderate-income households. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.144.020 Allocations.
A. Each specific plan that authorizes residential development shall adopt a phasing schedule that allocates timing of potential residential construction, including phasing of required improvements, consistent with the general plan and with these regulations.
B. The limitations on residential development established by these regulations apply to new residential construction within certain areas that have been annexed to the city or that will be annexed to the city. Development in such areas is subject to development plans or specific plans which shall contain provisions consistent with these regulations.
C. Allocations shall be implemented by the timing of issuance of building permits.
D. Dwellings affordable and enforceably restricted to residents with extremely low, very low, low, or moderate incomes, as defined in the city’s general plan housing element, new dwellings in the downtown core (C-D zone as shown on the official zoning map), and legally established accessory dwelling units shall be exempt from these regulations. “Enforceably restricted” shall mean dwellings that are subject to deed restrictions, development agreements, or other legal mechanisms acceptable to the city to ensure long-term affordability, consistent with city affordable housing standards. In expansion areas, the overall number of units built must conform to the city-approved phasing plan.
E. It shall not be necessary to have dwellings allocated for a particular time interval or location to process and approve applications for general plan amendment, zoning regulations amendment, or other zoning action, subdivision application, or architectural review. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.144.030 Periodic city council review and consideration of revisions.
The community development department shall provide status updates to the council concerning implementation of these regulations, coordinated with the annual report on the general plan. The status update will describe actual construction levels and suggest if revisions are necessary to maintain the city’s one percent growth rate. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.146 RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY STANDARDS

Sections:
17.146.010   Purpose and applicability.

17.146.010 Purpose and applicability.
A. Applicability. The provisions in this section shall apply to boarding houses as defined in Article 9 (Definitions) and where permitted in Article 2 (Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development and Design Standards), and as may otherwise be regulated by state law. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate boarding houses in the city. Residential care facilities or day cares as defined in Article 9 (Definitions) are exempt from the provisions of this section.
B. Permit Required. Boarding houses occupied by six or more individuals may be permitted upon approval of whatever type of permit is required by the zone provisions in Article 2 (Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development and Design Standards).
C. Occupancy Limits. Use permits for boarding houses shall stipulate a maximum occupancy. The occupancy limits shall reflect habitable space within buildings and available parking and shall not exceed the following standards based on the general plan:
+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Table 8-6: Maximum Population Density for Each Zone |
+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Zone                  | Maximum Population Density  |
|                       | (persons per net acre)      |
+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| R-1                   | 20                          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| R-2, O, C-N, C-T      | 25                          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| R-3                   | 40                          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| R-4, C-R, C-C, C-D    | 55                          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
(Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.148 HIGH-OCCUPANCY RESIDENTIAL USE REGULATIONS

Sections:
17.148.010   Purpose and applicability.
17.148.020   Permit requirements.
17.148.030   Performance standards.

17.148.010 Purpose and applicability.
A. Applicability. The provisions in this chapter shall apply to “high-occupancy residential use,” as defined in Article 9 (Definitions) and where permitted in Article 2 (Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development and Design Standards). This chapter is intended to promote the quality of life in low-density and medium-density residential neighborhoods by ensuring that dwellings provide adequate support facilities. A high-occupancy residential use is allowed in the R-1 and R-2 zones subject to the performance standards set forth in Section 17.148.030.
B. Relationship to Zone Standards. Where this chapter does not contain a particular type of standard or procedure, conventional zoning standards shall apply.
C. Director’s Actions or Variances. Nothing in this chapter prohibits applicants from requesting a director’s action or variance from the strict interpretation of these zoning regulations to the extent allowed for any use. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.148.020 Permit requirements.
In addition to any requirements of the minor use permit, an applicant for a high-occupancy residential use shall submit and certify the following information as part of the application:
A. Address of dwelling;
B. A site plan which shows:
    1. The entire boundary of the site as well as adjacent structures within twenty feet;
    2. The number and location of off-street parking spaces;
    3. The gross floor area of the dwelling in square feet;
    4. The floor plan for the dwelling with the rooms clearly labeled;
C. The number of proposed adult occupants;
D. Owner’s signature; and
E. Any other information deemed necessary by the director. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.148.030 Performance standards.
A. A high-occupancy residential use shall operate in compliance with the following performance standards:
    1. The parking requirement shall be the greater of:
        a. The number of spaces required for dwellings as described in Section 17.72.030 (Required Parking Spaces); or
        b. One off-street parking space per adult occupant, less one.
    2. The parking of one vehicle within a required street setback is allowed. Parking in other yards is prohibited.
    3. Each required parking space shall be of an all-weather surface.
    4. Upon approval of the director, parking may be provided in tandem.
    5. There shall be a minimum of one bathroom provided for every three adult occupants.
    6. The dwelling must meet all current building, health, safety, and fire codes and have been built pursuant to all required permits. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Article 9. Definitions

Chapter 17.154 DEFINITIONS, PURPOSE, AND ORGANIZATION

Sections:
17.154.002   Purpose and applicability.
17.154.004   Organization.
17.154.006   Other definition sections.

17.154.002 Purpose and applicability.
This article provides definitions of the technical and other terms and phrases used in this title (zoning regulations) as a means of providing consistency in its interpretation. Where any definition in this article may conflict with definitions in other titles of the municipal code, these definitions shall prevail for the purposes of this code, except for as specified in Section 17.154.006 (Other Definition Sections). If a word is not defined in this chapter or in other provisions of the municipal code, the most common dictionary definition in the American Heritage Dictionary is presumed to be correct. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.154.004 Organization.
This article is subdivided into the following chapters:
A. Chapter 17.156 (Land Use Definitions) applies to land uses and activities identified in Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone of Section 17.10.020 (Use Regulations by Zone).
B. Chapter 17.60 (AOZ Land Use Definitions) applies to land uses and activities identified in Table 2-24: Airport Overlay Zone—Maximum Allowed Persons of Section 17.64.040 (Development Standards and Uses).
C. Chapter 17.158 (General Definitions) applies to all other terms used in this title. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.154.006 Other definition sections.
In addition to the definitions provided in this chapter, definitions are contained in the following sections of this title. Where any definition of this subsection may conflict with definitions in other titles of the municipal code, these definitions shall prevail.
A. Section 17.70.140 (Public Art Requirements for Private Development).
B. Section 17.86.030 (Adult Business Uses).
C. Chapter 17.138 (Inclusionary Housing Requirements).
D. Chapter 17.140 (Affordable Housing Incentives).
E. Chapter 17.142 (Downtown Housing Conversion Regulations). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.156 LAND USE DEFINITIONS (TABLE 2-1: USES ALLOWED BY ZONE)

Sections:
17.156.002   Purpose and applicability.
17.156.004   A definitions.
17.156.006   B definitions.
17.156.008   C definitions.
17.156.010   D definitions.
17.156.012   E definitions.
17.156.014   F definitions.
17.156.016   G definitions.
17.156.018   H definitions.
17.156.020   I definitions.
17.156.022   J definitions.
17.156.024   K definitions.
17.156.026   L definitions.
17.156.028   M definitions.
17.156.030   N definitions.
17.156.032   O definitions.
17.156.034   P definitions.
17.156.035   Q definitions.
17.156.036   R definitions.
17.156.038   S definitions.
17.156.040   T definitions.
17.156.042   U definitions.
17.156.044   V definitions.
17.156.046   W definitions.
17.156.048   X definitions.
17.156.050   Y definitions.
17.156.052   Z definitions.

17.156.002 Purpose and applicability.
This chapter provides definitions of the land uses and activities identified in Table 2-1: Uses Allowed by Zone of Section 17.10.020 (Use Regulations by Zone). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.004 A definitions.
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU). An attached or detached dwelling unit that is no more than one thousand two hundred square feet in size, provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, and is located on a lot with a proposed or existing primary residence. An ADU includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on the same lot as a single-family or multifamily structure is or will be situated. An ADU may be structured as one efficiency unit, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1, and/or a manufactured home, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18007, among other formats.
Accessory Use. See “Use, Accessory.”
Adult Entertainment Businesses. See Section 17.86.030 (Adult Business Uses).
Agricultural Accessory Structure. Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site with a permitted agricultural use including farm offices, barns, stables, coops, tank houses, storage tanks, wind machines, windmills, silos and other farm outbuildings, private garages and carports, storehouses, garden structures, greenhouses, recreation rooms, private swimming pools, and tennis courts for the use of the persons residing on the site.
Airport. An area approved by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for the take-off and landing of aircraft, which may include appurtenant areas for airport buildings, aircraft operations, and related facilities, aprons and taxiways, control towers, hangars, safety lights, navigation, and air traffic control facilities and structures. These may also include facilities for aircraft manufacturing, maintenance, repair, and reconditioning. Where approved, an airport may also include aircraft sales and dealerships, car rental establishments, gift shops, hotels and motels, personal services, restaurants and bars, tobacco and newsstands, and other similar commercial uses serving the air-traveling public and airport employees.
Animal Care, Sales and Services. 
    Animal Boarding/Kennels. The commercial provision of shelter and care for dogs, cats, other household animals, and horses (where allowed), including activities associated with such shelter and care (e.g., feeding, exercising, grooming, and incidental medical care) of four or more dogs four months of age or older, or four or more cats, except for dogs or cats in pet shops.
    Animal Grooming. The commercial provision of bathing and trimming services for dogs, cats, and other household animals permitted by the municipal code. Overnight boarding is not included with this use (see “Animal Boarding/Kennels”).
    Animal Retail Sales. The retail sales of household animals within an entirely enclosed building. These uses include grooming, if incidental to the retail use, but specifically excludes boarding of animals other than those for sale (see “Animal Boarding/Kennels”).
    Veterinary Services, Large Animal. Veterinary services for livestock, farm animals, and other large animals. This classification allows twenty-four-hour accommodation of animals receiving medical services.
    Veterinary Services, Small Animal. Veterinary services for household pets. This classification allows twenty-four-hour accommodation of animals receiving medical services, but does not include kenneling of animals not receiving medical services (see “Animal Boarding/Kennels”).
Animal Husbandry and Grazing. Raising and breeding of animals or production of animal products. Typical uses include grazing, ranching, dairy farming, poultry farming, beekeeping, and enclosed fisheries, but excludes slaughterhouses and feedlot operations. Does not include animal sales, boarding, and grooming (see “Animal Care, Sales and Services”).
Auto Repair. See “Vehicle Repair and Service.”
Auto Sales and Rental. See “Vehicle Repair and Service.” (Ord. 1679 § 4, 2020; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.006 B definitions.
Backlots and Soundstages. See “Media Production—Backlots and Soundstages.”
Banks and Financial Institutions. 
    Automated Teller Machines (ATMs). An unstaffed computerized, self-service machine used by banking customers for financial transactions, including deposits, withdrawals, and fund transfers. These machines may be located at or within banks, or in other locations.
    Banks and Credit Unions. Financial institutions providing retail banking services. This classification includes only those institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of money, including credit unions, but does not include “Check Cashing Shops/Payday Loans.”
    Check Cashing Shops/Payday Loans. A commercial land use that generally includes some or all of a variety of financial services, including cashing of checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose; deferred deposit of personal checks whereby the check casher refrains from depositing a personal check written by a customer until a specific date pursuant to a written agreement; money transfers; payday advances; issuance of money orders; making consumer or auto-title loans; and similar uses. This category does not include state or federally chartered banks, savings associations, credit unions, or industrial loan companies. It also does not include retail sellers that are primarily engaged in the business of selling consumer goods, such as consumables to retail buyers, and that cashes checks or issues money orders as a service to its customers (for a fee not exceeding two dollars) incidental to their main purpose or business.
Bar. See “Eating and Drinking Establishments—Bars, Live Entertainment, and Taverns.”
Bed and Breakfast Establishment. See “Lodging—Bed and Breakfast Establishment.”
Boarding House. A boarding house is a residence or dwelling, other than a motel or hotel, wherein two or more rooms, with or without individual or group cooking facilities, are rented to three or more individuals under separate rental agreements or leases, either written or oral, whether or not an owner, agent or rental manager is in the residence. Meals may also be included. This use type includes convents, monasteries, and student dormitories, but does not include “Fraternities and Sororities,” which are separately defined, nor does it include a fraternity or sorority that is not in good standing with the California Polytechnic University. Notwithstanding this definition, no single-unit dwelling operated as a group home pursuant to the Community Care Facilities Act, which is otherwise exempt from local zoning regulations, shall be considered a boarding house.
Broadcast Studios. See “Media Production—Broadcast Studios.”
Building Materials Sales and Services. See “Retail Sales—Building Materials and Services.”
Business Services. Establishments providing goods and services to other businesses on a fee or contract basis, including printing and copying, blueprint services, advertising and mailing, equipment rental and leasing, office security, custodial services, photo finishing, model building, taxi, or delivery services with two or fewer fleet vehicles on site. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.008 C definitions.
“Cannabis” or “cannabis product” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis plants. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this division, “cannabis” does not mean “industrial hemp” as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code.
Cannabis Accessories. Any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or cannabis products into the human body.
Cannabis Activity. Any activity involving cannabis or cannabis products, except for possession or use, which is regulated under state law. Includes commercial cannabis activity as well as personal noncommercial cultivation, processing, storing, labeling, or delivery for personal adult recreational or medicinal use.
“Canopy” means all of the following:
    1. The totality of an individual plant's aboveground parts, including branches, stems, leaves, and flowering structures;
    2. The designated area(s) at a licensed premises that will contain mature plants at any point in time;
    3. Canopy shall be calculated in square feet and measured using clearly identifiable boundaries of all area(s) that will contain mature plants at any point in time, including all the space(s) within the boundaries;
    4. Canopy may be noncontiguous, but each unique area included in the total canopy calculation shall be separated by an identifiable boundary such as an interior wall or by at least ten feet of open space; and
    5. If mature plants are being cultivated using a shelving or stacking system, the surface area of each level shall be included in the total canopy calculation.
Car Wash. See “Vehicle Sales and Services—Vehicle Services, Washing.”
Caretaker Quarters. “Caretaker dwelling” means a permanent residence that is secondary or accessory to the primary use of the property, and used for housing a caretaker employed on the site of any nonresidential use where needed for security purposes or to provide twenty-four-hour care or monitoring of people, plants, animals, equipment, or other conditions on the site.
Cemetery. Establishments primarily engaged in operating sites or structures reserved for the interment of human or animal remains, including mausoleums, burial places, and memorial gardens.
Check Cashing Shops. See “Banks and Financial Institutions—Check Cashing Shops/Payday Loans.”
Commercial Cannabis Activity. The cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products as provided for in this title.
Commercial Mining. See “Mineral Extraction.”
Commercial Recreation. Recreational facilities where visitors are participant actors rather than spectators. Examples include outdoor facilities such as amusement and theme parks, water parks, swimming pools; driving ranges, golf courses, miniature golf courses, riding stables; and indoor facilities such as large fitness centers, gymnasiums, handball, badminton, racquetball, dance hall and tennis club facilities; ice or roller skating rinks; trampoline and bounce house establishments; bowling alleys; pool and billiards lounges; and electronic game and amusement centers. This classification may include snack bars and other incidental food and beverage services to patrons. Bars or restaurants with alcohol sales shall be treated as a separate use and shall be regulated accordingly, even when operated in conjunction with the entertainment and recreation use.
    Commercial Recreation, Large-Scale. Larger recreational facilities (greater than twenty thousand square feet).
    Commercial Recreation, Small-Scale. Smaller and primarily indoor (although some facilities may be outdoor) facilities that are less than twenty thousand square feet.
Community Garden. A site used for growing plants for food, fiber, herbs, flowers, and others which is shared and maintained by community residents, either as an accessory or primary use.
Concentrated Cannabis. The separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis.
Continuing Care Community. A residential facility that combines independent living, assisted living, skilled nursing, memory care on one development site.
Convenience Store. See “Food and Beverage Sales—Convenience Store.”
Crop Production. Commercial agricultural production field and orchard uses, including the production of the following or similar, primarily in the soil on the site and not in containers: field crops; flowers and seeds; fruits; grains; ornamental crops; tree nuts; trees and sod; vegetables; wine and table grapes. Also includes associated crop preparation services and harvesting activities, such as mechanical soil preparation, irrigation system construction, spraying, and crop processing, not including sales sheds (see “Food and Beverage Sales—Produce Stand”). Does not include greenhouses or containerized crop production (See “Greenhouse/Plant Nursery, Commercial”). Does not include noncommercial home gardening, which is considered an accessory use to an allowed residential use. Does not include cannabis, which is addressed separately.
Cultivation. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.
Cultivation, Indoor. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis enclosed within a structure using artificial lighting. These structures do not have any part open to the outside.
Cultivation, Outdoor. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis not within an enclosed structure such as open fields, greenhouses, hoop structures, etc.
Cultivation, Personal. Cultivation of cannabis conducted by an individual strictly for that individual’s personal use, possession, processing, transporting, or giving away without any compensation whatsoever in accordance with this code and state law, including but not limited to Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2, as may be amended. Except as herein defined, personal cultivation does not include, and shall not authorize, any cultivation conducted as part of a business or commercial activity, including cultivation for compensation or retail or wholesale sales of cannabis.
Cultural Institutions. A nonprofit institution displaying or preserving objects of interest in one or more of the arts or sciences. This use includes libraries, museums, and art galleries. May also include accessory retail uses such as a gift/book shop, restaurant, etc. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018: Ord. 1647 § 7 (Exh. D (part)), 2018)

17.156.010 D definitions.
Day Care Centers. Establishments providing nonmedical care for persons on a less than twenty-four-hour basis other than “Family Day Care.” This classification includes nursery schools, preschools, and day care facilities for children or adults, and any other day care facility licensed by the state.
Delivery. The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. “Delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer.
Distribution. The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between licensees.
Drive-Through or Drive-Up Facilities. An establishment that sells products or provides services to occupants in vehicles, including drive-in or drive-up windows and drive-through services. Examples include fast food restaurants, banks, and pharmacies. Does not include “click and collect” facilities in which an online order is picked up in a stationary retail business without use of a drive-in service (see “Retail Sales—General Retail”). Does not include drive-in theaters or “Vehicle Services—Washing.” (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018: Ord. 1647 § 7 (Exh. D (part)), 2018)

17.156.012 E definitions.
Eating and Drinking Establishments. Businesses primarily engaged in serving prepared food and/or beverages for consumption on or off the premises.
    Bars, Live Entertainment, and Taverns. Any establishment that sells or serves alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and is holding or applying for a public premises license from the State Department of Alcoholic Beverages and in which persons under twenty-one years of age are restricted from the premises. References to the establishment shall include any immediately adjacent area that is owned, leased, or rented, or controlled by the licensee. This use includes wine-tasting rooms and micro-breweries where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on site and any food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. Does not include adult entertainment businesses.
    Restaurant. Establishments where food and beverages may be consumed on the premises, taken out, or delivered.
    Restaurant with Late-Hour Alcohol Service. A restaurant that provides alcohol service after eleven p.m.
Edible Product. Cannabis product that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption, including, but not limited to, chewing gum, but excluding products set forth in Division 15 (commencing with Section 32501) of the Food and Agricultural Code. An edible cannabis product is not considered food, as defined by Section 109935 of the Health and Safety Code, or a drug, as defined by Section 109925 of the Health and Safety Code.
Educational Conferences Housing. Student housing complexes normally occupied for part of the year by university students used during their vacant periods for educational conferences.
Elderly and Long-Term Care. Establishments that provide twenty-four-hour medical, convalescent, or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness, or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves, and are licensed as a skilled nursing facility by the state, including but not limited to rest homes and convalescent hospitals. Does not include “Residential Care Facilities,” “Hospitals,” or “Clinics.”
Extended-Hour Retail. See “Retail Sales, Extended-Hour Retail.” (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018: Ord. 1647 § 7 (Exh. D (part)), 2018)

17.156.014 F definitions.
Family Day Care. A day care facility licensed by the state that is located in a single-unit residence or other dwelling unit where a resident of the dwelling provides care and supervision for children under the age of eighteen for periods of fewer than twenty-four hours a day.
    Small. A facility that provides care for eight or fewer children, including children who reside at the home and are under the age of ten. See Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78.
    Large. A facility that provides care for nine to fourteen children, including children who reside at the home and are under the age of 10. See Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78.
Farm and Feed Stores. See “Nurseries and Garden Centers.”
Food and Beverage Sales. Retail sales of food and beverages for off-site preparation and consumption.
    Convenience Store. A retail establishment with not more than four thousand five hundred square feet of gross floor area, offering for sale products including but not limited to fresh food and produce, prepackaged food, household items, newspapers and magazines, and sandwiches and other freshly prepared foods, such as salads, for off-site consumption. Sale of alcoholic beverages is limited to beer and wine only in conjunction with an ABC License Type 20.
    General Market. Retail food markets of food and grocery items for off-site preparation and consumption. Typical uses include supermarkets, neighborhood grocery stores, and specialty food stores, such as retail bakeries; candy, nuts, and confectionery stores; meat or produce markets; vitamin and health food stores; cheese stores; and delicatessens. This classification may include small-scale specialty food production such as pasta shops with retail sales.
    Liquor Store. Any business selling alcoholic beverages as a primary use, including beer, wine, distilled spirits, hard liquor, and/or any other alcoholic beverages. Does not include grocery stores, convenience stores, warehouse stores, or other alcohol sales authorized as part of an off-site wine tasting room or food and beverage product manufacturing.
    Produce Stand. A temporary facility for selling seasonal goods such as fruits, vegetables and plants.
Food Preparation. Businesses preparing and/or packaging food for off-site consumption, excluding those of an industrial character in terms of processes employed, waste produced, water used, and traffic generation. Typical uses include catering kitchens, bakeries with on-site retail sales, and small-scale specialty food production. Food preparation may also be considered accessory to allowed restaurant uses.
Food Trucks. Any self-propelled, motorized device or vehicle by which any person or property may be propelled or moved upon a highway or street, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power, or which may be drawn or towed by a self-propelled, motorized vehicle, from which food or food products are sold, offered for sale, displayed, bartered, exchanged, or otherwise given.
Fraternities and Sororities. Residence for college or university students who are members of a social or educational association that is affiliated and in good standing with the California Polytechnic State University and where such an association also holds meetings or gatherings.
Freight/Truck Terminals. Transportation facilities furnishing services incidental to freight, courier, and postal services by truck, airplane, or rail. This classification does not include local messenger and local delivery services (see “Light Fleet-Based Services”).
Fuel Dealer. A retail trade establishment that sells fuel oil, butane, propane, and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), bottled or in bulk, to consumers, as the primary use of the site. Does not include the sale of these fuels as an accessory use to a service/fueling station or other retail establishment.
Funeral Parlors and Interment Services. An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation, or disposition of human remains and conducting memorial services. Typical uses include crematories, columbaria, mausoleums, mortuaries, funeral chapels, and funeral homes. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.016 G definitions.
General Retail. See “Retail Sales, General Retail.”
Greenhouse. A fully enclosed permanent or temporary structure that is clad in transparent material that may contain climate control, such as heating and/or ventilation capabilities, and/or supplemental artificial lighting, and/or use of both natural and artificial lighting (mixed light) for cultivation. Cannabis cultivation within a greenhouse is considered outdoor cultivation.
Greenhouse/Plant Nursery, Commercial. A commercial agricultural establishment engaged in the production of ornamental plants and other nursery products, grown under cover either in containers or in the soil on the site, or outdoors in containers. The outdoor production of plants in the soil on the site is instead included under “crop production.” Also includes establishments engaged in the sale of these products (wholesale) and commercial-scale greenhouses. Does not include noncommercial home gardening in greenhouses and “Nurseries and Garden Centers.”
Grocery Store. See “Food and Beverage Sales, General Market.” (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018: Ord. 1647 § 7 (Exh. D (part)), 2018)

17.156.018 H definitions.
Handicraft Manufacturing. Establishments primarily engaged in on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing or artistic endeavor, which involves only the use of hand tools or small mechanical equipment. Handicraft manufacturing uses shall include the accessory direct retail sale to consumers of only those goods produced on site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, candle-making shops, woodworking, and custom jewelry manufacturers. For handicraft manufacturing uses without a retail component, see “Manufacturing—Light.” For retail uses with an accessory manufacturing component, see “Retail Sales—General Retail.”
Heliport/Helipad. Any landing area used for landing or taking off private helicopters for the purpose of picking up and discharging of passengers or cargo.
High-Occupancy Residential Use. Any dwelling in the R-1 or R-2 zones when the occupancy of the dwelling consists of six or more persons over the age of eighteen. Does not include “Residential Care Facilities.”
High-Occupancy Residential Use. Any dwelling in the R-1 or R-2 zones when the occupancy of the dwelling consists of six or more adults.
Home Occupation. A commercial use conducted on residential property by the inhabitants of the subject residence, which is incidental and secondary to the residential use of the property.
Homeless Shelters. See “Lodging—Homeless Shelters.”
Homestay Rentals. An owner-occupied dwelling unit where bedrooms are provided for compensation for fewer than thirty consecutive days with a maximum of four adult overnight guests.
Hoop Structure. A readily removable plastic- or fabric-covered hoop structure without in-ground footings or foundations. Cannabis cultivation within hoop structures is considered outdoor cultivation.
Hospice Inpatient Facility. Residential facility licensed or supervised by any federal, state, or local health/welfare agency that provide twenty-four-hour medical and/or nonmedical services for patients under the care of a licensed Medicare-certified hospice agency.
Hospitals and Clinics. State-licensed facilities providing medical, surgical, psychiatric, or emergency medical services to sick or injured persons. This classification includes facilities for inpatient or outpatient treatment, including substance-abuse programs as well as training, research, and administrative services for patients and employees. This classification excludes veterinaries and animal hospitals (see “Animal Care, Sales, and Services”).
    Clinic. A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an outpatient basis, including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, administration, and related services to patients who are not lodged overnight. Services may be available without a prior appointment. This classification includes licensed facilities such as blood banks and plasma centers, and emergency medical services offered exclusively on an outpatient basis such as urgent care centers. This classification does not include private medical and dental offices that typically require appointments and are usually smaller scale; see “Medical and Dental Offices.”
    Hospital. A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical services for sick or injured persons primarily on an inpatient basis, and including ancillary facilities for outpatient and emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, research, administration, and services to patients, employees, or visitors.
Hotels and Motels. See “Lodging—Hotels and Motels.” (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018: Ord. 1647 § 7 (Exh. D (part)), 2018)

17.156.020 I definitions.
Instructional Services. Commercial establishments that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development provided on an individual or group setting. Typical uses include classes or instruction in music, fitness, art, or academics. Instructional services also include rehearsal studios as an accessory use. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.022 J definitions.
Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit (JADU). A unit that is no more than five hundred square feet in size and contained entirely within a single-family residence. A junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities or may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure. (Ord. 1679 § 5, 2020: Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.024 K definitions.
Reserved. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.026 L definitions.
Laboratory—Medical, Analytical, Research, Testing. A facility for testing, analysis, and/or research. Examples of this use include medical labs, soils and materials testing labs, and forensic labs. This type of facility is distinguished from industrial research and development (see “Research and Development”) in its orientation more toward testing and analysis than product development or prototyping; an industrial research and development facility may typically include this type of lab. The “medical lab” subset of this land use type is oriented more toward specimen analysis and processing than direct blood drawing and specimen collection from patients (see “Hospitals” and “Clinics”), but may also include incidental specimen collection.
Light Fleet-Based Services. Passenger transportation services, local delivery services, medical transport, and other businesses that rely on fleets of three or more vehicles with rated capacities less than ten thousand pounds. This classification includes parking, dispatching, and offices for taxicab and limousine operations, ambulance services, nonemergency medical transport, local messenger and document delivery services, home cleaning services, and similar businesses. This classification does not include towing operations or taxi or delivery services with two or fewer fleet vehicles on site (see “Business Services”). Does not include a dispatch office facility on a site separate from the location where the vehicles used by the business are parked or stored between calls (see “Office—Business and Professional”).
Liquor Stores. See “Food and Beverage Sales—Liquor Stores.”
Live Plants. Living cannabis flowers and plants, including seeds, immature plants, and vegetative stage plants.
Livestock Feed Lot. A type of animal feeding operation which is used in intensive animal farming for finishing livestock, notably beef cattle, but also swine, horses, sheep, turkeys, chickens or ducks, prior to slaughter.
Lodging. An establishment providing overnight accommodations to transient patrons for payment for periods of fewer than thirty consecutive calendar days.
    Bed and Breakfast Establishment. A building or group of buildings providing fifteen or fewer bedrooms or suites that are rented for overnight lodging, with a common eating area for guests. Does not include room rental, which is separately defined (see “Boarding House”).
    Homeless Shelter. A church, public building, or quasi-public facility that provides emergency or temporary shelter for more than thirty-one days in any six-month period to homeless individuals and/or groups. These accommodations may include temporary lodging, meals, laundry facilities, bathing, counseling, and other basic support services.
    Hostels. An establishment with guest rooms or suites that may be private or common which are rented to the general public for overnight lodging to transient patrons. Hostels cater primarily, but not exclusively, to travelers who arrive by bicycle, train, or other nonautomotive vehicles, and are generally an inexpensive form of lodging.
    Hotels and Motels. An establishment with a group of guest rooms or suites, with or without kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for overnight lodging to transient patrons. These establishments may provide additional services, such as conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, bars, personal services, retail services, or recreational facilities available to guests or to the general public. This use classification does not include boarding or rooming housings (see “Boarding Houses”) or bed and breakfasts (see “Bed and Breakfast Establishment”), or hostels (see “Hostels”) which are separately defined and regulated. Any single hotel room that is not part of a group of hotel rooms is considered a “Vacation Rental.”
    Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park. A form of lodging designed to specifically accommodate travelers with and temporary overnight parking for recreational vehicles (RV) and/or trailers as a primary use of the property. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018: Ord. 1647 § 7 (Exh. D (part)), 2018)

17.156.028 M definitions.
Maintenance and Repair Services. Establishments engaged in the maintenance or repair of office machines, household appliances, furniture, and similar items. This classification excludes maintenance and repair of vehicles or boats (see “Vehicle Sales and Services”) and personal apparel (see “Personal Services”).
Manufacturing—Heavy. Manufacturing of products from extracted or raw materials or recycled or secondary materials, or bulk storage and handling of such products and materials. This classification includes operations such as biomass energy conversion; textile mills; leather and allied product manufacturing; wood product manufacturing; paper manufacturing; chemical manufacturing; plastics and rubber products manufacturing; nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing (such as sand, gravel, or clay into products for intermediate or final consumption); primary metal manufacturing; fabricated metal product manufacturing; petroleum refining and related industries; and automotive, ship, aircraft, and heavy equipment manufacturing. Includes accessory office uses associated with the on-site use. This classification does not include recycling (see “Recycling”) or the processing of animals.
Manufacturing—Light. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, and treatment packaging, taking place primarily within enclosed buildings and producing minimal impacts on nearby properties. Includes accessory wholesale and/or direct retail sale to consumers of only those goods produced on site. Includes accessory office uses associated with the on-site use. Examples of light industrial uses include but are not limited to the manufacture of electronic instruments, equipment, and appliances; brewery and alcohol production, pharmaceutical manufacturing; and production apparel manufacturing.
Manufacturing (Nonvolatile). The production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, using nonvolatile organic or inorganic compounds (see “Manufacturing (Volatile)”), at a fixed location, that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products, or labels or relabels its containers.
Manufacturing (Volatile). The production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, using volatile organic compounds, at a fixed location, that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products, or labels or relabels its containers.
Marijuana. See “Cannabis.”
Market, General. “See Food and Beverage Sales—General Market.”
Media Production. Fixed-base facilities for motion picture, television, video, sound, computer, and other communications production. These facilities include the following types:
    Backlots and Soundstages. Outdoor sets, backlots, and other outdoor facilities and warehouse-type facilities providing space for the construction and use of indoor sets, including supporting workshops and craft shops.
    Broadcast Studios. Workplaces where movies, television shows or radio programs are produced and recorded, including administrative and technical production, administrative and production support offices, post-production facilities (editing and sound recording studios, foley stages, etc.), optical and special effects units, film processing laboratories, etc.
Medical Marijuana. See “Medicinal Cannabis.”
Medicinal Cannabis or Medicinal Cannabis Product. Cannabis or a cannabis product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code, by a medicinal cannabis patient in California who possesses a physician’s recommendation.
Medical Office. “See Office—Medical and Dental Offices.”
Microbusiness. Allows a single business to integrate cultivation, manufacturing, distribution and retail sales.
Mineral Extraction. The commercial surface mining or quarrying operations for aggregates (sand and gravel) or other surface or subsurface minerals and materials from the earth.
Mixed-Light Cultivation. Cultivation of cannabis using a combination of natural and supplemental artificial lighting (e.g., a greenhouse using natural light during the day and artificial light during the night). Mixed-light cultivation is not allowed.
Mixed-Use Development. A development that combines both nonresidential and residential uses, where the residential component may be live/work as defined in Section 17.158.028 and is typically located above or behind the commercial. (See also Section 17.70.130, Mixed-use development.)
Mobile Home Park. A parcel of land under one or more ownerships that has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes, as the term “mobile home” is defined in Civil Code Section 798.3 or successor provision of the State Mobile Home Residency Law, for nontransient use.
Multi-Unit Dwellings. Two or more dwelling units attached or detached on a site or lot, which does not include an accessory dwelling unit. Types of multiple unit dwellings include a duplex, townhouses, common interest subdivisions, garden apartments, senior housing developments, and multistory apartment buildings. Multi-unit dwellings may also be combined with nonresidential uses as part of a mixed-use development. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018: Ord. 1647 § 7 (Exh. D (part)), 2018)

17.156.030 N definitions.
Nightclubs. See “Eating and Drinking Establishments—Bars, Live Entertainment, and Taverns.”
Nurseries and Garden Centers. See “Retail—Nurseries and Garden Centers.”
Nursery (Cannabis). A site that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds, or other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis. Cultivation as a cannabis nursery shall be indoor only (see “Cultivation, Indoor”). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018: Ord. 1647 § 7 (Exh. D (part)), 2018)

17.156.032 O definitions.
Offices. 
    Business and Professional Offices. Offices of firms or organizations providing professional, executive, management, or administrative services, such as accounting, architectural, computer software design, engineering, graphic design, interior design, legal offices, and tax preparation offices, but excluding banks and savings and loan associations (see “Banks and Financial Institutions”).
    Medical and Dental Offices. Office use providing consultation, diagnosis, therapeutic, preventive, or corrective personal treatment services by doctors, dentists, chiropractors, acupuncturists, optometrists, and similar medical professionals, medical and dental laboratories within medical office buildings but excluding clinics or independent research laboratory facilities and hospitals (see “Hospitals” and “Clinics”), and similar practitioners of medical and healing arts for humans licensed for such practice by the state of California. Incidental medical and/or dental research within the office is considered part of the office use, where it supports the on-site patient services.
    Temporary Offices. A mobile home, recreational vehicle or modular unit used as a temporary office facility. Temporary offices may include construction supervision offices on a construction site or off-site construction yard, a temporary on-site real estate office for a development project, or a temporary business office in advance of permanent facility construction.
Onshore Support Facilities. Any activity or land use required to support directly the exploration, development, production, storage, processing, transportation, or related aspects of offshore energy resource extraction.
Outdoor Temporary and/or Seasonal Sales. The temporary outdoor use of property for retail sales. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.034 P definitions.
Park and Recreation Facilities. Parks with playgrounds and recreation facilities, all of which are noncommercial and intended for neighborhood or community use. This classification also includes noncommercial playing fields, courts, gymnasiums, public swimming pools, picnic facilities, tennis courts, and golf courses, as well as related food concessions or community centers within the facilities.
Parking Facility. A surface parking lot or parking structure that is a primary use of a site.
Parking Facility—Temporary. The temporary use of property for the parking of vehicles.
Personal Services. Provision of recurrently needed services of a personal nature. This classification includes barber shops and beauty salons, seamstresses, tailors, day spas, massage services where all persons engaged in the practice of massage are certified pursuant to the Business and Professions Code Section 4612, dry cleaning agents (excluding large-scale bulk cleaning plants), shoe repair shops, self-service laundries, tattoo and body-piercing services, video rental stores, photocopying, photo finishing services, and travel agencies mainly intended for the consumer.
Primary Use. See “Use—Primary.”
Private Residence. A house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling.
Produce Stand. See “Food and Beverage Sales—Produce Stand.”
Product. See “Cannabis” and “Edible Product” and “Topical Product.”
Public Assembly Facilities. A facility for public or private assembly and meetings, exclusive of “Religious Assembly Facilities,” which is defined separately. Examples of these uses include:
    1. Banquet rooms.
    2. Civic and private auditoriums.
    3. Community centers.
    4. Conference/convention facilities.
    5. Meeting halls for clubs and other membership organizations.
Public assembly facilities do not include gymnasiums or other “Sports and Entertainment Assembly” facilities, or “Day Care Centers” or “Schools,” which are all separately classified and regulated.
Public Safety Facility. A facility operated by public agencies including fire stations, other fire prevention and firefighting facilities, police and sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018: Ord. 1647 § 7 (Exh. D (part)), 2018)

17.156.035 Q definitions.
Reserved. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.036 R definitions.
Recycling. A facility for receiving, temporarily storing, transferring and/or processing materials for recycling, reuse, or final disposal. This use classification does not include facilities that deal with animal matter nor does it include waste transfer facilities that operate as materials recovery, recycling, and solid waste transfer operations, which are classified as utilities.
    Collection Facility. A facility available for the general public for the recycling of California Redemption Value (CRV) products such as glass, aluminum cans, and plastic beverage containers as defined by the state’s Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery. Also includes reverse vending machines, where an automated mechanical device accepts, sorts, and processes recyclable materials and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip. Processing and sorting is not conducted on site.
    Processing Facility. A facility that receives, sorts, stores and/or processes recyclable materials.
Religious Assembly Facilities. Any facility specifically designed and used to accommodate the gathering of persons for the purposes of fellowship, worship, or similar conduct of religious practices and activities. This definition includes functionally related internal facilities (i.e., kitchens, multi-purpose rooms, storage, etc.) and residences for clergy. Other establishments maintained by religious organizations, including full-time educational institutions, hospitals and other related operations, are classified according to their respective activities.
Research and Development. A facility for scientific research, and the design, development and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical and computer and telecommunications components in advance of product manufacturing, and the assembly of related products from parts produced off site, where the manufacturing activity is secondary to the research and development activities. Includes pharmaceutical, chemical and biotechnology research and development. Does not include soils and other materials testing laboratories (see “Laboratory—Medical, Analytical, Research, Testing”), or blood drawing and specimen collection from patients (see “Hospitals and Clinics—Clinic”), or testing of computer software (see “Office”). Includes assembly of related products from parts produced off site where the manufacturing activity is secondary to the research and development activities.
Residential Care Facilities. Facilities that are licensed by the state to provide permanent living accommodations and twenty-four-hour primarily nonmedical care and supervision for persons in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance for sustaining the activities of daily living. Living accommodations are shared living quarters with or without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes facilities that are operated for profit as well as those operated by public or not-for-profit institutions, including hospices, nursing homes, convalescent facilities, and group homes for minors, persons with disabilities, and people in recovery from alcohol or drug addictions. This use classification excludes “Transitional Housing and Supportive Housing.”
Restaurants. See “Eating and Drinking Establishments—Restaurants.”
Retail (Cannabis). Includes storefront and non-storefront (delivery) sale of cannabis and cannabis products.
Retail Sales. 
    Building Materials and Services. Retail sales or rental of building supplies or equipment. This classification includes lumber yards, tool and equipment sales or rental establishments, and includes establishments devoted principally to taxable retail sales to individuals for their own use. This classification includes the accessory retail sale of nursery and garden products, as defined under “Nursery and Garden Centers.”
        Extended-Hour Retail. A business that is open to the public between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m.
        General Retail. The retail sale or rental of merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification. This classification includes retail establishments with sixty thousand square feet or less of sales area, including department stores, clothing stores, furniture stores, pet supply stores, hardware stores, and businesses retailing the following goods: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras, photographic supplies and services (including portraiture and retail photo processing), medical supplies and equipment, pharmacies, electronic equipment, sporting goods, kitchen utensils, hardware, appliances, antiques, art galleries, art supplies and services, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, office supplies, bicycles, and new automotive parts and accessories (excluding vehicle service and installation). Retail sales may be combined with other services such as office machine, computer, electronics, and similar small-item repairs. For facilities greater than sixty thousand square feet, see “Large-Scale Retail.”
        Indoor. Storage and display of commercial goods or materials entirely within an enclosed building.
        Large-Scale Retail. General retail establishments (over sixty thousand square feet of sales area, but less than one hundred forty thousand square feet) that sell merchandise and bulk goods for individual consumption, including membership warehouse clubs.
        Nurseries and Garden Centers. Establishments primarily engaged in retailing nursery and garden products—such as trees, shrubs, plants, seeds, bulbs, and sod—that are predominantly grown elsewhere. These establishments may sell a limited amount of a product they grow themselves. Fertilizer and soil products are stored and sold in package form only. This classification includes wholesale and retail nurseries offering plants for sale. This classification also includes farm supply and feed stores.
        Outdoor. Storage and display of commercial goods or materials in open lots, outside of a structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or primary use.
Recreational Vehicle Park. See “Lodging—Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park.” (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018: Ord. 1647 § 7 (Exh. D (part)), 2018)

17.156.038 S definitions.
Safe Parking. A parking program, operated on property located outside of the public right-of-way and managed by a social service provider, that provides individuals and families with vehicles a safe place to park overnight while working towards a transition to permanent housing.
Sale/Sell/To Sell. Any transaction whereby, for any consideration, title to cannabis is transferred from one person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis or cannabis products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of cannabis or cannabis products by a licensee to the licensee from whom such cannabis or cannabis product was purchased.
Salvage and Wrecking. Storage and dismantling of vehicles and equipment for sale of parts, as well as their collection, storage, exchange or sale of goods including, but not limited to, any used building materials, used containers or steel drums, used tires, and similar or related articles or property.
Schools—Colleges. Institutions of higher education providing curricula of a general, religious, or professional nature, typically granting recognized degrees, including conference centers and academic retreats associated with such institutions. This classification includes universities and junior colleges, but excludes trade schools and personal instructional services such as music lessons and tutoring (see “Instructional Services”).
Schools—Primary and Secondary. Facilities for primary or secondary education, including public schools, charter schools, and private and parochial schools having curricula comparable to that required in the public schools of the state.
Schools—Trade Schools. Public or private post-secondary schools (other than a community college or four-year college) providing occupational or job skills training for specific occupations, including business and computer schools, management training, and technical training schools. Excludes personal instructional services such as music lessons and tutoring (see “Instructional Services”).
Self-Storage. See “Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution—Personal Storage.”
Single-Unit Dwelling. A dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one household which is not attached to or located on a lot with commercial uses or other dwelling units, other than an accessory dwelling unit. For the purpose of accounting for housing units pursuant to Chapter 17.144 (Residential Growth Management Regulations), a single-unit dwelling may also include, as an accessory use, one legally established accessory dwelling unit. This definition also includes individual manufactured housing units installed on a foundation system pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18551.
Social Service Provider. An agency or organization licensed or supervised by any federal, state, or local health/welfare agency that participates in the Federal Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) and has demonstrated experience with the homeless population by assisting individuals and families achieve economic self-sufficiency and self-determination through a comprehensive array of programs and actions.
Special Event. A temporary and short-term activity.
Sports and Entertainment Assembly Facility. A large-scale indoor or outdoor facility accommodating spectator-oriented sports, concerts, and other entertainment activities. Examples of this land use include amphitheaters, race tracks, stadiums and coliseums, and drive-in theaters. May also include commercial facilities customarily associated with the above uses, including bars and restaurants, gift shops, video game arcades, etc.
Supportive and/or Transitional Housing. The term “Supportive Housing” (per Government Code Section 655829(f), as may be amended) shall mean a dwelling unit occupied by a target population, with no limit on length of stay, that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident(s) in retaining the housing, improving their health status, and maximizing their ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. A target population means persons with low incomes having one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Welfare and Institutions (W&I) Code Section 4500) and may include—among other populations—adults, emancipated youth, families, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.
The term “Transitional Housing” (per Government Code Section 65582(h), as may be amended) shall mean buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of assistance.
Supportive and/or transitional housing may be designed as a residential group living facility or as a regular residential use and includes both facilities that provide on-site and off-site services. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.040 T definitions.
Temporary Use. A use allowed for less than one year consisting of activities that represent a variation from the normal business operations. Examples include, but are not limited to, parking lot sales, benefits, and special events.
Testing Laboratory. A facility, entity, or site in the state of California that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of the following: (1) accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in the cannabis industry in the state, and (2) licensed by the bureau.
Theaters. Facilities for indoor display of films, motion pictures, or dramatic, musical, or live performances. This classification may include incidental food and beverage services to patrons.
Topical Product. Cannabis product that is intended to be used for external use. A topical cannabis product is not considered a drug as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code.
Transit Station or Terminal. A facility or location with the primary purpose of transfer, loading, and unloading of passengers and baggage. May include facilities for the provision of passenger services such as ticketing, restrooms, lockers, waiting areas, passenger vehicle parking and bus bays, for layover parking, and interior bus cleaning and incidental repair. Includes rail and bus terminals, but does not include terminals serving airports or heliports.
Transitional Housing. See “Supportive and/or Transitional Housing.” (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018: Ord. 1647 § 7 (Exh. D (part)), 2018)

17.156.042 U definitions.
Use. See Section 17.158.046 (U Definitions).
Utilities Facilities. A structure or improvement built or installed above ground for the purpose of providing utility services, communications services, and materials transfer to more than one lot. Generating plants; electric substations; solid waste collection, including transfer stations and materials recovery facilities; solid waste treatment and disposal; water or wastewater treatment plants; and similar facilities of public agencies or public utilities, including corporation and maintenance yards.
    Facilities with No On-Site Staff (Unmanned). Utilities facilities that do not include office and/or working space for employees, and where on-site staff are required intermittently only for maintenance and/or infrequent monitoring.
    Facilities with On-Site Staff. Utilities facilities that include office and/or working space for employees, and/or that require employees to be located on site for general operation of the facility.
    Transmission Lines. A specialized cable or other structure designed to conduct communications and electrical power. This definition also includes attached utility poles and substations where transmission lines are connecting with the facility. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.044 V definitions.
Vacation Rentals. A dwelling or part of a dwelling where lodging is furnished for compensation for fewer than thirty consecutive days. Does not include fraternities, sororities, convents, monasteries, hostels, bed and breakfast establishments, homestay rentals, hotels, motels, or boarding/rooming houses, which are separately defined.
Vehicle Sales and Services. 
    Auto and Vehicle Sales and Rental. A retail establishment selling and/or renting automobiles, trucks and vans, motorcycles, and bicycles (bicycle sales are also included under “General Retail”). May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not include mobile home, recreational vehicle, or watercraft sales (see “Large Vehicle, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental”); tire recapping establishments (see “Vehicle Services”); businesses dealing exclusively in used parts, (see “Salvage and Wrecking”); or “Service/Fueling Stations,” which are separately defined.
    Large Vehicle, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental. Sales, servicing, rental, fueling, and washing of large trucks, trailers, tractors, and other heavy equipment used for construction, moving, agricultural, or landscape gardening activities, as well as boats, mobile homes, and recreational vehicle/campers. Examples include cranes, earth moving equipment, tractors, combines, heavy trucks, etc. Includes large vehicle operation training facilities. Sales of new or used automobiles are excluded from this classification (see “Auto and Vehicle Sales and Rental”).
    Major (Major Repair/Body Work). Major repair of automobiles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, or trucks, including light-duty trucks (i.e., gross vehicle weights of less than ten thousand pounds) and heavy-duty trucks (i.e., gross vehicle weights of more than ten thousand pounds). Examples of uses include full-service motor vehicle repair garages; body and fender shops; brake shops; machine shops, painting shops; towing services, and transmission shops. Does not include vehicle dismantling or salvage (see “Salvage and Wrecking”) and tire retreading or recapping.
    Minor (Minor Repair/Maintenance). Minor repair of automobiles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, or light trucks, vans or similar size vehicles (i.e., vehicles that have gross vehicle weights less than ten thousand pounds), including installation of electronic equipment (e.g., alarms, audio equipment, etc.); servicing of cooling and air conditioning, electrical, fuel and exhaust systems; brake adjustments, relining and repairs; oil and air filter replacement; wheel alignment and balancing; tire sales, service, and installation shops; shock absorber replacement; chassis lubrication; smog checks; engine tune-ups; and installation of window film and similar accessory equipment.
    Service/Fueling Stations. An establishment engaged in the retail sale of vehicle fuels or the retail sale of these fuels in combination with activities, such as providing minor vehicle repair services; selling automotive oils, replacement parts, and accessories; and/or ancillary retail and grocery sales. Does not include body and fender work or “heavy” repair of trucks or other motor vehicles (see “Vehicle Services—Major”).
    Vehicle Services. The service and repair of motor vehicles in an enclosed building, including the repair or replacement of engines and transmissions, body and fender repair, and the installation of non-factory-installed products.
    Washing. Washing, waxing, detailing, or cleaning of automobiles or similar light vehicles, including self-serve washing facilities.
Vending Machine. An automated mechanical device which ejects consumer products, including but not limited to snack food items, nonalcoholic beverages, electronic devices, and movies, and that accepts cash, debit, and/or credit.
Veterinary Services. See “Animal Care, Sales, and Services.” (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.046 W definitions.
Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution. Storage and distribution facilities without sales to the public on site or direct public access except for public storage in small individual spaces exclusively and directly accessible to specific tenants.
    Outdoor Storage. Storage of vehicles or commercial goods or materials in open lots, outside of a structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or primary use. Building materials stored outside and associated with a building materials and services establishment is defined separately under “Building Materials and Services.” Garden and nursery products stored outside and associated with a “Nurseries and Garden Centers” use or as accessory to a “Building Materials and Services” use are defined separately by those respective classifications and not included in the classification “Outdoor Storage.”
    Personal Storage. Facilities offering enclosed storage with individual access for personal effects and household goods, including mini-warehouses and mini-storage. This use excludes workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing, and commercial activity.
    Warehousing and Indoor Storage. Storage within an enclosed building of commercial goods prior to their distribution to wholesale and retail outlets, and the storage of industrial equipment, products and materials including, but not limited to, automobiles, feed, and lumber. Also includes cold storage, draying or freight, moving and storage, and warehouses. This classification excludes the storage of hazardous chemical, mineral, and explosive materials.
    Wholesaling and Distribution. Indoor storage and sale of goods to other firms for resale, storage of goods for transfer to retail outlets of the same firm, or storage and sale of materials and supplies used in production or operation, including janitorial and restaurant supplies. Wholesalers are primarily engaged in business-to-business sales, but may sell to individual consumers through mail or internet orders. They normally operate from a warehouse or office having little or no display of merchandise, and are not designed to solicit walk-in traffic.
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. Wireless telecommunications facilities consist of commercial wireless communication systems, including but not limited to cellular, PCS, paging, broadband, data transfer, and any other type of technology that fosters wireless communication through the use of portable electronic devices. A facility includes all supporting structures and associated equipment. The following are definitions used in association with the regulation of wireless telecommunications facilities:
    Co-location. The practice of two or more wireless telecommunications service providers sharing one support structure or building for the location of their antennas and equipment.
    Satellite dish antenna. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar-configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia, that is used to transmit and/or receive radio, microwave or other electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based use.
    Stealthing. Improvements or treatments added to a wireless telecommunications facility which mask or blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it effectively unnoticeable to the casual observer. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.048 X definitions.
Reserved. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.050 Y definitions.
Reserved. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.156.052 Z definitions.
Reserved. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.158 GENERAL DEFINITIONS

Sections:
17.158.002   Purpose and applicability.
17.158.004   Abbreviations.
17.158.006   A definitions.
17.158.008   B definitions.
17.158.010   C definitions.
17.158.012   D definitions.
17.158.014   E definitions.
17.158.016   F definitions.
17.158.018   G definitions.
17.158.020   H definitions.
17.158.022   I definitions.
17.158.024   J definitions.
17.158.026   K definitions.
17.158.028   L definitions.
17.158.030   M definitions.
17.158.032   N definitions.
17.158.034   O definitions.
17.158.036   P definitions.
17.158.038   Q definitions.
17.158.040   R definitions.
17.158.042   S definitions.
17.158.044   T definitions.
17.158.046   U definitions.
17.158.048   V definitions.
17.158.050   W definitions.
17.158.052   X definitions.
17.158.054   Y definitions.
17.158.056   Z definitions.

17.158.002 Purpose and applicability.
This chapter (General Definitions) applies to general (non-land use) terms used in this title except as specifically excluded per Section 17.154.006 (Other Definition Sections). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.004 Abbreviations.
ALUC. San Luis Obispo County regional airport land use commission.
ALUP. San Luis Obispo County regional airport land use plan.
CNEL. Community Noise Equivalent Level.
dB. Decibel.
FAA. Federal Aviation Administration.
FAR. Floor Area Ratio.
UZ. Underlying Zoning. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.006 A definitions.
Abutting, Adjoining, or Adjacent. Having a common property or zone line, or separated only by an alley, path, private street, or easement.
Accessory Buildings. See Buildings, Accessory.
Accessory Structures. See Structures, Accessory.
Addition. Attached to and used in conjunction with.
    Minor Addition. Any addition to a building or structure that comprises less than twenty-five percent increase in total building area, constructed in compliance with current regulations.
    Minor Nonconforming Addition. Extension of the nonconforming feature of an existing building by no more than fifty percent.
    Significant Addition. Any addition to a building or structure that comprises twenty-five percent or more increase in total building area, constructed in compliance with current regulations. See also Section 17.106.020(B) (Enlargements and Modifications).
Affordable Housing Agreement. A written agreement between the developer, the city, and possibly additional parties that specifies the terms and conditions under which affordable housing requirements are to be met.
Affordable Housing Fund. A fund established and administered by the city containing in-lieu fees and other funds held and used exclusively to increase and improve the supply of affordable housing.
Alcoholic Beverage. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances, and sales of which require a State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license.
All-Electric Building. A building that has no natural gas plumbing installed within the building and that uses electricity as the source of energy for all space heating, water heating, cooking appliances, and clothes drying appliances. An all-electric building may be plumbed for the use of natural gas as fuel for appliances in a commercial kitchen.
Alley. A public way permanently reserved primarily for secondary vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Allowed Use. Any use or structure that is allowed in a zone without a requirement for approval of a use permit, but subject to any restrictions applicable to that zone.
Ambient Entertainment. Acoustic or recorded music, or live readings of books or poetry, which is clearly incidental, that allows for normal conversation levels, and for which no cover fee or ticket is required.
Applicant. The property owner, the owner’s agent, or any person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity that has a legal or equitable title to land that is the subject of a development proposal or is the holder of an option or contract to purchase such land or otherwise has an enforceable proprietary interest in such land and has submitted an entitlement or building permit application to the city.
Arbors. Ornamental landscape features that are substantially open to the passage of light and air on all sides. “Substantially open” sides and roof of the structure shall be a minimum of fifty percent open at any point across the entire side. Generally designed with an open, lattice-work design constructed of wood, metal, or other lightweight material. Includes trellises.
Average Cross-Slope. The ratio, expressed as a percentage of the difference in elevation to the horizontal distance between two points on the perimeter of the area, for which slope is being determined. (Ord. 1685 § 3 (Exh. A (part)), 2020; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.008 B definitions.
Balcony. A platform that projects from the wall of a building thirty inches or more above grade that is accessible from the building’s interior, is not accessible from the ground and is not enclosed by walls on more than two sides. See also “Deck.”
Basement. A nonhabitable space beneath the first or ground floor of a building the ceiling of which does not extend more than four feet above finished grade.
Bedroom. Any space in a dwelling unit which contains a minimum of seventy square feet of floor area unless it is one of the below-listed rooms or common spaces. The “bedroom” definition does not include garages, attic space, or similar spaces which are not habitable, such as foyers, storage closets, utility rooms, or unfinished attics and basements.
The following rooms/common spaces that are adjacent and open to common areas are not considered bedrooms:
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Table 9-1: Rooms and Common Spaces Not Considered Bedrooms                          |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Hallway                               | Den (see definition, Section 17.158.012)    |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Bathroom                              | Mezzanine (see definition for requirements, |
|                                       | Section 17.158.030)                         |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Kitchen/breakfast nook                | Laundry room                                |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Living room, family room, dining room |                                             |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
The director shall determine whether spaces which do not clearly meet the definition of a “bedroom” meet the intent of this regulation or need to be forwarded to the planning commission for conditional use permit review.
Spaces (i.e., not bedrooms) established prior to August 14, 2014, using the previous bedroom definition (greater than or equal to fifty percent open wall area with an adjoining room) may remain and will not be considered bedrooms consistent with floor plans approved with a building permit.
Block Front. All the properties fronting on one side of a street, between intersecting streets or a street and a railroad, waterway, cul-de-sac, or unsubdivided land.
Building. Any structure used or intended for sheltering or supporting any use or occupancy.
    Building, Accessory. A detached subordinate building used only as incidental to the principal building on the same lot.
    Building, Principal. A building in which the primary use of the lot is conducted on which it is situated.
Building Division. City of San Luis Obispo Building and Safety Division.
Building Envelope. The three-dimensional space enclosed by the exterior surfaces of a building or structure.
Building Footprint. The horizontal area, as seen in plan view, of a building or structure, measured at the surface level from the outside of exterior walls and supporting columns, excluding eaves.
Building Official. City of San Luis Obispo chief building official, or someone designated by him or her to act on his or her behalf. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.010 C definitions.
Canopy. A roofed shelter projecting over a sidewalk, driveway, entry, window, or similar area that may be wholly supported by a building or may be wholly or partially supported by columns, poles, or braces extending from the ground.
Carport. An accessible and usable covered space enclosed on not more than two sides, designed, constructed and maintained for the parking or storage of one or more motor vehicles.
Case Management. A system for arranging and coordinating care and services whereby a case manager assesses the needs of the client and client’s family and arranges, coordinates, monitors, and advocates for services to meet the client’s needs.
City. The city of San Luis Obispo.
Common Interest Development. Any of the following: a community apartment project, a condominium project, a planned development, or a stock cooperative identified in Civil Code Section 1351.
Community Development Department. The city of San Luis Obispo community development department.
Conditionally Permitted. Allowed subject to approval of a use permit.
Construction. Building, erection, enlargement, alteration, conversion or movement of any building, structures, or land together with any scientific surveys associated therewith.
County. The county of San Luis Obispo.
Council. The city of San Luis Obispo city council.
Coverage. The portion of a lot that is covered by structures, including principal and accessory buildings located on or above the ground, including upper-level projections and living areas, as well as covered or uncovered decks, balconies, porches, and similar architectural features expressed as a percentage of the total lot area. See Section 17.70.120 (Lot Coverage) for exceptions to lot coverage calculations.
Creek. A waterway or portion of waterway designated in the general plan as a creek. A drainage ditch, concrete swale, underground culvert, or storm drain (as indicated on the general plan) is not a creek. Creeks located outside the urban reserve line are as designated by the USGS 7.5 Minute series quadrangle maps or county data. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.012 D definitions.
Deck. A platform, either freestanding or attached to a building, that is supported by pillars or posts. See also “Balcony.”
Demolition. The act of reconstructing, removing, taking down or destroying all or portions of an existing building or structure, or making extensive repairs or modifications to an existing building or structure, if such changes involve removal or replacement of fifty percent or more of both the structural framing and cladding or of the exterior walls within a twenty-four-month period. When determining whether a building or structure is demolished, the following applies:
    1. The nonconforming portions of any wall are counted as removed or taken down, even when retention of these portions is proposed.
    2. Any continuous run of remaining exterior wall surfaces measuring ten feet or less in length are counted as removed or replaced.
Den (or “family room”). A room which is open on at least one side; does not contain a wardrobe, closet, or similar facility; and which is not designed for sleeping.
Density. The number of dwellings per net acre, measured in density units.
Department. The community development department of the city of San Luis Obispo.
Designee. Personnel of the city sanctioned to act on behalf of a review authority, as authorized by this title.
Development. Any public or private action for which a city construction permit or planning approval pursuant to the provisions of this title is required.
Development Agreement. An agreement between the city and any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property for the development of such property and which complies with the applicable provisions of the Government Code for such development agreements.
Development Envelope (see also “Building Envelope” and “Coverage”). An area of a lot that encompasses all development, including but not limited to excavation, fill, grading, storage, demolition, structures, building heights, decks, roof overhangs, porches, patios, terraces, pools, and any areas of disturbance, including access ways and parking. Approved plantings of landscape materials on natural grade and approved walkways and driveways may occur outside of a development envelope.
Director. The director of the city of San Luis Obispo community development department, or someone designated by him or her to act on his or her behalf.
Disabled Person. A person who has a medical, physical, or mental condition that limits a major life activity, as those terms are defined in State Government Code Section 12926, anyone who is regarded as having such a condition or anyone who has a record of having such a condition. It includes a person or persons, or an authorized representative of a disabled person. The term “disabled person” does not include a person who is currently using illegal substances, unless he or she has a separate disability.
Driveway. An access way that provides vehicular access between a street and the parking or loading facilities located on an adjacent property.
Dwelling. A building or mobile home on a permanent foundation with provisions for sleeping, cooking and sanitation, and with permanent connections to utilities, providing independent living space for owner occupancy, rental, or lease on a monthly or longer basis. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.014 E definitions.
Easement. A portion of land created by grant or agreement for specific purpose; an easement is the right, privilege or interest which one party has in the land of another.
Ecological Restoration Project. A project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.
Efficiency Unit. As defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1.
Electric Vehicle Charging Equipment. Any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. Also referred to as charging station or charging equipment.
Electronic Game. A machine or device offered to the public as a game or amusement, whether remuneration is required or not, the object of which is to achieve a high or low score based on the skill of the player.
Electronic Game Amusement Center. Any premises having thereon available four or more electronic games, when the games are a primary good or service offered by the establishment.
EV Capable Space. A parking space constructed with empty raceway (i.e., pathway for future electrical wiring, usually in enclosed walls or pavement) to supply power for future EV charging stations at any given time.
EV Ready Space. A parking space constructed with full electrical circuits (e.g., junction box, conduit, receptacle, overprotecting devices, wiring, etc.) that are ready for connection with an operational EV charging station at any given time.
Existing Topography. The natural unaltered topography or the topography resulting from grading activity legally permitted in conjunction with subdivision improvements, right-of-way improvements, or previous on-site building improvements. (Ord. 1657 § 24, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.016 F definitions.
Facade. The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building. The portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending vertically from the grade to the top of a parapet wall or eave, and horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation.
Fair Housing Laws. The following legislation: (1) the Federal Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. Section 3601 and following) and (2) the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Government Code Section 12955 and following), including amendments to them.
Feasible. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.
Fences. Horizontal and vertical structures that are intended to separate properties, retain soil materials, and provide security; or as defined by the Building Official. Fences may also be walls, hedges and screen planting.
Festival (or “Carnival” or “Fair”). A temporary public or commercial gathering where entertainment, food, crafts, and the like are offered for viewing or sale. Gatherings on public property under the sponsorship or control of the city are excluded.
Floodplain Management Regulations. The following terms shall apply for the purpose of Chapter 17.78 (Flood Damage Prevention):
    A Zone. See “Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).”
    Alluvial Fan. A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
    Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
    Base Flood. A flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “one-hundred-year flood”).
    Base Flood Elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE, and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
    Encroachment. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures, or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
    Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before February 20, 1979.
    Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
    Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM). The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.
    Flood, Flooding, or Floodwater. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and the condition resulting from flood-related erosion.
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
    Flood Insurance Study. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
    Floodplain Administrator. The community official designated by this title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
    Floodplain Management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.
    Floodplain Management Regulations. Chapter 17.78 (Flood Damage Prevention) and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
    Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “Flood, Flooding or Floodwater.”
    Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that shall be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”
    Floodway Fringe. The area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted.
    Functionally Dependent Use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
    Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
    Historic Structure. Any structure that is:
        1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
        2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
        3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
        4. Individually listed on the city’s master list of historic structures, provided this local inventory is consistent with state-approved or certified historic preservation programs as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
    Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
    Levee System. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.
    Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement as separately defined. See also “Basement.”
    Mean Sea Level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.
    New Construction. For floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after February 20, 1979, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
    New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after February 20, 1979.
    Obstruction. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or, due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
    One-Hundred-Year Flood. See “Base Flood.”
    Program Deficiency. A defect in a community’s floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations.
    Regulatory Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
    Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
    Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). An area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH and includes all areas designated in the city’s waterway management plan as being in the one-hundred-year floodplain.
    Start of Construction. Substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
    Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
    Substantial Improvement. 
        1. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost (cumulatively within any ten-year period) of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed.
        2. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation or other improvement of a foundation for a structure which equals or exceeds twenty-five percent of the foundation.
        3. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation or other improvement which, by nature of the work, will necessitate raising the structure off the foundation to complete the work.
    The term does not, however, include either:
        1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure ensure safe living conditions; or
        2. Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”
    Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with Chapter 17.78: Flood Damage Prevention. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Chapter 17.78: Flood Damage Prevention is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
    Water Surface Elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
    Watercourse. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
    XB zone. The area between the limits of the one percent flooding and the 0.2 percent flooding, indicated as an X zone in the maps and formerly as a B zone in the maps.
Floor Area, Gross. The total area enclosed within a building, including closets, stairways, and utility and mechanical rooms, measured from the inside face of the walls.
Floor Area, Net. The gross floor area less areas stipulated by Section 17.70.060 (FAR Measurement and Exceptions).
Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The net floor area of a building or buildings on a lot divided by the lot area.
Foot-candle. A unit of measure of the intensity of light falling on a surface, equal to one lumen per square foot or the intensity of light from a standardized candle burning at one foot from a given surface.
Front Yard. The area of a residential lot that lies between the front property line and the walls of any residences that face the street. The front yard area includes the entire yard extending across the full width of a site, the depth of which contains all areas between the front property line back to the walls of the building which are parallel or generally face the front property line. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.018 G definitions.
Garage. A building or portion thereof, containing accessible and usable enclosed space designed, constructed, and maintained for the parking or storage of one or more motor vehicles.
General Plan. City of San Luis Obispo’s adopted general plan.
Glare. The effect produced by a light source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted, such as to cause annoyance, discomfort or loss of visual performance and ability.
Government Code. The Government Code of the state of California.
Grade. The location of the ground surface.
    Grade, Adjacent. The lowest elevation of ground surface immediately adjacent to the building exterior wall.
    Grade, Average. The average level of the highest and lowest existing grade elevation points. See Section 17.70.080 (Height Measurement and Exceptions).
    Grade, Existing. The surface of the ground or pavement at a stated location as it exists before disturbance in preparation for a project regulated by these zoning regulations.
    Grade, Finished. The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk adjacent to the building at the completion of a project regulated by these zoning regulations.
Gross Floor Area. See “Floor Area.”
Ground Floor. The first floor of a building other than a cellar or basement that is closest to finished grade.
Guest Quarters. A separate accessory space, attached or detached, which contains bathroom facilities including toilets, bathing facilities, showers, or sinks but does not contain a kitchen (see “Kitchen” definition in Section 17.158.026: K Definitions). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.020 H definitions.
Hazardous Materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Hedge. A barrier or boundary formed by a dense row of shrubs or low trees. See also “Fence.”
Household. One or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to, and common use of, all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food; who share living expenses, including rent or mortgage payments, food costs and utilities; and who maintain a single mortgage, lease, or rental agreement for all members of the household. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.022 I definitions.
Illegal Use. Any use of land or building that does not have the currently required permits and was originally constructed and/or established without permits required for the use at the time it was brought into existence.
Impervious Surface. A surface that is incapable of being penetrated by water, including buildings and paved surfaces such as parking, sidewalks, and roads.
In-Lieu Fee. Monetary payment to city established through ordinance that may be required of an owner or developer as a substitute for a dedication of land or portion of land.
Intermittent Use. A temporary use (see “Temporary Use”) that occurs no more than ninety days in a year, but which may continue from year to year.
Irrigation Efficiency. The measurement of the amount of water beneficially used, which is the amount of water stored in the root zone divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.024 J definitions.
Reserved. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.026 K definitions.
Kitchen. An area within any structure including one or more of the following facilities that are capable of being used for the preparation or cooking of food: ovens/microwave ovens, stoves, hotplates, refrigerators exceeding six cubic feet, dishwashers, garbage disposals, sinks having a drain outlet of larger than one and one-half inches in diameter, and cabinets, counter space, or other areas for storing food. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.028 L definitions.
Landscape, Rehabilitated. Any re-landscaping project that requires a building permit or design review where the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet.
Light Pollution. The night sky glow caused by the scattering of artificial light in the atmosphere.
Live/Work. An integrated housing unit and working space, occupied and utilized by a single household in a structure, either single-unit or multi-unit, and may include only commercial activities and pursuits that are compatible with the character of a quiet residential environment. May be designed or structurally modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity, and which includes: (1) complete kitchen space and sanitary facilities in compliance with the city building code and (2) working space reserved for and regularly used by one or more occupants of the unit. See also building code definitions of live/work.
Loft. See “Mezzanine” when referring to an interior floor space of an occupiable or habitable structure.
Lot. A parcel of real property with a distinct designation delineated on an approved survey map, tract map, or parcel map filed in the office of the county recorder and abutting at least one public street; or a parcel of real property containing at least the area required for the zone in which it is located, abutting at least one public street or other access approved by the council, and held under separate ownership from adjoining property.
Lot, Abutting. A lot having a common property line or separated by a public path or lane, private street, or easement to the subject lot.
Lot Area. The horizontal land area within a lot expressed in square feet, acres, or other area measurement.
Lot Area, Net. See Section 17.70.110 (Lot Area).
Lot, Corner. A lot or parcel bounded on two or more sides by street lines that have an angle intersection that is not more than one hundred thirty-five degrees.
Lot Coverage. See “Coverage.”
Lot, Flag. As defined in Chapter 16.26: Definitions. See Figure 9-1: Flag Lot.Figure 9-1. Flag Lot
[IMAGE: <17.158.028_Fig9-1.png>]
Lot, Interior. A lot bounded on one side by a street line and on all other sides by lot lines between adjacent lots or that is bounded by more than one street with an intersection greater than one hundred thirty-five degrees.
Lot Line. The boundary between a lot and other property or the public right-of-way.
    Lot Line, Front. On an interior lot, the line separating the lot from the street or lane. On a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street or lane. On a through lot, the lot line abutting the street or lane providing the primary access to the lot. On a flag or panhandle lot, the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the street or lane from which access is obtained. Where no lot line is within forty-five degrees of being parallel to the rear lot line, a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the rear lot line, will be deemed the front lot line for the purpose of establishing the minimum front yard (see Figure 9-3: Irregular Lots).
    Lot Line, Rear. The lot line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. Where no lot line is within forty-five degrees of being parallel to the front lot line, a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot line, will be deemed the rear lot line for the purpose of establishing the minimum rear yard (see Figure 9-3: Irregular Lots).
    Lot Line, Side. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
    Lot Line, Street Side. A side lot line of a corner lot that is adjacent to a street.
Lot, Through. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.Figure 9-2. Lot Types
[IMAGE: <17.158.028_Fig9-2.png>]
Figure 9-3. Irregular Lots
[IMAGE: <17.158.028_Fig9-3.png>]
    Low-Intensity Lighting. Lighting designed to accent architectural features or signs that does not produce glare, such as tubular neon or LED rope lighting. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.030 M definitions.
Market Value. The highest price a willing buyer would pay and a willing seller would accept, both being fully informed and in an open market, as determined by an appraiser or other qualified professional.
Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA). The upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area in Section 17.70.220. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated total water use for the landscape shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0.
Mezzanine. A partial or intermediate level of a building interior containing floor area without enclosing interior walls or partitions and not separated or partitioned from the floor level below or access way (stairs and/or landing) leading to the mezzanine from the floor below by a wall or any other partitions. Spaces designated as lofts or mezzanines that do not fully conform to this definition shall be deemed a “bedroom.” (See also Section 17.158.008.)
Minor Addition. See “Addition.”
Municipal Code. The city of San Luis Obispo Municipal Code. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.032 N definitions.
Nonconforming. A use, structure, or lot, which was lawfully erected, altered, maintained or formed, but which, because of the application of this title to it, no longer conforms to the specific regulations applicable to the zone in which it is located.
Nonconforming Building. See “Nonconforming Structure.”
Nonconforming Lot. See Chapter 17.96 (Nonconforming Lots).
Nonconforming Parking. See Section 17.72.060 (Nonconforming parking).
Nonconforming Structure. See Chapter 17.92 (Nonconforming Structures).
Nonconforming Use. See Chapter 17.94 (Nonconforming Uses). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.034 O definitions.
On Site. Located on the lot that is the subject of discussion.
Owner Occupancy. A lawfully allowed dwelling that is occupied by the owner(s) named on the property deed as their primary residence and is occupied by them for the major portion of the year.
Outdoor Storage. The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four hours, except for the keeping of building materials reasonably required for construction work on the premises pursuant to a valid and current building permit issued by the city.
Overlay Zone. A zone applied in combination with other zones to impose additional restrictions or to allow greater variety than is possible with the underlying zone. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.036 P definitions.
Parcel. See “Lot.”
Parking Area. An area of a lot, structure, or any other area, including driveways, which is designed for and the primary purpose of which is to provide for the temporary storage of operable motor vehicles.
Parking, Bicycle. A covered or uncovered area equipped with a rack or racks designed and usable for the secure, temporary storage of bicycles.
Parking Management Plan. A document that outlines how site parking will be regulated and includes provisions to reduce parking demand, including but not limited to availability of transit in close proximity, access to a car share program and access to information regarding alternative transportation programs.
Person. Any individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, company, or corporation.
Planning Commission. City of San Luis Obispo planning commission.
Preexisting. In existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.
Primary Unit. The existing single-unit residential structure on the site when used in the application of accessory dwelling unit regulations.
Principal Building. See “Building, Principal.”
Project. Any proposal for a new or changed use or for new construction, alteration, or enlargement of any structure, that is subject to the provisions of this ordinance. This term includes, but is not limited to, any action that qualifies as a “project” as defined by the California Environmental Quality Act.
Project Applicant. The individual or entity submitting entitlement plans required under this title. A project applicant may be the property owner or the property owner’s designee.
Public Art. Work of art installed either on or off site, as part of new development, in conformance with the standards identified in Section 17.70.140 (Public Art Requirements for Private Development). The definitions of “work of art” shall include, but not be limited to, sculpture, monuments, murals, frescoes, bas-relief, mobiles, drawings, paintings, graphic arts, mosaics, photographs, fountains, decorative arts, ceramics, carving and stained glass located in or on a public place. Public art does not include landscaping, paving, architectural ornamentation, or signs.
Public Place. Land or buildings owned by the city or others which are accessible to the general public.
Public Resources Code. The Public Resources Code of the state of California.
Public Works Department. City of San Luis Obispo public works department.
Public Works Director. City of San Luis Obispo public works director, or someone designated by him or her to act on his or her behalf. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.038 Q definitions.
Reserved. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.040 R definitions.
Real Property. Land and improvements, if any, including anything permanently affixed to the land, such as buildings, walls, fences, and paved areas.
Reasonable Accommodation. Providing disabled persons flexibility in the application of land use and zoning regulations and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements, when necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities. It may include adjustments to standards such as yard area modifications for ramps, handrails or other such accessibility improvements; hardscape additions, such as widened driveways, parking area or walkways; building additions for accessibility; tree removal; or reduced off-street parking where the disability clearly limits the number of people operating vehicles. Reasonable accommodation does not include an accommodation which would (1) impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city or (2) require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city’s zoning regulations.
Recreational Vehicle. Any trailer, camper, motor home or other vehicle designed and intended for traveling and recreational purposes.
Replacement Unit. A dwelling which is built, moved, or remodeled to replace a residential unit lost through demolition or remodeling or conversion to nonresidential use.
Review Authority. The body responsible for making decisions on zoning and related applications.
Right-of-Way. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer or other similar use.
Riparian Vegetation. Those herbaceous plants, shrubs, and trees which are naturally associated with streamside environments, and with roots and branches extending in or over a creek channel.
Roof Deck. See “Deck.” See also Section 17.70.150 (Rooftop Uses). (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.042 S definitions.
Screening. A wall, fence, hedge, informal planting, or berm, provided for the purpose of buffering a building or activity from neighboring areas or from the street.
Self-Sufficiency Program. A program designed to assist individuals and families in meeting their basic needs and address any substance dependency and mental health issues so that they do not need to rely on emergency public or private assistance.
Setback. The distance from which a structure, parking area, or other development feature must be separated from a prescribed lot line, easement, or other feature (see Figure 9-4: Setbacks), and as specified in the development regulations of each zone. See also Section 17.70.170 (Setbacks).Figure 9-4. Setbacks
[IMAGE: <17.158.042_Fig9-4.png>]
    Setback, Front. The minimum distance required between a structure and the front property line.
    Setback Line. An officially adopted line determining the extent of a future street or other public right-of-way.
    Setback, Rear. The minimum distance required between a structure and the rear property line.
    Setback, Side. The minimum distance required between a structure and a side property line. Also referred to as “interior side setback.”
    Setback, Street Side. On a corner lot, the minimum distance required between a structure and the property line along the side lot line that is adjacent to a street. See Figure 9-5: Street Side Setback.Figure 9-5. Street Side Setback
[IMAGE: <17.158.042_Fig9-5.png>]
Shopping Center. A development consisting of at least five separate establishments with a minimum area of fifty thousand square feet, a site with a minimum of three hundred feet of frontage and shared common drives and off-street parking.
Sidewalk. A paved, surfaced, or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
Site. A lot, or group of contiguous lots, that is proposed for development in accordance with the provisions of this title and is in a single ownership or under unified control.
Slope. An inclined ground surface the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance (e.g., 2:1 or 1:1) or as a percentage (e.g., fifty percent or one hundred percent).
    Slope, Average. For the purpose of the hillside development standards, the term “average slope” shall be defined as the relationship between the change in elevation (rise) of the land and the horizontal distance (run) over which that change in elevation occurs.
Specific Plan. A plan for a designated area within the city, based on the general plan, but containing more detailed regulations and programs as provided in Government Code Section 65450 et seq.
State. The state of California.
Storage—Accessory. The storage of materials accessory and incidental to a primary use and is not considered a land use separate from the primary use.
Story. The portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the next floor above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling above.
Street. A public or private right-of-way providing vehicular access to abutting property.
Structure. Anything assembled or constructed on the ground, or attached to anything with a foundation on the ground.
    Structure, Accessory. A structure that is located upon the same site as the structure or use to which it is accessory. Accessory structures may consist of detached structures or additions to primary structures. The use of an accessory structure is incidental and subordinate to the use of the principal structure, or to the primary land use of the site. Does not include habitable accessory structures such as accessory dwelling units (ADUs). See also “Building, Accessory.”
    Structure, Principal (Structure, Main; Structure, Primary). A structure housing the primary use of a site or functioning as the primary use.
    Structure, Temporary. A structure without any foundation or footings and which is intended to be removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
Studio. A dwelling unit characterized by an open floor plan, with no interior walls separating spaces into separate rooms. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.044 T definitions.
Tandem Parking. The arrangement of parking spaces where no more than two cars are arranged in tandem, such that one or more spaces must be driven across in order to access another space or spaces.
Through Lot. See “Lot, Through.”
Tiny House—Movable. A residential dwelling unit that is accessory to a principal residential dwelling unit located on the same parcel of land, which provides complete independent living quarters for one household, and meets the following conditions:
    1. Is towable by a bumper hitch, frame-towing hitch, or fifth-wheel connection and is designed not to and cannot move under its own power;
    2. Is no larger than allowed by California State law for movement on public highways;
    3. Is a detached self-contained residential dwelling unit which includes facilities and functional areas for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
Top of Bank. The line where the naturally eroded ground slope, or the slope resulting from a creek alteration, flattens to conform with the ground which has not been cut by water flow within the creek channel. If the bank is terraced, the top of bank is the highest step.
Transit Stop. A facility located within the public right-of-way at selected points along transit routes for passenger pickup, drop-off, or transfer, but excluding areas for vehicle repair or storage, passenger ticketing and parking, which are defined as a transit station or terminal.
Trellis. See “Arbor.” (Ord. 1657 § 25, 2019; Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.046 U definitions.
Unbundle Parking. To separate parking from general rent or purchase costs in new residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use buildings.
Use. The purpose for which land or the premises of a building, structure, or facility thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
    Use, Accessory. A use that is customarily associated with, and is incidental and subordinate to, the primary use and located on the same parcel as the primary use. Accessory use includes active or passive solar heating systems and cogeneration facilities.
    Use, Primary. A primary, principal, or dominant use established, or proposed to be established, on a parcel.
Use Permit. A discretionary permit, such as a minor use permit or conditional use permit, which may be granted by the appropriate city of San Luis Obispo authority to provide for the accommodation of land uses with special site or design requirements, operating characteristics, or potential adverse effects on surroundings, which are not permitted as of right but which may be approved upon completion of a review process and, where necessary, the imposition of special conditions of approval by the permit granting authority. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.048 V definitions.
Vehicle. Any vehicle, as vehicle is defined by the California Vehicle Code, including any automobile, camper, camp trailer, trailer, trailer coach, motorcycle, house car, boat, or similar conveyance. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.050 W definitions.
Water-Efficient Landscape Standards. 
    Ecological Restoration Project. A project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.
    Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU). The total water used for the landscape.
    Homeowner-Provided Landscaping. Any landscaping either installed by a private individual for a single-unit residence or installed by a licensed contractor hired by a homeowner. A homeowner, for purposes of this chapter, is a person who occupies the dwelling he or she owns. This excludes speculative homes, which are not owner-occupied dwellings.
    Hydrozone. A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same irrigation schedule.
    Irrigation Efficiency. The measurement of the amount of water beneficially used, which is the amount of water stored in the root zone, divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices.
    Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA). The upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area.
    Rehabilitated Landscape. Any re-landscaping project that requires a building permit or design review where the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.052 X definitions.
Reserved. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.054 Y definitions.
Yard. An area along a property line within which no structures, parking spaces or parking backup spaces may be located, except as otherwise provided in these regulations. Yards are intended to help determine the pattern of building masses and open areas within neighborhoods and zones.
    Yard, Front. The area of a residential lot that lies between the street property line and the walls of any residences that face the street. The front yard area includes the entire yard extending across the full width of a site, the depth of which contains all areas between the front property line back to the walls of the building which are parallel or generally face the front property line.
    Yard, Other. Any yard other than a street yard (i.e., side and rear yards).
    Yard, Street. A yard adjacent to a local street, state highway (except frontages on Highway 101), or adopted setback line. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

17.158.056 Z definitions.
Zone (or “district” or “zone district”). An area of the city delineated on the official zoning map, designated by name or abbreviation as provided in the regulations codified in this title. (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Chapter 17.160 AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE LAND USE DEFINITIONS (TABLE 2-24)

Sections:
17.160.010   Airport overlay zone land use definitions (Table 2-24).

17.160.010 Airport overlay zone land use definitions (Table 2-24).
Airport. See Section 17.156.004—A Definitions: “Airport.”
Ambulance, Taxi, and/or Limousine Dispatch Facility. See Section 17.156.026—L Definitions: “Light Fleet-Based Services.”
Antennas and Telecommunications Facilities. See Section 17.156.046—W Definitions: “Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.”
ATMs. See Section 17.156.006—B Definitions: “Banks and Financial Institutions”—“Automated Teller Machines (ATMs).”
Auto and Vehicle Sales and Rental. See Section 17.156.044—V Definitions: “Vehicle Sales and Services”—“Auto and Vehicle Sales and Rental.”
Auto Parts Sales, with Installation. See Section 17.156.044—V Definitions: “Vehicle Sales and Services”—“Vehicle Services.”
Auto Parts Sales, without Installation. See Section 17.156.044—V Definitions: “Vehicle Sales and Services”—“Vehicle Services.”
Bakery.
    Retail. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“General Retail.”
    Wholesale. See Section 17.156.028—M Definitions: “Manufacturing—Light.”
Banks and Financial Services. See Section 17.156.006—B Definitions: “Banks and Financial Institutions.”
Bar/Tavern. See Section 17.156.012—E Definitions: “Eating and Drinking Establishments”—“Bars, Live Entertainment, and Taverns.”
Bed and Breakfast Inn. See Section 17.156.026—L Definitions: “Lodging”—“Bed and Breakfast Establishment.”
Boarding/Rooming House, Dormitory. See Section 17.156.006—B Definitions—“Boarding House.”
Building and Landscape Materials Sales. 
    Indoor. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“Building Materials and Services.”
    Outdoor. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“Building Materials and Services.”
Business Support Services. See Section 17.156.006—B Definitions: “Business Services.”
Caretaker Quarters. See Section 17.156.008—C Definitions: “Caretaker Quarters.”
Catering Service. See Section 17.156.014—F Definitions: “Food Preparation.”
Cemetery, Mausoleum, Columbarium. See Section 17.156.008—C Definitions: “Cemetery.”
Club, Lodge, Private Meeting Hall. See Section 17.156.034—P Definitions: “Public Assembly Facilities.”
Commercial Recreation Facility. 
    Indoor. See Section 17.156.008—C Definitions: “Commercial Recreation”—“Commercial Recreation, Small-Scale.”
    Outdoor. See Section 17.156.008—C Definitions: “Commercial Recreation”—“Commercial Recreation, Large-Scale.”
Community Garden. See Section 17.156.008—C Definitions: “Community Garden.”
Construction and Heavy Equipment Sales and Rental. See Section 17.156.044—V Definitions: “Vehicle Sales and Services”—“Large Vehicle, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental.”
Convalescent Hospital. See Section 17.156.012—E Definitions: “Elderly and Long-Term Care.”
Convenience Store. See Section 17.156.014—F Definitions: “Food and Beverage Sales”—“Convenience Store.”
Convents and Monasteries. See Section 17.156.006—B Definitions: “Boarding House.”
Copying and Quick Printer Service. See Section 17.156.006—B Definitions: “Business Services.”
Crop Production. See Section 17.156.008—C Definitions: “Crop Production.”
Day Care. 
    Day Care Center (Child/Adult). See Section 17.156.010—D Definitions: “Day Care Centers.”
    Family Day Care Home (Small/Large). See Section 17.156.014—F Definitions: “Family Day Care.”
Educational Conferences. See Section 17.156.012—E Definitions: “Educational Conferences Housing.”
Equipment Rental. See Section 17.156.006—B Definitions: “Business Services.”
Extended-Hour Retail. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“Extended-Hour Retail.”
Farm Supply and Feed Store. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“Nurseries and Garden Centers.”
Fitness/Health Facility. See Section 17.156.008—C Definitions: “Commercial Recreation”—“Commercial Recreation, Small-Scale.”
Food Bank/Packaged Food Distribution Center. See Section 17.156.046—W Definitions: “Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution.”
Fraternity, Sorority. See Section 17.156.014—F Definitions: “Fraternities and Sororities.”
Fuel Dealer (Propane, etc.). See Section 17.156.014—F Definitions: “Fuel Dealer.”
Furniture and Fixtures Manufacturing, Cabinet Shop. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Building Materials and Services.”
Furniture, Furnishings, and Appliance Stores. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“Building Materials and Services.”
Grazing. See Section 17.156.004—A Definitions: “Animal Husbandry and Grazing.”
General Retail. 
    Two thousand square feet or less. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“General Retail.”
    More Than Two Thousand Square Feet, Up to Fifteen Thousand Square Feet. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“General Retail.”
    More Than Fifteen Thousand Square Feet, Up to Forty-Five Thousand Square Feet. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: ‘Retail Sales”—“General Retail.”
    More Than Forty-Five Thousand Square Feet, Up to Sixty Thousand Square Feet. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“General Retail.”
    More Than Sixty Thousand Square Feet, Up to One Hundred Forty Thousand Square Feet. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“Large-Scale Retail.”
Golf Course. See Section 17.156.008—C Definitions: “Commercial Recreation”—“Commercial Recreation, Large-Scale.”
Greenhouse/Plant Nursery, Commercial. See Section 17.156.016—“Greenhouse/Plant Nursery: Commercial.”
Groceries, Specialty Foods. See Section 17.156.014—F Definitions: “Food and Beverage Sales”—“General Market.”
Heliport. See Section 17.156.018—H Definitions: “Helipad/Heliport.”
High-Occupancy Residential Use. See Section 17.156.018—H Definitions: “High occupancy residential use.”
Home Occupation. See Section 17.156.018—H Definitions: “Home Occupation.”
Homeless Shelter. See Section 17.156.026—L Definitions: “Lodging”—“Homeless Shelters.”
Hostel. See Section 17.156.026—L Definitions: “Lodging”—“Homeless Shelters.”
Hotel, Motel. See Section 17.156.026—L Definitions: “Lodging”—“Hotels and Motels.”
Industrial Research and Development. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Research and Development.”
Laboratory—Medical, Analytical, Research, Testing. See Section 17.156.026—L Definitions: “Laboratory—Medical, Analytical, Research, Testing.”
Laundry, Dry Cleaning Plant. See Section 17.156.034—P Definitions: “Personal Services.”
Library. 
    Branch Facility. See Section 17.156.008—C Definitions: “Cultural Institutions.”
    Museum. See Section 17.156.008—C Definitions: “Cultural Institutions.”
Liquor, Store/Alcohol Sales. See Section 17.156.014—F Definitions: “Food and Beverage Sales”—“Liquor Store.”
Live/Work Units. See Section 17.156.026—M Definitions: “Mixed-Use Development.”
Livestock Feed Lot. See Section 17.156.026—L Definitions: “Livestock Feed Lot.”
Maintenance Service, Client Site Services. See Section 17.156.028—M Definitions: “Maintenance and Repair Services.”
Manufacturing. 
    Heavy. See Section 17.156.028—M Definitions: “Manufacturing—Heavy.”
    Light. See Section 17.156.028—M Definitions: “Manufacturing—Light.”
Media Production. 
    Backlots/Outdoor Facilities and Soundstages. See Section 17.156.028—M Definitions: “Media Production”—“Backlots and Soundstages.”
    Broadcast Studio. See Section 17.156.028—M Definitions: “Media Production—Broadcast Studios.”
Medical Service. 
    Clinic, Laboratory, Urgent Care. See Section 17.156.018—H Definitions: “Hospitals and Clinics.”
    Doctor Office. See Section 17.156.032—O Definitions: “Offices”—“Medical and Dental Offices.”
    Extended Care. See Section 17.156.012—E Definitions: “Elderly and Long-Term Care.”
    Hospital. See Section 17.156.018—H Definitions: “Hospitals and Clinics”—“Hospital.”
Mixed-Use Project. See Section 17.156.026—M Definitions: “Mixed-Use Development.
Mobile Home. 
    Mobile Home as Temporary Residence at Building Site. See Section 17.158.040—R Definitions: “Recreational Vehicle.”
    Mobile Home Park. See Section 17.156.028—M Definitions: “Mobile Home Park.”
    Mobile Home, RV, and Boat Sales. See Section 17.156.044—V Definitions: “Large Vehicle, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental.”
Mortuary, Funeral Home. See Section 17.156.014—F Definitions: “Funeral Parlors and Interment Services.”
Multifamily Dwellings. See Section 17.156.028—M Definitions: “Multi-Unit Dwellings.”
Night Club. See Section 17.156.012—E Definitions: “Eating and Drinking Establishments”—“Bars, Live Entertainment, and Taverns.”
Office. 
    Accessory. See Section 17.156.032—O Definitions: “Offices”—“Business and Professional Offices.”
    Business and Service. See Section 17.156.032—O Definitions: “Offices”—“Business and Professional Offices.”
    Government. See Section 17.156.032—O Definitions: “Offices”—“Business and Professional Offices.”
    Processing. See Section 17.156.032—O Definitions: “Offices”—“Business and Professional Offices.”
    Production and Administrative. See Section 17.156.032—O Definitions: “Offices”—“Business and Professional Offices.”
    Professional. See Section 17.156.032—O Definitions: “Offices”—“Business and Professional Offices.”
    Temporary. See Section 17.156.032—O Definitions: “Offices”—“Business and Professional Offices”—“Temporary Offices.”
Office-Supporting Retail. 
    Two Thousand Square Feet or Less. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“General Retail.”
    More Than Two Thousand, Up to Five Thousand Square Feet. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“General Retail.”
Outdoor BBQ/Grill, Accessory to Restaurant. See Section 17.156.012—E Definitions: “Eating and Drinking Establishments”—“Restaurant.”
Outdoor Temporary and/or Seasonal Sales. See Section 17.156.032—O Definitions: “Outdoor Temporary and/or Seasonal Sales.”
Park, Playground. See Section 17.156.034—P Definitions: “Park and Recreation Facilities.”
Parking Facility. 
    Multi-Level. See Section 17.156.034—P Definitions: “Parking Facility.”
    Temporary. See Section 17.156.034—P Definitions: “Parking Facility—Temporary.”
Personal Services. See Section 17.156.034—P Definitions: “Personal Services.”
Personal Services—Restricted. See Section 17.156.034—P Definitions: “Personal Services.”
Petroleum Product Storage and Distribution. See Section 17.156.046—W Definitions: “Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution.”
Photo and Film Processing Lab. See Section 17.156.034—P Definitions: “Personal Services.”
Photographer, Photographic Studio. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“General Retail.”
Printing and Publishing. See Section 17.156.006—B Definitions: “Business Services.”
Produce Stand. See Section 17.156.014—F Definitions: “Food and Beverage Sales”—“Produce Stand.”
Public Assembly Facility. See Section 17.156.034—P Definitions: “Public Assembly Facilities.”
Public Safety Facilities. See Section 17.156.034—P Definitions: “Public Safety Facility.”
Public Utility Facilities. See Section 17.156.042—U Definitions: “Utilities Facilities.”
Railroad Facilities. See Section 17.156.040—T Definitions: “Transit Station or Terminal.”
Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park Accessory to Hotel, Motel. See Section 17.156.026—L Definitions: “Lodging”—“Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park.”
Recycling Facilities. 
    Collection and Processing Facility. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Recycling—Processing Facility.”
    Recycling Facilities—Scrap and Dismantling Yard. See Section 17.156.038—S Definitions: “Salvage and Wrecking.”
    Recycling Facilities—Small Collection Facility. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Recycling”—“Collection Facility.”
Religious Facility. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Religious Assembly Facilities.”
Repair Service—Equipment, Large Appliances, etc. See Section 17.156.028—M Definitions: “Maintenance and Repair Services.”
Residential Care Facilities. 
    Six or Fewer Residents. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Residential Care Facilities.”
    Seven or More Residents. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Residential Care Facilities.”
Residential Hospice Facility. See Section 17.156.018—H Definitions: “Hospice In-Patient Facility.”
Residential Support Services. See Section 17.156.034—P Definitions: “Personal Services.”
Rest Home. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Residential Care Facilities.”
Restaurant. See Section 17.156.012—E Definitions: “Eating and Drinking Establishments”—“Restaurant.”
Restaurant with Late-Hour Alcohol Service. See Section 17.156.012—E Definitions: “Eating and Drinking Establishments”—“Restaurant with Late-Hour Alcohol Service.”
School. 
    Boarding School, Elementary, Middle, Secondary. See Section 17.156.038—S Definitions: “Schools—Primary and Secondary.”
    College, University Campus. See Section 17.156.038—S Definitions: “Schools—Colleges.”
    College, University—Satellite Classroom Facility. See Section 17.156.038—S Definitions: “Schools—Colleges.”
    Elementary, Middle, Secondary. See Section 17.156.038—S Definitions: “Schools—Primary and Secondary.”
    Specialized Education/Training. See Section 17.156.020—I Definitions: “Instructional Services.”
Secondary Dwelling Units. See Section 17.156.004—A Definitions: “Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU).”
Service Station (see also “Vehicle Services”). See Section 17.156.044—V Definitions: “Vehicle Sales and Services”—“Service/Fueling Station.”
Single-Family Dwellings. See Section 17.156.038—S Definitions: “Single-Unit Dwelling.”
Social Service Organization. See Section 17.156.032—O Definitions: “Offices”—“Business and Professional Offices.”
Special Event. See Section 17.156.038—S Definitions: “Special Event.”
Sports and Active Recreation Facility. See Section 17.156.008—C Definitions: “Commercial Recreation.”
Sports and Entertainment Assembly Facility. See Section 17.156.038—S Definitions: “Sports and Entertainment Assembly Facility.”
Storage—Personal Storage Facility. See Section 17.156.046—W Definitions: “Warehousing, Storage and Distribution”—“Personal Storage.”
Storage Yard. See Section 17.156.046—W Definitions: “Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution”—“Outdoor Storage.”
Studio—Art, Dance, Martial Arts, Music, etc. See Section 17.156.020—I Definitions: “Instructional Services.”
Theater. See Section 17.156.020—T Definitions: “Theaters.”
Theater—Drive-In. See Section 17.156.008—C Definitions: “Commercial Recreation”—“Large-Scale.”
Transit Station or Terminal. See Section 17.156.040—T Definitions: “Transit Station or Terminal.”
Transit Stop. See Section 17.156.040—T Definitions: “Transit Station or Terminal.”
Truck or Freight Terminal. See Section 17.156.014—F Definitions: “Freight/Truck Terminals.”
Vacation Rental. See Section 17.156.044—V Definitions: “Vacation Rentals.”
Vehicle Services. 
    Carwash. See Section 17.156.044—V Definitions: “Vehicle Services”—“Washing.”
    Repair and Maintenance—Major. See Section 17.156.044—V Definitions: “Vehicle Services”—“Major (Major Repair/Body Work).”
    Repair and Maintenance—Minor. See Section 17.156.044—V Definitions: “Vehicle Services”—“Minor (Minor Repair/Maintenance).”
Vending Machine. See Section 17.156.044—V Definitions: “Vending Machine.”
Veterinary Clinic/Hospital. 
    Boarding, Large Animal. See Section 17.156.004—A Definitions: “Animal Care, Sales and Services”—“Veterinary Services, Large Animal.”
    Boarding, Small Animal, Indoor. See Section 17.156.004—A Definitions: “Animal Care, Sales and Services”—“Veterinary Services, Small Animal.”
    Boarding, Small Animal, Outdoor. See Section 17.156.004—A Definitions: “Animal Care, Sales and Services”—“Animal Boarding/Kennels.”
Warehouse Stores. 
    Forty-Five Thousand Square Feet or Less Gross Floor Area. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“General Retail.”
    More Than Forty-Five Thousand Square Feet Gross Floor Area. See Section 17.156.036—R Definitions: “Retail Sales”—“Large-Scale Retail.”
Warehousing, Indoor Storage. See Section 17.156.046—W Definitions: “Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution”—“Warehousing and Indoor Storage.”
Water and Wastewater Treatment Plants and Services. See Section 17.156.042—U Definitions: “Utility Facilities.”
Wholesaling and Distribution. See Section 17.156.046—W Definitions: “Warehousing, Storage, and Distribution”—“Wholesaling and Distribution.”
Wine-Tasting Room—Off Site. See Section 17.156.012—E Definitions: “Eating and Drinking Establishments”—“Bars, Live Entertainment, and Taverns.”
Work/Live Units. See Section 17.156.026—M Definitions: “Mixed-Use Development.” (Ord. 1650 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018)

Tables
 Statutory References
 State Code Citation Table
 Cross-Reference Table
 Ordinance List and Disposition Table

Statutory References
for California Cities
The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes applicable to California cities. They are current through April 2015.

General Provisions
Administrative fines and penalties. Gov’t Code § 53069.4
Alternative forms of government. Gov’t Code § 34851 et seq.
Authority to adopt, amend, revise or repeal city charters. Cal. Const. Art. XI, §§ 3 and 5
Citations for infractions and misdemeanors. Penal Code §§ 853.5 – 853.85
Classifications of cities. Gov’t Code §§ 34100 – 34102
Code adoption. Gov’t Code §§ 50022.1 – 50022.10
Conflict of interest code. Gov’t Code § 87100 et seq.
Elections. Gov’t Code §§ 34050 and 36503 and Elec. Code §§ 1301, 9200 et seq., and 10100 et seq.
Expedited judicial review of First Amendment cases. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.8
False petitions. Gov’t Code § 34093
General powers. Gov’t Code § 37100 et seq. and Cal. Const. Art. XI, § 7
Imprisonment. Gov’t Code §§ 36901, 36903 – 36904
Initiative and referendum. Cal. Const. Art. XI, § 7.5 and Elec. Code §§ 9200 et seq., and 9235 et seq.
Judicial review of city decisions. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.6
Ordinances. Gov’t Code § 36900 et seq.
Penalties for ordinance violations. Gov’t Code §§ 36900 and 36901
Police power. Cal. Const. Art. XI, § 7
Procedure for enactment or revision of city charters. Gov’t Code § 34450 et seq.

Administration and Personnel
Chief of police. Gov’t Code § 41601 et seq.
City assessor. Gov’t Code § 41201 et seq.
City attorney. Gov’t Code § 41801 et seq.
City clerk. Gov’t Code § 40801 et seq.
City manager. Gov’t Code §§ 34851 – 34859
City officers generally. Gov’t Code § 36501
City records. Gov’t Code §§ 34090 – 34090.7
City treasurer. Gov’t Code § 41001 et seq.
Election of legislative body by districts. Gov’t Code § 34870 et seq.
Elective mayor. Gov’t Code §§ 34900 – 34905
The California Emergency Services Act. Gov’t Code § 8550 et seq.
Fire department. Gov’t Code § 38611
Legislative body. Gov’t Code § 36801 et seq.
Local emergencies. Gov’t Code §§ 8630 – 8634
Local planning agencies. Gov’t Code § 65100 et seq.
Mayor. Gov’t Code §§ 36801 – 36803 and 40601 et seq.
Meetings (“Ralph M. Brown Act”). Gov’t Code § 54950 et seq.
Peace officer standards and training. Penal Code § 13500 et seq.
Personnel system. Gov’t Code § 45000 et seq.
Retirement systems. Gov’t Code § 45300 et seq.

Revenue and Finance
Chartered city special assessment procedure. Gov’t Code § 43240
Claims against public entities. Gov’t Code § 900 et seq.
Contracting by local agencies (“Local Agency Public Construction Act”). Pub. Cont. Code § 20100 et seq.
Development fees. Gov’t Code § 66000 et seq.
Financial powers. Gov’t Code § 37200 et seq.
Fiscal year in chartered cities. Gov’t Code § 43120
Graffiti prevention tax. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 7287 – 7287.10
Local agency service fees and charges. Gov’t Code § 66012 et seq.
Property tax assessment, levy and collection. Gov’t Code § 43000 et seq.
Public works and public purchases. Gov’t Code § 4000 et seq.
Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7200 et seq. and Gov’t Code § 37101
Special gas tax street improvement fund. Sts. & High. Code § 2113
The Documentary Transfer Tax Act. Rev. & Tax. Code § 11901 et seq.
Transfer of tax function to county. Gov’t Code § 51500 et seq.
Transient occupancy tax. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 7280 – 7283.51
Unclaimed property. Civ. Code § 2080 et seq.
Uniform public construction cost accounting act. Pub. Cont. Code § 22000 et seq.

Business Licenses, Taxes and Regulations
Authority to license businesses. Gov’t Code § 37101 and Bus. & Prof. Code § 16000 et seq.
Automatic checkout systems. Civ. Code § 7100 et seq.
Bingo. Penal Code § 326.5
Charitable solicitations. Bus. & Prof. Code § 17510 et seq.
Commercial filming. Gov’t Code § 65850.1
Community antenna television systems. Gov’t Code § 53066 et seq.
Gambling Control Act. Bus. & Prof. Code § 19800 et seq.
Massage parlors. Gov’t Code § 51030 et seq.
Private Investigator Act. Bus. & Prof. Code § 7512 et seq.
Taxicabs and vehicles for hire. Veh. Code §§ 16500 et seq., 21100(b) and 21112 and Gov’t Code § 53075.5

Animals
Animals generally. Food & Agric. Code § 16301 et seq.
Cruelty to animals. Penal Code § 597 et seq.
Dangerous and vicious dogs. Food & Agric. Code § 31601 et seq.
Dogs and dog licenses. Gov’t Code § 38792 and Food & Agric. Code § 30501 et seq.
Rabies control. Health & Safety Code § 121575 et seq.

Health and Safety
Delinquent garbage fees. Gov’t Code § 38790.1
Fire prevention. Health & Safety Code § 13000 et seq.
Fireworks. Health & Safety Code §§ 12500 et seq. (State Fireworks Law) and 12640 et seq. (Permits)
Garbage and refuse collection and disposal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 49300 and 49400 and Gov’t Code § 38790
Graffiti abatement. Gov’t Code §§ 38772 and 53069.3
Hospitals. Gov’t Code § 37600 et seq.
Littering. Penal Code § 374
Noise control. Health & Safety Code § 46000 et seq. and Gov’t Code § 65302(f)
Nuisance abatement. Gov’t Code § 38771 et seq. and Penal Code §§ 370, 372 and 373a
Weed control. Gov’t Code §§ 39501 – 39502

Public Peace, Morals and Welfare
Crimes against property. Penal Code § 450 et seq.
Crimes against public health and safety. Penal Code § 369a et seq.
Crimes against public justice. Penal Code § 92 et seq.
Crimes against the person. Penal Code § 187 et seq.
Crimes against the person involving sexual assault and against public decency and good morals. Penal Code § 261 et seq.
Crimes against the public peace. Penal Code § 403 et seq.
Minors. Penal Code § 858(b) 858
Weapons. Penal Code §§ 12001 et seq., 17500 et seq., and 19910 et seq.

Vehicles and Traffic
Bicycles. Veh. Code §§ 21100(h), 21206 and 39000 et seq.
Curb markings. Veh. Code § 21458
Establishments of crosswalks. Veh. Code § 21106
Local traffic rules and regulations. Veh. Code § 21100 et seq.
One-way street designations. Veh. Code § 21657
Pedestrian rights and duties. Veh. Code § 21949 et seq.
Penalties. Veh. Code § 40000.1 et seq.
Speed limits. Veh. Code § 22348 et seq.
Stopping, standing, and parking. Veh. Code § 22500 et seq.
Through highways. Veh. Code §§ 21101(b), 21353 and 21354
Traffic control devices. Veh. Code § 21350 et seq.
Traffic signs, signals and markings. Veh. Code § 21350 et seq.
Turning movements. Veh. Code § 22100 et seq.
Vehicle weight limits. Veh. Code § 35700 et seq.

Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
Advertising displays. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 5230, 5231 and 5440 et seq.
Constructions of sidewalks and curbs. Sts. & High. Code § 5870 et seq.
Improvement Act of 1911. Sts. & High. Code § 5000 et seq.
Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972. Sts. & High. Code § 22500 et seq.
Municipal parks. Pub. Res. Code § 5181 et seq.
Obstructions and encroachments of public ways. Gov’t Code § 38775
Tree Planting Act of 1931. Sts. & High. Code § 22000 et seq.
Underground utility districts. Sts. & High. Code § 5896.1 et seq. and Gov’t Code § 38793

Public Services
Connection fees. Gov’t Code § 66013
Municipal sewers. Gov’t Code § 38900 et seq. and Health & Safety Code § 5470 et seq.
Municipal water systems. Gov’t Code § 38730 et seq.
Water wells. Water Code § 13700 et seq.

Buildings and Construction
Adoption of construction codes. Health & Safety Code §§ 17922, 17958 and 17958.5
Authority to regulate buildings and construction. Gov’t Code §§ 38601(b) and 38660
Inspection warrants. Civ. Proc. Code § 1822.50 et seq.
Mobilehomes. Health & Safety Code § 18200 et seq.
Signs. Gov’t Code §§ 38774 and 65850(b) and Bus. & Prof. Code § 5229 et seq.
State Housing Law. Health & Safety Code § 17910 et seq.

Subdivisions
Subdivision Map Act. Gov’t Code § 66410 et seq.

Zoning
Family day care homes. Health & Safety Code § 1597.30 et seq.
Local authority to regulate land use. Gov’t Code § 65850
Local planning generally (“Planning and Zoning Law”). Gov’t Code § 65000 et seq.
Local zoning administration. Gov’t Code § 65900 et seq.
Open-space zoning. Gov’t Code § 65910 et seq.
Zoning fees and charges. Gov’t Code § 66014

Environmental Protection
The California Environmental Quality Act. Pub. Res. Code § 21000 et seq.
The California Noise Control Act of 1973. Health & Safety Code § 46000 et seq. and Gov’t Code § 65302(f)

State Code Citation Table
This table lists California state code sections that are cited in the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code. Thus, Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 2188.7 is cited in Section 16.02.060
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
|                   State Citation                   | Code Section |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| California Constitution                            | 2.40.020     |
|                                                    | 3.16.240     |
|                                                    | 15.40.130    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Const. Art. I, § 4                            | 9.05.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Const. Art. XI, § 5                           | 1.24.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Const. Art. XI, § 7                           | 1.24.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Const. Art. XIII C                            | 5.10.310     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| California Revenue and Taxation Code               | 3.12.020     |
|                                                    | 3.12.090     |
|                                                    | 3.12.100     |
|                                                    | 3.12.120     |
|                                                    | 3.12.130     |
|                                                    | 3.12.140     |
|                                                    | 3.15.020     |
|                                                    | 3.15.100     |
|                                                    | 3.15.110     |
|                                                    | 3.15.130     |
|                                                    | 3.15.140     |
|                                                    | 3.15.150     |
|                                                    | 3.16.030     |
|                                                    | 5.32.040     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 60                         | 13.08.395    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 61                         | 13.08.395    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 62                         | 13.08.395    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 2188.7                     | 16.02.060    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6001                       | 3.15.100     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6067                       | 3.12.110     |
|                                                    | 3.15.120     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6203                       | 3.12.100     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6366                       | 3.12.120     |
|                                                    | 3.15.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6366.1                     | 3.12.120     |
|                                                    | 3.15.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6701                       | 3.12.100     |
|                                                    | 3.15.110     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6702                       | 3.12.100     |
|                                                    | 3.15.110     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6711                       | 3.12.100     |
|                                                    | 3.15.110     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6715                       | 3.12.100     |
|                                                    | 3.15.110     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6737                       | 3.12.100     |
|                                                    | 3.15.110     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6797                       | 3.12.100     |
|                                                    | 3.15.110     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6828                       | 3.12.100     |
|                                                    | 3.15.110     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7284.6                     | 3.16.120     |
|                                                    | 3.16.180     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7284.7                     | 3.16.180     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7285.9                     | 3.15.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701                      | 5.32.070     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701(1)                   | 5.32.040     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701(3)                   | 5.32.040     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701(a)                   | 5.32.040     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701(b)                   | 5.32.040     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701(d)                   | 5.32.040     |
|                                                    | 5.32.120     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701(g)                   | 5.32.040     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| California Business and Professions Code           | 15.40.200    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 4612                      | 17.156.034   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 5230                      | 15.40.105    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 8762                      | 16.16.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 10011                     | 13.06.040    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 11003.2                   | 16.26.410    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 11004                     | 16.26.410    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 12107                     | 5.20.280     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 12500.5                   | 5.20.280     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 17070 et seq.             | 3.16.250     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 23790.5                   | 17.86.060    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 26001                     | 9.10.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 26001(f)                  | 5.10.040     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 26057                     | 9.10.070     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 26200(c)                  | 9.10.100     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.5                      | 5.10.150     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.6                      | 3.16.200     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.8                      | 1.20.060     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 607F                              | 6.08.030     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 713                               | 15.40.105    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 714                               | 15.14.060    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 789 et seq.                       | 5.45.050     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 798 et seq.                       | 5.45.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 798.3                             | 17.156.028   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 798.23.5                          | 5.45.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 798.56                            | 5.45.070     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 1102.6a                           | 13.06.040    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 1350                              | 16.26.410    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 1351                              | 17.140.020   |
|                                                    | 17.158.010   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 1353.8                            | 17.70.220    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 1355                              | 16.17.080    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 1367                              | 16.26.070    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 1714.5                            | 2.24.070     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 2080.4                            | 3.32.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 3479                              | 8.32.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 3480                              | 17.76.060    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 3494                              | 8.32.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Civ. Code § 4080                              | 15.15.060    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Corp. Code § 5003                             | 8.16.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Corp. Code § 25100                            | 16.26.070    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Educ. Code § 66025.9                          | 17.140.040   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Educ. Code § 94300 et seq.                    | 5.56.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| California Elections Code                          | 2.42.060     |
|                                                    | 2.42.070     |
|                                                    | 2.42.090     |
|                                                    | 2.42.100     |
|                                                    | 2.42.110     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Elec. Code § 1000                             | 2.42.040     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Elec. Code § 1001                             | 2.42.040     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Elec. Code § 1500                             | 2.42.040     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Elec. Code § 3000 et seq.                     | 2.42.090     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Food & Agric. Code § 32501                    | 17.156.012   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| California Government Code                         | 1.04.020     |
|                                                    | 1.04.080     |
|                                                    | 2.04.020     |
|                                                    | 2.36.490     |
|                                                    | 2.40.060     |
|                                                    | 2.40.130     |
|                                                    | 13.08.010    |
|                                                    | 17.02.080    |
|                                                    | 17.04.010    |
|                                                    | 17.50.010    |
|                                                    | 17.70.040    |
|                                                    | 17.128.050   |
|                                                    | 17.158.012   |
|                                                    | 17.158.018   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 900                              | 1.08.140     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 900 et seq.                      | 1.08.140     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 910                              | 1.08.140     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 912.4                            | 3.16.190     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 913                              | 3.16.190     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 935                              | 1.08.140     |
|                                                    | 3.16.190     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 935(b)                           | 1.08.140     |
|                                                    | 3.16.200     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 940 – Cal. Gov’t Code § 949      | 1.08.140     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 945.6                            | 1.08.140     |
|                                                    | 3.16.190     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 946                              | 3.16.190     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 950 – Cal. Gov’t Code § 951      | 1.08.140     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 3502                             | 2.36.070     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 6061                             | 4.20.140     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 11135                            | 5.20.200     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 12650 et seq.                    | 3.16.250     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 12926                            | 17.158.012   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 12955 et seq.                    | 17.158.016   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 18451                            | 17.140.040   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 25845                            | 10.68.120    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 36900                            | 1.12.050     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 37100.5                          | 5.10.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 37101                            | 5.10.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 38771                            | 1.24.040     |
|                                                    | 8.32.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 38773                            | 8.12.080     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 38773.1                          | 1.24.150     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 38773.5                          | 1.24.150     |
|                                                    | 8.12.080     |
|                                                    | 10.68.010    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 38774                            | 15.40.105    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 51175 – Cal. Gov’t Code § 51189  | 15.04.100    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 53069.4                          | 1.24.020     |
|                                                    | 1.24.030     |
|                                                    | 1.24.100     |
|                                                    | 1.24.110     |
|                                                    | 1.24.140     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 53075.5                          | 5.20.210     |
|                                                    | 5.20.220     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 53075.5(h)(1) – Cal. Gov’t Code  | 5.20.200     |
| § 53075.5(9)                                       |              |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 53750                            | 3.16.170     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 53750(h)(2)                      | 3.16.170     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 54950 et seq.                    | 5.44.080     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65009(b)(2)                      | 17.122.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65010                            | 17.122.040   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65090                            | 16.14.120    |
|                                                    | 17.122.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65091                            | 16.14.120    |
|                                                    | 17.122.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65091(a)(2)                      | 17.122.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65091(a)(4)                      | 17.122.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65094                            | 17.122.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65096                            | 17.122.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65302                            | 17.78.010    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65400                            | 17.120.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65400 et seq.                    | 17.104.050   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65401                            | 17.120.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65402                            | 17.120.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65450 – Cal. Gov’t Code § 65457  | 17.50.010    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65450 et seq.                    | 16.26.360    |
|                                                    | 17.102.020   |
|                                                    | 17.158.042   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65560                            | 17.78.010    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65582(h)                         | 17.156.038   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65583(a)(4)                      | 17.10.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65583(a)(5)                      | 17.10.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65800                            | 17.78.010    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65800 et seq.                    | 17.02.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850                            | 15.40.105    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.4                          | 17.10.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.5                          | 15.14.010    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.6                          | 17.10.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.7                          | 15.15.010    |
|                                                    | 15.15.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.2                          | 17.86.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.2(g)                       | 17.86.210    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.7                          | 17.10.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.22                         | 17.86.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65863.7                          | 5.45.010     |
|                                                    | 17.10.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65863.8                          | 5.45.010     |
|                                                    | 17.10.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65864 et seq.                    | 17.128.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65901 et seq.                    | 17.120.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65913.2                          | 4.20.140     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915                            | 17.70.040    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915 – Cal. Gov’t Code § 65918  | 17.140.010   |
|                                                    | 17.140.040   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915 et seq.                    | 17.140.010   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915.7                          | 17.140.050   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(g)(2)(A) – Cal. Gov’t Code | 17.138.080   |
| § 65915(H)                                         |              |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(h)(1)                      | 17.140.070   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 65943                            | 17.104.050   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66001                            | 4.56.100     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66007                            | 4.20.140     |
|                                                    | 4.56.050     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66412.3                          | 16.10.130    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66418.2                          | 16.08.050    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66424.6                          | 16.14.040    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66427.4                          | 5.45.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66428                            | 16.08.030    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66428.1                          | 16.08.030    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66436                            | 16.14.060    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66451.1                          | 16.10.050    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66451.3                          | 16.10.070    |
|                                                    | 17.122.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66451.4                          | 16.10.070    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66451.11                         | 17.96.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66452.1                          | 16.10.050    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66452.2                          | 16.10.050    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66452.6                          | 16.12.050    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66473.1                          | 16.10.120    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66473.5                          | 16.10.120    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66474.1                          | 16.14.090    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66474.2                          | 16.12.045    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66477                            | 4.56.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66477.2                          | 16.22.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66478.1                          | 16.10.130    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.12                         | 16.16.040    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.13                         | 16.16.040    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.16                         | 16.16.040    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.34                         | 16.24.030    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.35                         | 16.08.030    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.35(a)                      | 16.16.010    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.36                         | 16.04.030    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Gov’t Code § 655829(f)                        | 17.156.038   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| California Health and Safety Code                  | 8.32.010     |
|                                                    | 8.32.020     |
|                                                    | 8.32.070     |
|                                                    | 9.08.040     |
|                                                    | 11.04.010    |
|                                                    | 13.08.010    |
|                                                    | 14.01.020    |
|                                                    | 16.02.060    |
|                                                    | 17.02.020    |
|                                                    | 17.86.100    |
|                                                    | 17.140.070   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25                     | 14.01.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 510                    | 8.32.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1529.5                 | 17.86.140    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1596.78                | 17.156.014   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1597.40                | 17.10.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 5238                   | 17.86.080    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11000 et seq.          | 9.09.020     |
|                                                    | 9.09.110     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11018.1                | 5.10.040     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11018.5                | 5.10.040     |
|                                                    | 17.156.008   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11053 – Cal. Health &  | 9.09.020     |
| Safety Code § 11058                                |              |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11054                  | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11055                  | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11056                  | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11057                  | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11058                  | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11357.5                | 9.09.020     |
|                                                    | 9.09.110     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11362.1                | 17.156.008   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11362.2                | 17.156.008   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11362.5                | 9.10.010     |
|                                                    | 17.156.028   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11362.7                | 9.10.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11362.7 et seq.        | 9.10.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11364.5                | 9.08.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11375.5                | 9.09.020     |
|                                                    | 9.09.110     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11401                  | 9.09.020     |
|                                                    | 9.09.110     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 13146                  | 3.50.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 17921                  | 3.50.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 17958.1                | 17.156.004   |
|                                                    | 17.158.014   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18007                  | 17.156.004   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18551                  | 17.156.038   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18950 – Cal. Health &  | 14.01.020    |
| Safety Code § 18961                                |              |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 19957.5                | 15.04.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25113                  | 8.32.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25118                  | 8.32.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25280                  | 8.32.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25316                  | 8.32.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25321                  | 8.32.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25322                  | 8.32.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25323                  | 8.32.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25326                  | 8.32.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25400                  | 8.32.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25501                  | 12.08.030    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 33007.5                | 16.26.070    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 33334.2(e)             | 17.138.150   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 50062.5                | 17.140.060   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 50079.5                | 17.138.030   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 50105                  | 17.138.030   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 109925                 | 17.156.012   |
|                                                    | 17.156.040   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 109935                 | 17.156.012   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 113758                 | 17.86.140    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code § 114365                 | 17.86.140    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Health & Safety Code Div. 31, Part 1, Ch.     | 5.45.050     |
| 2                                                  |              |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Lab. Code § 6404.5                            | 8.14.030     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| California Penal Code                              | 1.16.010     |
|                                                    | 5.08.120     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 16                               | 1.12.050     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 17                               | 1.12.050     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 19.8                             | 1.12.050     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 290                              | 5.56.070     |
|                                                    | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.110     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 311 – Cal. Penal Code § 311.7    | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 313.1                            | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 314                              | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 315                              | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 316                              | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 318                              | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 326.5                            | 5.32.040     |
|                                                    | 5.32.070     |
|                                                    | 5.32.230     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 326.5(b)                         | 5.32.210     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 374                              | 12.08.150    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 647(a)                           | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 647(b)                           | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 647(d)                           | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 647(h)                           | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 653k                             | 9.16.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 836.5(a)                         | 1.16.060     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 853.5                            | 1.16.060     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 853.6                            | 1.16.060     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 11105                            | 2.28.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 11225 – Cal. Penal Code § 11235  | 5.56.070     |
|                                                    | 5.56.090     |
|                                                    | 5.56.110     |
|                                                    | 5.56.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 12020                            | 9.16.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 12025                            | 9.16.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 12028                            | 9.16.030     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 13510(c)                         | 2.60.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 13512                            | 2.60.030     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Penal Code § 13522                            | 2.60.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| California Public Utilities Code                   | 5.24.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 799                         | 3.16.220     |
|                                                    | 3.16.260     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 1031 – Cal. Pub. Util. Code | 10.48.060    |
| § 1036                                             |              |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 5860                        | 5.72.010     |
|                                                    | 5.72.020     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 5870(g)(3)                  | 5.72.060     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 5870(n)                     | 5.72.010     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 5870b                       | 5.72.060     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 7901 et seq.                | 17.10.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 21411                       | 3.15.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 21659                       | 17.64.060    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 21676(b)                    | 17.64.030    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| California Public Resources Code                   | 12.23.030    |
|                                                    | 17.04.010    |
|                                                    | 17.158.036   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 4201 – Cal. Pub. Res. Code   | 15.04.100    |
| § 4204                                             |              |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 21000 et seq.                | 17.02.060    |
|                                                    | 17.122.020   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 21081(c)                     | 16.10.130    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Pub. Cont. Code § 22034(f)                    | 3.24.187     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| California Streets and Highways Code               | 3.20.010     |
|                                                    | 3.20.020     |
|                                                    | 3.20.030     |
|                                                    | 12.12.030    |
|                                                    | 12.16.020    |
|                                                    | 12.24.100    |
|                                                    | 13.08.010    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Sts. & High. Code § 5610 – Cal. Sts. & High.  | 12.24.100    |
| Code § 5618                                        |              |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Sts. & High. Code § 36062                     | 12.36.070    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Sts. & High. Code § 36500 et seq.             | 12.42.020    |
|                                                    | 12.42.030    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Sts. & High. Code § 36530                     | 12.42.060    |
|                                                    | 12.42.100    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Sts. & High. Code § 36531                     | 12.42.050    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Sts. & High. Code § 36533                     | 12.42.060    |
|                                                    | 12.42.100    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Sts. & High. Code § 36534                     | 12.42.060    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| California Vehicle Code                            | 3.15.130     |
|                                                    | 5.16.040     |
|                                                    | 5.20.210     |
|                                                    | 5.20.230     |
|                                                    | 9.12.020     |
|                                                    | 10.04.010    |
|                                                    | 10.04.030    |
|                                                    | 10.04.200    |
|                                                    | 10.08.020    |
|                                                    | 10.12.010    |
|                                                    | 10.12.060    |
|                                                    | 10.12.070    |
|                                                    | 10.14.010    |
|                                                    | 10.14.020    |
|                                                    | 10.14.060    |
|                                                    | 10.14.070    |
|                                                    | 10.36.010    |
|                                                    | 10.36.232    |
|                                                    | 10.44.020    |
|                                                    | 10.56.010    |
|                                                    | 10.64.030    |
|                                                    | 10.68.100    |
|                                                    | 10.80.020    |
|                                                    | 10.80.070    |
|                                                    | 12.20.040    |
|                                                    | 12.22.050    |
|                                                    | 15.40.300    |
|                                                    | 17.158.048   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 110                               | 10.04.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 395.5                             | 15.40.1000   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 575                               | 17.76.100    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 672                               | 15.40.300    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 5201                              | 15.40.300    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 9105                              | 10.44.070    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 9840                              | 3.15.130     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 11701                             | 15.40.300    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 22507                             | 10.34.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 22511.5                           | 10.44.070    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 22658                             | 12.38.160    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 22660                             | 10.68.010    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 22661                             | 10.68.030    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 35702                             | 10.48.040    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 40000.1                           | 1.12.050     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Veh. Code § 42001(a)                          | 10.44.070    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Water Code § 13000 et seq.                    | 12.08.030    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code § 217                      | 3.32.040     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code § 601                      | 9.50.030     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code § 602                      | 9.50.030     |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code § 4500                     | 17.156.038   |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| CCR Title 19                                       | 15.04.100    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| CCR Title 24                                       | 15.02.010    |
|                                                    | 17.86.190    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| 24 CCR 6                                           | 17.70.100    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| CCR Title 4850 et seq.                             | 14.01.020    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| CCR Title 15000                                    | 17.02.060    |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+

Cross-Reference Table
This table provides users with the legislative history and the current dispositions of the sections in the prior municipal code. Thus, prior code § 1200 was derived from the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code and currently appears in this code as § 1.12.010.
The legislative history information was derived from the San Luis Municipal Code, adopted in 1955, as compiled by D. G. Wettlin.
Editor’s note: There were two groups of prior code sections numbered 4800—4815, 9900, 9901 and 9950 in the prior code.
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
|              Prior Code              |      Herein      |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1100                                 | 1.04.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1101                                 | 1.04.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1102                                 | 1.04.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1103                                 | 1.04.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1104                                 | 1.04.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1105                                 | 1.04.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1106                                 | 1.04.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1107                                 | 1.04.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1108                                 | 1.04.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1109                                 | 1.04.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1200                                 | 1.12.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1201                                 | 1.12.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1202                                 | 1.12.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1203                                 | 1.12.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1204                                 | 1.12.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1205                                 | 1.12.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1206                                 | 1.12.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1207                                 | 1.12.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1208                                 | 1.12.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1209                                 | 1.12.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1210                                 | 1.12.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1211                                 | 1.12.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1250                                 | 1.16.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1251                                 | 1.16.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1252                                 | 1.16.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1253                                 | 1.16.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1254                                 | 1.16.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1255                                 | 1.16.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1300                                 | 1.08.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1301                                 | 1.08.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1302                                 | 1.08.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1303                                 | 1.08.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1304                                 | 1.08.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1305, 1313 – 1317, 1319, 1321 – 1326 | 1.08.020         |
| and 1329                             |                  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1306                                 | 1.08.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1307                                 | 1.08.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1308                                 | 1.08.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1309 – 1312                          | 1.08.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1318                                 | 1.08.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1327                                 | 1.08.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1328                                 | 1.08.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1400                                 | 1.20.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1401                                 | 1.20.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1402                                 | 1.20.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1403                                 | 1.20.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 1404                                 | 1.20.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2100                                 | 2.04.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2100.1                               | 2.04.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2310                                 | 2.32.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2310.1                               | 2.32.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2320                                 | 2.08.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2320.1                               | 2.08.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2330                                 | 2.28.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2330.1                               | 2.28.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2410                                 | 2.12.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2410.1                               | 2.12.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2410.2                               | 2.12.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2410.3                               | 2.12.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2420                                 | 2.16.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2420.1                               | 2.16.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2420.2                               | Repealed by 958  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2430                                 | 2.24.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2430.1                               | 2.24.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2430.1A                              | 2.24.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2430.2                               | 2.24.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2430.3                               | 2.24.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2430.4                               | 2.24.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2430.5                               | 2.24.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2430.6                               | 2.24.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2430.6(a)                            | 2.24.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2430.7                               | 2.24.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2440                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2450                                 | 2.20.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2450.1                               | 2.20.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2450.2                               | 2.20.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2450.3                               | 2.20.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2460—2460.3                          | Repealed by 930  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2470—2470.3                          | Repealed by 1574 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2480                                 | 2.56.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2480.1                               | 2.56.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2480.2                               | 2.56.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2480.3                               | 2.56.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2480.4                               | 2.56.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2550                                 | 3.04.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2551                                 | 3.04.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2552                                 | 3.04.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2553                                 | 3.04.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2554                                 | 3.04.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2555                                 | 3.04.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2556                                 | 3.04.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2557                                 | 3.04.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2558                                 | 3.04.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2559                                 | 3.04.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2560                                 | 3.04.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2561                                 | 3.04.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2562                                 | 3.04.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2563                                 | 3.04.140         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2564                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2565                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2575                                 | 3.08.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2576                                 | 3.08.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2577                                 | 3.08.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2578                                 | 3.08.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2579                                 | 3.08.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2580                                 | 3.08.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2581                                 | 3.08.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2582                                 | 3.08.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2583                                 | 3.08.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2584                                 | 3.08.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2610                                 | 3.20.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2610.1                               | 3.20.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2610.2                               | 3.20.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2630                                 | Repealed by 954  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2630.1                               | Repealed by 954  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2640                                 | 3.28.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2700                                 | 2.36.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2700.1                               | 2.36.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2700.2                               | 2.36.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2700.3                               | 2.36.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2700.4                               | 2.36.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2700.5                               | 2.36.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2700.6                               | 2.36.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2700.7                               | 2.36.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2701                                 | 2.36.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2702                                 | 2.36.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2702.1                               | 2.36.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2702.2                               | 2.36.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2702.3                               | 2.36.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2703.1                               | 2.36.140         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2704                                 | 2.36.150         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2704.1                               | 2.36.160         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2704.2                               | 2.36.170         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2704.3                               | 2.36.180         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2704.4                               | 2.36.190         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2704.5                               | 2.36.200         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2704.6                               | 2.36.210         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2704.7                               | 2.36.220         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2704.8                               | 2.36.230         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2704.9                               | 2.36.240         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2705                                 | 2.36.250         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2705.1                               | 2.36.260         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2705.2                               | 2.36.270         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2705.3                               | 2.36.280         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2705.4                               | 2.36.290         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2705.5                               | 2.36.300         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2705.6                               | 2.36.310         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2706                                 | 2.36.320         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2706.1                               | 2.36.330         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2706.2                               | 2.36.340         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2706.3                               | 2.36.350         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2707                                 | 2.36.360         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2708                                 | 2.36.370         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2708.1                               | 2.36.380         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2708.2                               | 2.36.390         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2708.3                               | 2.36.400         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2708.4                               | 2.36.410         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2708.5                               | 2.36.420         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2708.6                               | 2.36.430         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2708.7                               | 2.36.440         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2708.8                               | 2.36.450         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2708.9                               | 2.36.460         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2708.10                              | 2.36.470         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2708.11                              | 2.36.480         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2709                                 | 2.36.490         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2710                                 | 2.36.500         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2710.11                              | Repealed by 722  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2710.12                              | Repealed by 722  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2710.13                              | Repealed by 722  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2711                                 | 2.36.540         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2800—2812                            | Ch. 2.40         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2900                                 | 2.44.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2900.1                               | 2.44.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2900.2                               | 2.44.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2900.3                               | 2.44.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2950.1                               | 3.24.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2950.2                               | 3.24.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2950.3                               | 3.24.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2950.4                               | 3.24.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2950.5                               | 3.24.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2950.6                               | 3.24.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2950.7                               | 3.24.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2951.1                               | 3.24.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2951.2                               | 3.24.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2951.3                               | 3.24.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2951.4                               | 3.24.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2951.5                               | 3.24.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2951.6                               | 3.24.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2952.1                               | 3.24.140         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2952.2                               | 3.24.150         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2952.3                               | 3.24.160         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2952.4                               | 3.24.170         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2952.5                               | 3.24.180         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2952.6                               | 3.24.190         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2952.7                               | 3.24.200         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2952.8                               | 3.24.210         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2953.1                               | 3.24.220         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2953.2                               | 3.24.230         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2953.3                               | 3.24.240         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2953.4                               | 3.24.250         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 2953.5                               | 3.24.260         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3120.1                               | Repealed by 1170 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3120.2                               | Repealed by 1170 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3120.3                               | Repealed by 1170 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3120.4                               | Repealed by 1170 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3120.5                               | Repealed by 1170 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3140.2                               | Repealed by 1170 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3140.3                               | Repealed by 1170 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3200                                 | 10.04.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.090        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.100        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.110        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.120        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.130        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.140        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.150        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.160        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.170        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.180        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.190        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.04.200        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3201                                 | 10.08.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3201.1                               | 10.08.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3201.2                               | 10.08.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3201.3                               | 10.08.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3201.4                               | 10.08.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3201.5                               | 10.08.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3202                                 | 10.12.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3202.1                               | 10.12.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3202.2                               | 10.12.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3202.3                               | 10.12.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3202.4                               | 10.12.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3202.5                               | 10.12.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3202.6                               | 10.12.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3202.7                               | 10.12.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3202.8                               | 10.12.090        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3202.9                               | 10.12.100        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3203                                 | 10.14.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3203.1                               | 10.14.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3203.2                               | 10.14.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3203.3                               | 10.14.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3203.4                               | 10.14.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3203.5                               | 10.14.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3203.6                               | 10.14.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3203.7                               | 10.14.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3203.8                               | 10.14.090        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3204                                 | 10.16.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3204.1                               | 10.16.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3204.2                               | 10.16.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3204.3                               | 10.16.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3205                                 | 10.20.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3206                                 | 10.24.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3206.1                               | 10.24.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3207                                 | 10.28.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3207.1                               | Repealed by 975  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3207.2                               | 10.28.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3207.3                               | 10.28.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3207.4                               | 10.28.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3207.5                               | 10.28.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3207.7                               | 10.28.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3207.8                               | 10.28.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3208                                 | 10.32.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3208.1                               | 10.32.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209                                 | 10.36.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.1                               | 10.36.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.2                               | 10.36.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.3                               | 10.36.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.4                               | 10.36.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.5                               | Repealed by 1484 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.6                               | 10.36.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.7                               | 10.36.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.8                               | 10.36.090        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.9                               | 10.36.100        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.10                              | 10.36.110        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.11                              | 10.36.120        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.12                              | 10.36.130        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.14                              | 10.36.140        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.15                              | 10.36.150        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.16                              | 10.36.160        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.17                              | 10.36.170        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.18                              | 10.36.180        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.19                              | 10.36.190        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.20                              | 10.36.200        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.21                              | 10.36.220        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.23                              | Repealed by 1264 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.36.230        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3209.99                              | 10.36.240        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3210                                 | 10.40.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3210.1                               | 10.40.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3210.2                               | Repealed by 1331 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | Repealed by 1331 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3210.3                               | 10.40.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3210.4                               | 10.40.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3210.5                               | 10.40.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3210.6                               | 10.40.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3210.7                               | 10.40.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3211                                 | 10.44.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3211.1                               | 10.44.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3211.2                               | 10.44.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3211.3                               | 10.44.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3211.4                               | Repealed by 927  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3211.5                               | 10.44.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3211.6                               | 10.44.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3211.7                               | 10.44.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3211.99                              | 10.44.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3212                                 | 10.48.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3212.1                               | 10.48.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3212.2                               | 10.48.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3212.3                               | 10.48.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3212.4                               | 10.48.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3212.5                               | 10.48.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3213                                 | 10.52.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3213.1                               | 10.52.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3213.2                               | 10.52.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3213.4                               | 10.52.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.52.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3213.5                               | 10.52.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3213.6                               | 10.52.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3213.7                               | 10.52.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3213.8                               | 10.52.090        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3213.10                              | 10.52.100        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3213.11                              | 10.52.110        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3213.99                              | 10.52.120        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3214                                 | Repealed by 972  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3215                                 | 10.56.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3215.1                               | 10.56.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3216(a)                              | 10.60.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3216(b)                              | 10.60.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3216(c)                              | 10.60.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3216(d)                              | 10.60.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3217                                 | 10.64.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3217.1                               | 10.64.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3217.2                               | 10.64.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3217.3                               | 10.64.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3218                                 | 10.68.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3218.1                               | 10.68.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3218.2                               | 10.68.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3218.3                               | 10.68.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3218.4                               | 10.68.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3218.5                               | 10.68.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3218.6                               | 10.68.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3218.7                               | 10.68.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3218.8                               | 10.68.090        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3218.9                               | 10.68.100        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3218.10                              | 10.68.110        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3218.12                              | 10.68.120        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3220.10                              | 10.72.100        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3220.11                              | Repealed by 974  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3220.12                              | Repealed by 974  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3220.13                              | Repealed by 974  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3220.14                              | 10.76.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 3220.15                              | 10.84.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4000                                 | 6.08.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4000.1                               | 6.08.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4000.2                               | 6.08.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4000.3                               | 6.08.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4000.4                               | 6.08.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4000.5                               | 6.08.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4001                                 | 6.20.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4001.1                               | 6.20.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4002.1                               | 6.20.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4002.2                               | 6.20.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4003                                 | 6.04.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4003.1                               | 6.04.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4003.2                               | 6.04.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4003.3                               | 6.04.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4003.4                               | 6.04.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4004.0                               | 6.24.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4004.1                               | 6.24.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4005                                 | 6.12.140         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4110                                 | 6.04.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4111.0                               | 6.20.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4111.1                               | 6.12.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4111.2                               | 6.12.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4111.3                               | 6.12.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4111.4                               | 6.12.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4112.0                               | 6.12.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4112.1                               | 6.12.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4112.2                               | 6.12.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4112.3                               | 6.12.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4112.4                               | 6.12.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4112.5                               | 6.12.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4113.0                               | 6.12.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4113.1                               | 6.12.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4114.0                               | 6.20.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4115.0                               | 6.16.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4115.1                               | 6.16.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4115.2                               | 6.16.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4115.3                               | 6.16.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4115.4                               | 6.16.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4115.5                               | 6.16.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4115.6                               | 6.16.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4115.7                               | 6.16.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4115.8                               | 6.16.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4116.0                               | 6.16.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4116.1                               | 6.16.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4117.0                               | 6.16.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4118.0                               | 6.16.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4119.0                               | 6.12.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4120                                 | 6.28.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4120.1                               | 6.28.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4120.2                               | 6.28.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4120.3                               | 6.28.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4120.4                               | 6.28.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4120.5                               | 6.28.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4120.6                               | 6.28.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4120.7                               | 6.28.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4220.10                              | 10.36.235        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4220.11                              | Repealed by 1594 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4220—4220.9                          | Repealed         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4221                                 | Repealed by 1346 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4221.1                               | Repealed by 970  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4222.1                               | Repealed by 970  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4223—4223.2                          | Repealed by 613  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4224                                 | Repealed by 814  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4224.1                               | Repealed by 814  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4225                                 | Repealed by 1032 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4225.1                               | Repealed by 1032 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4225.2                               | Repealed by 1032 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4226                                 | 12.20.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4226.1                               | 12.20.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 12.22.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4226.2                               | 12.20.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4226.3                               | 12.20.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4226.4                               | 12.20.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4226.5                               | 12.20.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4226.6                               | 12.20.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4226.7                               | 12.20.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4226.8                               | 12.20.090        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4226.9                               | 12.20.100        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4226.10                              | 12.20.110        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4226.11                              | Repealed by 1018 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4226.12                              | 12.20.045        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4227                                 | 9.20.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4260                                 | Repealed by 977  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4260.1                               | Repealed by 977  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4260.2                               | Repealed by 977  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4260.3                               | Repealed by 977  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4260.4                               | Repealed by 977  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4270                                 | Repealed by 1543 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4280.1                               | 3.32.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4280.2                               | 3.32.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4280.3                               | 3.32.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4281                                 | 12.20.120        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4285                                 | 9.16.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4285.1                               | 9.16.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4285.2                               | 9.16.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4286                                 | 12.40.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4287                                 | 12.40.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4288                                 | 5.36.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4289                                 | 9.20.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4290                                 | Repealed by 1446 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4300.1—4300.16                       | Repealed by 1392 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400                                 | 8.24.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.1                               | 8.24.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.2                               | 8.24.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.3                               | 8.24.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.4                               | 8.24.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.5                               | 8.24.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.6                               | 8.24.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.7                               | 8.24.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.8                               | 8.24.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.9                               | 8.24.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.10                              | 8.24.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.11                              | 8.24.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.12                              | 8.24.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.13                              | 8.24.140         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.14                              | 8.24.150         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.15                              | 8.24.160         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4400.16                              | 8.24.170         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4500                                 | 5.32.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4501                                 | 5.32.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4502                                 | 5.32.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4503                                 | 5.32.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4504                                 | 5.32.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4505                                 | 5.32.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4506)                                | 5.32.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4507                                 | 5.32.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4508                                 | 5.32.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4509                                 | 5.32.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4510                                 | 5.32.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4511                                 | 5.32.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4512                                 | 5.32.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4513                                 | 5.32.140         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4514                                 | 5.32.150         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4515                                 | 5.32.160         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4516                                 | 5.32.170         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4517                                 | 5.32.180         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4518                                 | 5.32.190         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4519                                 | 5.32.200         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4520                                 | 5.32.210         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4521                                 | 5.32.230         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4522                                 | Repealed by 1090 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4550                                 | 9.20.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4600                                 | 9.04.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4601                                 | 9.04.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4700                                 | 9.08.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4701                                 | 9.08.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4702                                 | 9.08.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4703                                 | 9.08.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4800—4802                            | Ch. 5.44         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4800—4816                            | Repealed by 1281 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4803*                                | Repealed by 1091 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4804—4809                            | Ch. 5.44         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4810*                                | Repealed by 1091 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4811—4813                            | Ch. 5.44         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4814                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4815*                                | Repealed by 1007 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4900                                 | 5.56.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4901                                 | 5.56.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4902                                 | 5.56.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4903                                 | 5.56.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4904                                 | 5.56.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4905                                 | 5.56.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4906                                 | 5.56.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4907                                 | 5.56.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4908                                 | 5.56.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4909                                 | 5.56.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4910                                 | 5.56.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4911                                 | 5.56.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4912                                 | 5.56.140         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4913                                 | 5.56.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4914                                 | 5.56.160         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4915                                 | 5.56.170         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4916                                 | 5.56.180         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4917                                 | 5.56.190         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4918                                 | 5.56.200         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4919                                 | 5.56.210         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4920                                 | 5.56.220         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4921                                 | 5.56.230         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4922                                 | 5.56.240         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4923                                 | 5.56.250         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4924                                 | 5.56.150         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4925                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4950                                 | 5.52.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4951                                 | 5.52.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4952                                 | 5.52.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4953                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4954                                 | 5.52.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4955                                 | 5.52.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4956                                 | 5.52.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4957                                 | 5.52.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4958                                 | 5.52.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4959                                 | 5.52.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 4960                                 | 5.52.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5100.0—5100.30                       | Repealed by 968  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200                                 | 8.04.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.1                               | 8.04.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.2                               | 8.04.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.3                               | 8.04.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.4                               | 8.04.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.5                               | 8.04.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.6                               | 8.04.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.6A                              | 8.04.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.7                               | 8.04.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.8                               | 8.04.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.9                               | 8.04.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.10                              | 8.04.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.11                              | 8.04.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.12                              | 8.04.140         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.13                              | 8.04.220         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.14                              | 8.04.150         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.15                              | 8.04.160         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.16                              | 8.04.170         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.17                              | 8.04.180         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.18                              | 8.04.190         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.19                              | 8.04.200         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.20                              | 8.04.210         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5200.21                              | 8.04.230         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5220                                 | 8.08.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5220.1                               | 8.08.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5220.2                               | 8.08.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5220.3                               | 8.08.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5220.4                               | 8.08.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5220.5                               | 8.08.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5220.6                               | 8.08.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5220.7                               | 8.08.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5220.8                               | 8.08.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5220.9                               | 8.08.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5220.10                              | 8.12.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5220.11                              | 8.12.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5220.12                              | 8.12.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5221.1                               | 8.12.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5221.2                               | 8.12.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5221.3                               | 8.12.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5221.4                               | 8.12.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5221.5                               | 8.12.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5221.6                               | 8.12.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5221.7                               | 8.12.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 5400—5405                            | Repealed by 1545 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6100.49.1                            | Repealed by 964  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6100.49.2                            | Repealed by 964  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6101(a)                              | Repealed by 1516 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6101(b)                              | Repealed by 1516 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6101(c)                              | Repealed by 1516 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6101(d)                              | Repealed by 1516 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6101(e)                              | Repealed by 1516 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6101(f)                              | Repealed by 1516 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6101(g)                              | Repealed by 1516 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6101(h)                              | Repealed by 1516 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6101(i)                              | Repealed by 1516 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6101(j)                              | Repealed by 1516 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6101(k)                              | Repealed by 1516 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6110                                 | 5.08.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6110.4                               | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6110.5                               | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6110.6                               | 5.08.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6110.7                               | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6110.8                               | 5.08.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6110.9                               | 5.08.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6110.10                              | 5.08.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6110.11                              | 5.08.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6110.12                              | 5.08.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6110.13                              | 5.08.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6110.14                              | 5.08.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6110.15                              | 5.08.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6210                                 | Repealed by 1202 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6210.1                               | Repealed by 1202 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6210.3                               | Repealed by 1202 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6210.4                               | Repealed by 1202 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6210.6                               | Repealed by 1202 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6210.7                               | Repealed by 1202 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6220                                 | Repealed by 1594 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6220.1                               | Repealed by 1594 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6220.2                               | Repealed by 1594 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6220.3                               | Repealed by 1594 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6220.4                               | Repealed by 1202 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6220.5                               | Repealed by 1594 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240                                 | 5.20.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.1                               | Repealed by 1524 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.2                               | 5.20.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.3                               | 5.20.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.4                               | Repealed by 1524 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.5                               | 5.20.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.6                               | 5.20.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.7                               | Repealed by 1524 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.8                               | 5.20.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.9                               | 5.20.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.10                              | Repealed by 1524 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.11                              | 5.20.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.12                              | 5.20.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.13                              | 5.20.140         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.14                              | 5.20.150         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.15(a)                           | 5.20.160         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.15(b)                           | Repealed by 1524 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.16                              | Repealed by 1524 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.17                              | 5.20.190         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.18                              | 5.20.200         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.19                              | Repealed by 1524 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.22                              | Repealed by 1524 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.23                              | 5.20.240         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.24                              | 5.20.260         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.25                              | 5.20.270         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.26                              | 5.20.310         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.27                              | 5.20.300         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.28                              | 5.20.280         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6240.29                              | 5.20.290         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250                                 | 5.24.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250.1                               | 5.24.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250.2                               | 5.24.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250.3                               | 5.24.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250.4                               | 5.24.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250.5                               | 5.24.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250.6                               | 5.24.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250.7                               | 5.24.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250.8                               | 5.24.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250.9                               | 5.24.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250.10                              | 5.24.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250.11                              | 5.24.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250.12                              | 5.24.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6250.13                              | 5.24.140         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6260                                 | Repealed by 969  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6270.8                               | 8.20.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6270.9                               | 8.20.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6270.10                              | 8.20.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6270—6270.7.A                        | Repealed         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6280                                 | Repealed         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.1                               | 3.12.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.2                               | 3.12.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.3                               | 3.12.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.4                               | 3.12.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.5                               | 3.12.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.6                               | 3.12.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.7                               | 3.12.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.8                               | 3.12.080         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.9                               | 3.12.090         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.10                              | 3.12.100         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.11                              | 3.12.110         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.12                              | Repealed by 961  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.13                              | 3.12.120         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.14                              | Repealed by 961  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.15                              | 3.12.130         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.16                              | 3.12.140         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.17                              | 3.12.150         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6400.18                              | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6500                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6501                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6502                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6503                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6504                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6505                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6506                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6507                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6508                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6509                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6510                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6511                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6512                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6513                                 | Repealed by 1107 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6600                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6601                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6602                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6603                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6604                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6605                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6606                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6607                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6608                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6609                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6609.1                               | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6609.2                               | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6609.3                               | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6610                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6611                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6612                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6613                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6614                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6615                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6616                                 | Repealed by 962  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6616.1                               | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6617                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6618                                 | Repealed by 1586 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6619                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6700                                 | Repealed by 1162 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6700.1—6700.10                       | Repealed by 1162 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6700.11                              | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6800                                 | 5.48.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6801                                 | 5.48.020         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6802                                 | 5.48.030         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6803                                 | 5.48.040         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6804                                 | 5.48.050         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6805                                 | 5.48.060         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 6806                                 | 5.48.070         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7210.0                               | 10.80.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7210.1                               | 10.80.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7210.2                               | 10.80.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7210.3                               | 10.80.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7210.4                               | 10.80.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7210.6                               | 10.80.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | 10.80.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7210.7                               | 10.80.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.1                               | 12.04.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.2                               | 12.04.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.3                               | 12.04.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.4                               | Repealed by 1131 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.5                               | 12.04.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.6                               | 12.04.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.7                               | 12.04.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.8                               | 12.04.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.9                               | 12.04.090        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.10                              | 12.04.100        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.11                              | 12.04.110        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.12                              | 12.04.120        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.13                              | 12.04.130        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7310.14                              | 12.04.140        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7320                                 | Repealed by 1543 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7320.1                               | Repealed by 1543 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7330.1                               | 12.16.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7330.2                               | 12.16.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7330.3                               | 12.16.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7330.5—7330.7                        | Repealed by 846  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7330.8                               | 12.16.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7330.9                               | 12.16.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7330, 7300.4                         | 12.16.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7350                                 | 12.12.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7350.1                               | 12.12.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7350.2                               | 12.12.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7350.3                               | 12.12.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410                                 | 13.04.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.1                               | 13.04.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.2 and 7410.4                    | 13.04.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.3                               | 13.04.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.5                               | Repealed by 1428 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.6, 7410.15, 7410.23 and 7410.24 | Ch. 13.04        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.7                               | 13.04.100        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.8                               | Repealed by 1428 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.9—7410.10                       | Repealed by 1133 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.11                              | 13.04.120        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.12 and 7410.16                  | 13.04.130        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.13                              | 13.04.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.14                              | 13.04.090        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.17                              | 13.04.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.18                              | 13.04.150        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.19                              | 13.04.140        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.20                              | 13.04.160        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.21                              | 13.04.170        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.22                              | 13.04.190        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.25                              | 13.04.200        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.26                              | 13.04.210        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.27                              | 13.04.220        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.28                              | 13.04.230        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7410.29                              | 13.04.250        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7500.3—7500.7                        | Repealed by 1133 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7500.8                               | Repealed by 1598 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7500.9                               | Repealed by 1598 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7500—7500.2                          | Repealed by 1598 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7501                                 | Repealed by 1598 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7501.1                               | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7501.2—7501.16                       | Repealed by 1598 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7502                                 | Repealed by 1598 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7503                                 | Repealed by 1598 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7504                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7504.1—7504.4                        | Repealed by 1598 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7505                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7505.1—7506.7                        | Repealed by 1598 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7507                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7508                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7508.1—7508.5                        | Repealed by 1598 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7600                                 | 3.36.010         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 7600.6                               | Repealed by 899  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8100—8162                            | Repealed by 1033 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8170                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8170.1                               | Repealed by 1033 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8170.2                               | Repealed by 1033 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8170.3                               | Repealed by 1033 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8170.4                               | Repealed by 1033 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8170.5                               | Repealed by 1033 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8170.6                               | Repealed by 1033 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8180                                 | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8181                                 | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8182                                 | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8190                                 | Repealed by 1353 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8210                                 | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400                                 | 13.12.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.1                               | 13.12.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.2                               | 13.12.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.2.1                             | 13.12.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.3                               | 13.12.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.4                               | 13.12.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.5                               | 13.12.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.6                               | 13.12.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.6.1                             | 13.12.090        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.6.2                             | 13.12.100        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.6.3                             | 13.12.110        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.6.4                             | 13.12.120        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.7                               | 13.12.130        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.8                               | 13.12.140        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.9                               | 13.12.150        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.10                              | 13.12.160        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.11                              | 13.12.170        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8400.12                              | 13.12.180        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8700.1 — 8700.11                     | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.1                               | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.2                               | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.3                               | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.4                               | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.5                               | Repealed by 798  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.6                               | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.7                               | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.8                               | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.9                               | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.10                              | Repealed by 798  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.11                              | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.12                              | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.13                              | Repealed by 798  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.14                              | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.15                              | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8710.16                              | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8720                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8720.1                               | 15.32.250        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8720.2                               | 15.32.260        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8720.3                               | 15.32.270        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8720.4                               | 15.32.280        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8720.5                               | 15.32.290        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8720.6                               | 15.32.300        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8800                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 8901 — 8907                          | Repealed by 1393 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9100 — 9100.13                       | Repealed by 934  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9101 — 9117                          | Repealed by 1490 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9201.1                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9201.2                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9201.3                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9201.4                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9201.5                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9201.6—9204.12                       | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.1(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.1(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.1(C)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.1(D)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.1(E)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.1(F)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.1(G)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.1(H)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.2(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.2(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.3(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.3(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.4(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.4(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.5(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.5(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.5(C)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.5(D)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.5(E)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.5(F)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.5(G)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.5(H)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.5(I)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.5(J)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.5(K)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.6(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.6(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.6(C)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.6(D)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.6(E)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.6(F)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.6(G)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.6(H)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.7(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.7(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9202.8                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.1(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.1(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.2(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.2(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.3(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.3(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.4(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.4(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.5(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.5(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.6(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.6(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.7(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.7(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.7(C)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.8(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.8(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.9(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.9(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.10(A)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.10(B)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.11(A)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.11(B)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.12(A)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.12(B)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.13(A)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.13(B)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.14(A)                           | Repealed by 1438 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.14(B)                           | Repealed by 1438 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.14(C)                           | Repealed by 1438 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.15(A)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.15(B)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.15(C)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.16(A)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.16(B)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.16(C)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.16(D)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.17(A)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.17(B)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.17(C)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9203.17(D)                           | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.1                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.2(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.2(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.2(C)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.2(D)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.2(E)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.2(F)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.2(G)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.3(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.3(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.3(C)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.3(D)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.3(E)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.4(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.4(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.4(C)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.4(D)                            | Repealed by 1438 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.4(E)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.4(F)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.4(G)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.4(H)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.4(I)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.5                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.6(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.6(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.7(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.7(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.7(C)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.7(D)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.7(E)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.7(F)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.8(A)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.8(B)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.8(C)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.8(D)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.8(E)                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.9                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.10                              | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9204.11                              | Repealed by 1438 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.1                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.2                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.3                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4                               | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.1                             | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.2                             | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.3                             | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.4                             | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.5                             | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.6                             | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.7                             | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.8                             | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.9                             | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.10                            | Repealed by 921  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.11                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.12                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.13                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.14                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.15                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.16                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.4.17                            | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.5                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.6                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.7                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.8                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9300.9                               | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9310                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9310.1                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9310.2                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9310.3                               | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9400—9424                            | Repealed by 1213 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9500.1—9500.3                        | Ch. 2.48         |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9600                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9601                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9602                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9603                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9604                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9605                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9606                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9701                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9702                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9703                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9705                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9706                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9707                                 | Not codified     |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9800                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9800.1—9800.10                       | Repealed by 984  |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9801                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9802                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9803                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9804                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9805                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9806                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9807                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9808                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9809                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9810                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9811                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9812                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9813                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9814                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9815                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9816                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9850—9855                            | Repealed by 1490 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9900                                 | Repealed by 1606 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| "                                    | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9901                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9901—9908                            | Repealed by 1359 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9902                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9903                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9904                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9905                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9906                                 | Repealed by 1650 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9910—9950                            | Repealed by 1606 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9950                                 | 12.32.010        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9951                                 | 12.32.030        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9952                                 | 12.32.040        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9953                                 | 12.32.050        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9954                                 | 12.32.060        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9955                                 | 12.32.070        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9956                                 | 12.32.080        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9957                                 | 12.32.090        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9958                                 | Repealed by 1515 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9959                                 | 12.32.110        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9960                                 | Repealed by 1515 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9961                                 | Repealed by 1515 |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9962                                 | 12.32.140        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+
| 9963                                 | 12.32.020        |
+--------------------------------------+------------------+

Ordinance List and Disposition Table
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 613  | (Repealed)                                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 722  | (Repealed)                                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 798  | (Repealed)                                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 814  | (Repealed)                                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 846  | (Repealed)                                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 899  | (Repealed)                                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 915  | Adds prior code § 4290, alcoholic beverage                 |
|      | sales from service stations (Repealed                      |
|      | by 1446)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 917  | Amends prior code § 2410.1, planning                       |
|      | commission (2.12)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 918  | Adds prior code § 7501(K), sewer discharge                 |
|      | (Repealed by 1598)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 919  | Adds prior code Ch. 9.5 to Art. IX, street                 |
|      | name and address regulations (12.32)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 920  | Amends prior code §§ 8800.11, 8820.5                       |
|      | and Ch. 2 of Art. VII, transportation                      |
|      | of overweight and oversize structures                      |
|      | and vehicles (10.80)                                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 921  | Amends prior code § 9300.4.9 and the                       |
|      | official setback line for Orcutt Road                      |
|      | between Broad Street and Johnson Avenue;                   |
|      | and deletes prior code § 9300.4.10 (Repealed               |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 923  | Adds prior code Ch. 8 to Art. IV, mobile                   |
|      | home park rent stabilization system                        |
|      | (5.44)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 924  | Amends prior code § 3212.3, truck routes                   |
|      | (10.48)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 925  | Adds prior code Ch. 8 to Art. IV; adds                     |
|      | a new subsection (E) to and renumbers                      |
|      | subsection (E) of prior code § 9203.9                      |
|      | to be (F); amends prior code § 9201.12,                    |
|      | adult entertainment establishments                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 926  | Amends prior code § 8100, building codes                   |
|      | (Repealed by 1033)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 927  | Amends prior code §§ 3211.1 — 3211.3;                      |
|      | deletes prior code § 3211.4, loading                       |
|      | zones (10.44)                                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 928  | Adds prior code § 4522; amends prior                       |
|      | code §§ 4506(e), 4511(b), 4516 and 4520,                   |
|      | bingo (5.32)                                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 929  | Adds prior code Ch. 8 to Art. VI, street                   |
|      | and sidewalk sales (5.48)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 930  | Repeals Part 4 of prior code Ch. 6 of                      |
|      | Art. II (Repealer)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 934  | Subdivisions; repeals prior code Ch.                       |
|      | 1 of Art. IX (Repealed by 1490)                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 935  | Amends prior code §§ 7501 (7501.1 — 7501.15),              |
|      | 7505 and 7506, sewer discharge quality                     |
|      | (Repealed by 1598)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 936  | Adds prior code § 3213.11, motorcycle                      |
|      | parking spaces (10.52)                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 938  | Adds prior code Ch. 9 to Art. VIII, solar                  |
|      | water heating (Repealed by 1353)                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 939  | Adds Part 8 to prior code Ch. 4 of Art.                    |
|      | II, human relations commission (2.56)                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 940  | Adds prior code Ch. 9 to Art IX; repeals                   |
|      | Ord. 884, zoning (Repealed by 1359)                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 941  | Zoning regulations revisions (Repealed                     |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 942  | Amends prior code § 7501 (7501.1 — 7501.16),               |
|      | sewer discharge quality (Repealed by                       |
|      | 1598)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 943  | Amends prior code §§ 3120.1 and 3120.4,                    |
|      | fire code (Repealed by 1170)                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 944  | Amends prior code § 3216, intersection                     |
|      | visibility obstructions (10.60)                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 945  | Amends prior code § 4112.2, dog impoundment                |
|      | redemption fees (6.12)                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 946  | Adds prior code § 6110.15 and Ch. 9.5                      |
|      | to Art. IV; amends prior code §§ 9202.8                    |
|      | and 9204.11, electronic game amusement                     |
|      | centers (5.08, 5.52)                                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 951  | Prohibits water and sewer service extension                |
|      | for private use outside city limits                        |
|      | (13.16)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 954  | Adds prior code Ch. 9.5 to Art. II; repeals                |
|      | Part 3 of prior code Ch. 6 of Art. II,                     |
|      | purchasing and payment procedures (3.24)                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 955  | Amends prior code §§ 5220.5 and 5220.6,                    |
|      | penalty fees (8.08)                                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 956  | Amends prior code §§ 8800.8(A), 8800.9                     |
|      | (H), 8800.14, 8810.1(C)(2) and 8810.3(E),                  |
|      | house moving and demolition                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 957  | Amends prior code §§ 1250 and 1251, notice                 |
|      | to appear (1.16)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 958  | Amends prior code §§ 2420 and 2420.1;                      |
|      | repeals prior code § 2420.2 (2.16)                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 959  | Amends prior code § 2100.1, council meetings               |
|      | (2.04)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 960  | Decodifies prior code § 2440, library                      |
|      | consolidation (Special)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 961  | Repeals prior code §§ 6400.12 and 6400.14                  |
|      | (Repealer)                                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 962  | Repeals prior code § 6616 (Repealer)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 963  | Amends prior code § 4280.1, unclaimed                      |
|      | property (3.32)                                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 964  | Amends prior code § 6100.49; repeals                       |
|      | prior code §§ 6100.49.1 and 6100.49.2,                     |
|      | private patrol services                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 965  | Amends prior code § 6250, passenger stages                 |
|      | (5.24)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 966  | Amends prior code § 4288, posting gasoline                 |
|      | prices (5.36)                                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 967  | Adds prior code § 4816, adult theaters                     |
|      | and bookstores                                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 968  | Repeals prior code Ch. 1 of Art. V (Repealer)              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 969  | Repeals prior code § 6260 (Repealer)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 970  | Repeals prior code § 4221.1 (Repealer)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 971  | Amends prior code § 4285.1, dangerous                      |
|      | and deadly weapons (9.16)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 972  | Repeals prior code § 3214 (Repealer)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 973  | Amends prior code § 3218.9, inoperative                    |
|      | vehicles (10.68)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 974  | Amends prior code § 3220.10; repeals                       |
|      | prior code §§ 3220.11 — 3220.13, bicycle                   |
|      | riding (10.72)                                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 975  | Repeals prior code § 3207.1 (Repealer)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 976  | Adds subsection (E)(5) to prior code                       |
|      | § 4226.3, amplified sound permit (12.20)                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 977  | Repeals prior code §§ 4260 — 4260.4 (Repealer)             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 978  | Amends prior code § 8190.2, tents (Repealed                |
|      | by 1353)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 979  | Amends prior code § 5220.9, rat harbors                    |
|      | and rubbish (8.08)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 980  | Amends prior code § 3120.5, fire code                      |
|      | (Repealed by 1170)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 981  | Approves amendment to contract between                     |
|      | board of administration, public employees’                 |
|      | retirement system and the city council                     |
|      | (Special)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 982  | Amends prior code § 7501.12, premises                      |
|      | inspection (Repealed by 1598)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 983  | Repeals and replaces prior code §§ 8400.2.1(9)             |
|      | and 8400.6; amends prior code § 8400.11(A),                |
|      | underground utilities (13.12)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 984  | Adds prior code Ch. 8A to Art. IX; repeals                 |
|      | prior code §§ 9800.1 — 9800.10, condominium                |
|      | development and conversion (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1490)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 985  | Amends prior code §§ 2450.1 — 2450.3,                      |
|      | mass transportation committee (2.20)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 986  | (Not passed)                                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 987  | Adds prior code Ch. 5A; repeals and replaces               |
|      | prior code § 6100.45, cardrooms (9.20)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 988  | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 989  | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 990  | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 991  | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 992  | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 993  | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 994  | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 995  | (Not passed)                                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 996  | Establishes a moratorium on licensing                      |
|      | of massage establishments, technicians                     |
|      | and technician trainees (Special)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 997  | Approves preliminary development plan                      |
|      | for city mall (Special)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 998  | Amends prior code § 6400.13, sales and                     |
|      | use tax (3.12)                                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 999  | Adds § 80.112 to the Uniform Fire Code                     |
|      | (Repealed by 1170)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1000 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1001 | Adds prior code §§ 4226.3(b) and 4226.12,                  |
|      | parks (12.20)                                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1002 | Adds Ch. 9 to Art. IV of the prior code,                   |
|      | massage establishments and technicians;                    |
|      | amends prior code § 6100.3.1, business                     |
|      | licenses (5.56)                                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1003 | (Not passed)                                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1004 | Adds prior code §§ 9900 — 9950, zoning                     |
|      | (Repealed by 1606)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1005 | Code adoption (Not codified)                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1006 | Amends prior code §§ 9202.1(C) and (D),                    |
|      | 9202.3(B)(4), 9202.4(B), 9202.5(A),                        |
|      | (B), (D) and (F)(4)(h), 9202.8, 9203.9,                    |
|      | 9203.10, 9203.11, 9204.3(E) and 9204.11,                   |
|      | zoning (Repealed by 1650)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1007 | Repeals prior code § 4815 (Repealer)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1008 | Adds § 17.04.371; amends § 17.22.010;                      |
|      | zoning (Repealed by 1650)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1009 | Amends prior code § 9202.5(B)(6), zoning                   |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1010 | Amends § 2.48.170, architectural review                    |
|      | commission (2.48)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1011 | Amends § 10.56.010, special speed zones                    |
|      | (10.56)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1012 | Temporary suspension of residential growth                 |
|      | management (Special)                                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1013 | Amends § 17.88.030(A), zoning (Repealed                    |
|      | by 1359)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1014 | Amends §§ 12.12.030 and 12.12.040, sidewalk                |
|      | construction (12.12)                                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1015 | Preliminary development plan approval                      |
|      | (Special)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1016 | Amends prior code § 9203.7, zoning (Repealed               |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1017 | Repeals §§ 5.28.010 through 5.28.140                       |
|      | (Repealer)                                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1018 | Repeals § 12.28.010 (Repealer)                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1019 | Amends development plan (Special)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1020 | Amends § 5.44.060, mobile home space                       |
|      | rent stabilization (5.44)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1021 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1022 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1023 | Amends § 17.42.020, zoning (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1024 | Franchise extension (Special)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1025 | Amends § 5.44.040, mobile home rent review                 |
|      | board (Repealed by 1091)                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1026 | (Not passed)                                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1027 | Approves preliminary development plan                      |
|      | (Special)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1028 | Establishes boundary of residential and                    |
|      | conservation/open space zones (Special)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1029 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1030 | Amends § 5.44.040, mobile home rent review                 |
|      | board (Repealed by 1091)                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1031 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1032 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 9.12, noise                       |
|      | control (9.12)                                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1033 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.04, uniform                    |
|      | codes adopted (Repealed by 1169)                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1034 | Amends § 17.21.030, zoning (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1606)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1035 | Adds Ch. 17.90, affordable housing incentives              |
|      | (Repealed by 1591)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1036 | Amends § 17.88.040, residential growth                     |
|      | management regulations (Repealed by                        |
|      | 1650)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1037 | Amends § 10.04.070, vehicles and traffic                   |
|      | (10.04)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1038 | Grants franchise to Union Oil Company                      |
|      | (Special)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1039 | Adds § 12.40.050, datum plane; repeals                     |
|      | Ch. 1.24 (12.40)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1040 | Amends §§ 8.04.010, 8.04.020 and 8.04.170,                 |
|      | solid waste disposal (8.04)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1041 | Amends Ord. 765, Foothill annexation                       |
|      | (Special)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1042 | Adds § 12.20.115; amends § 12.20.110,                      |
|      | parks (12.20)                                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1043 | Consumption of alcohol urgency ordinance                   |
|      | (Not codified)                                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1044 | Amends § 1.20.020, appeals procedure;                      |
|      | repeals § 2.48.180 (1.20)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1045 | Amends § 15.20.030, solar water heating                    |
|      | systems (Repealed by 1353)                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1046 | Adds Ch. 17.87, major office development                   |
|      | permit (Repealed by 1547)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1047 | Adds Ch. 3.40, financing of industrial                     |
|      | and commercial development (3.40)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1048 | Amends Ch. 8.16, smoking (Repealed by                      |
|      | 1545)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1049 | Amends § 3.16.110, utility users tax                       |
|      | (Repealed by 1586)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1050 | Amends § 17.42.020, zoning (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1051 | Amends §§ 8.12.020 through 8.12.060 and                    |
|      | 8.12.080, abatement of dangerous obstructions              |
|      | in streambeds (8.12)                                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1052 | Amends § 17.82.150, zoning (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1490)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1053 | Adds Ch. 16.34, vesting tentative maps                     |
|      | (Not passed)                                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1054 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1055 | Adds Ch. 16.34, vesting tentative maps                     |
|      | (Repealed by 1490)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1056 | Adds § 13.12.040(J) and (K), underground                   |
|      | utilities (13.12)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1057 | Amends § 17.74.130, zoning (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1058 | Amends § 17.22.010, zoning (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1059 | Capital improvement board (3.42)                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1060 | Consolidation of library operation and                     |
|      | financing functions; repeals Ord. 570                      |
|      | (Special)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1061 | Adds §§ 17.78.040(29), 17.78.050(H) and                    |
|      | 17.78.190(C); amends § 17.78.030; renumbers                |
|      | existing Ch. 17.78, including amendments,                  |
|      | to Ch. 15.44, excavation and grading                       |
|      | (Repealed by 1213)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1062 | Amends § 10.36.140, parking (10.36)                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1063 | Amends contract between the board of                       |
|      | administration public employees’ retirement                |
|      | system and the city (Special)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1064 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1065 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1066 | Amends § 12.20.115, parks (12.20)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1067 | Amends Ch. 2.40, elections (2.40)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1068 | Amends Ch. 17.88, residential growth                       |
|      | management (Repealed by 1359)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1069 | Lease agreement (Special)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1070 | Amends § 9.04.010, alcoholic beverages                     |
|      | (9.04)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1071 | Adds Ch. 17.92, onshore support facilities                 |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1072 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1073 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1074 | Amends § 17.42.020, zoning (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1075 | Adds § 15.08.337, fire prevention code                     |
|      | (Repealed by 1170)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1076 | Amends § 10.40.060, parking (10.40)                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1077 | Amends §§ 5.44.030(E) and 5.44.070(B)                      |
|      | and (C), mobile home rent stabilization                    |
|      | (5.44)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1078 | Amends Ch. 17.87, zoning (Repealed by                      |
|      | 1547)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1079 | Amends § 5.44.060(B)(2), mobile home                       |
|      | park rent stabilization (5.44)                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1080 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1081 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1082 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1083 | Adds § 9.20.050, public urination (9.20)                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1084 | Grants solid waste utility franchise                       |
|      | (Special)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1085 | Amends §§ 17.04.430, 17.08.010, 17.08.030,                 |
|      | 17.12.020, 17.16.010, 17.16.020, 17.16.040,                |
|      | 17.16.060, 17.21.010, 17.21.030, 17.21.040,                |
|      | 17.22.010 and 17.48.020, zoning (Repealed                  |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1086 | Amends § 15.36.150(C) and (D), building                    |
|      | demolition and Ch. 17.54, zoning (Repealed                 |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1087 | Adds § 17.62.040(C); amends § 17.22.010,                   |
|      | zoning (Repealed by 1650)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1088 | Amends §§ 17.22.010 and 17.34.020(C),                      |
|      | zoning (Repealed by 1650)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1089 | Adds Ch. 13.07, water conservation (13.07)                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1090 | Amends §§ 5.32.120 and 5.32.210, bingo;                    |
|      | repeals § 5.32.220 (5.32)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1091 | Amends §§ 5.44.020(E), (F) and (G), 5.44.050,              |
|      | 5.44.070, 5.44.090 and 5.44.100, mobile                    |
|      | home park rent stabilization; repeals                      |
|      | §§ 5.44.020(D), 5.44.040 and 5.44.110                      |
|      | (5.44)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1092 | Amends contract between the board of                       |
|      | administration public employees’ retirement                |
|      | system and the city (Special)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1093 | Adds §§ 17.84.085, 17.84.105 and 17.84.130(F);             |
|      | amends § 17.84.030 by repealing subsections                |
|      | (F), (G), (L), (N), (O), (Q), (R) and                      |
|      | (S), redesignating existing subsections                    |
|      | (H), (I), (J), (K), (M), (P) and (U)                       |
|      | to be (F), (G), (I), (J), (O), (U) and                     |
|      | (DD), amending existing subsection (T)                     |
|      | and redesignating it to be (CC), and                       |
|      | adding new subsections (H), (K), (L),                      |
|      | (M), (N), (P), (Q), (R), (S), (T), (V),                    |
|      | (W), (X), (Y), (Z), (AA), (BB) and (EE);                   |
|      | amends §§ 17.84.050, 17.84.060(B), (C)                     |
|      | and (D), 17.84.070(A), 17.84.080, 17.84.110(A)             |
|      | and 17.84.140(B); amends (A) of, adds                      |
|      | (3) and (4) to (B) of and amends (D)                       |
|      | of § 17.84.150; amends (A) and (B) and                     |
|      | repeals and replaces (C) of § 17.84.160;                   |
|      | and amends (B) and (C) of § 17.84.170,                     |
|      | zoning (Repealed by 1650)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1094 | Urgency ordinance amending contract between                |
|      | the board of administration public employees’              |
|      | retirement system and the city (Special)                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1095 | Amends § 10.48.040, truck routes (10.48)                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1096 | Amends § 10.44.020(C), curb markings                       |
|      | (10.44)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1097 | Amends § 13.12.040(11), underground utilities              |
|      | (13.12)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1098 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1099 | Amends §§ 10.52.010 and 10.52.030, parking                 |
|      | meters (10.52)                                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1100 | Amends §§ 10.64.030 and 10.64.040, parking                 |
|      | revenues, fines and forfeitures (10.64)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1101 | Adds Ch. 4.30, parking in-lieu fees in                     |
|      | the C-C zone; amends § 17.42.020(E),                       |
|      | zoning (4.30)                                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1102 | Adds § 17.08.090; amends §§ 17.04.050,                     |
|      | 17.04.340, 17.08.010 (repeals and replaces                 |
|      | (I), repeals (J) and (K)), 17.08.040(B)(1),                |
|      | (C)(5), (D)(1), (D)(9), 17.12.020, 17.16.020(C)(2)         |
|      | (Table 3), (E)(2)(d), 17.16.040, 17.16.060                 |
|      | (amends Table 6, adds (H)), 17.18.010                      |
|      | and 17.22.010 (Table 9); repeals § 17.04.440,              |
|      | zoning (Repealed by 1650)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1103 | Amends § 17.04.371 and Table 9 in § 17.22.010,             |
|      | zoning (Repealed by 1650)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1104 | Rezone; approves preliminary development                   |
|      | plan PD 138 (Special)                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1105 | Amends Ch. 15.04, adoption of uniform                      |
|      | codes (Repealed by 1169)                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1106 | (Number not used)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1107 | Adds § 17.16.110, zoning (Repealed by                      |
|      | 1650)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1108 | Adds § 17.80.080 and amends §§ 17.80.040,                  |
|      | 17.80.050, 17.80.060 and 17.80.070,                        |
|      | zoning (Repealed by 1650)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1109 | Hazardous chemicals transport (8.28)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1110 | Amends Table 9 in § 17.22.010, zoning                      |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1111 | Amends § 16.36.140, subdivisions (Repealed                 |
|      | by 1490)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1112 | Amends § 2.20.020, mass transportation                     |
|      | committee (2.20)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1113 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1114 | Suspends portion of amendment to Table                     |
|      | 6 in § 17.16.060 enacted by Ord. 1102                      |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1115 | Amends § 13.04.090, water service charges                  |
|      | (Repealed by 1428)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1116 | Adds §§ 13.07.040 and 13.07.050 and repeals                |
|      | and replaces § 13.07.030, water conservation               |
|      | (13.07)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1117 | Replaces Ch. 5.44, mobile home park rent                   |
|      | stabilization (5.44)                                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1118 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1119 | Adds Ch. 17.89, zoning (Repealed by 1211)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1120 | Amends § 17.16.030, zoning (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1121 | Adds (C) to § 6.20.050, dogs (6.20)                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1122 | Adds §§ 17.04.224 and 17.08.110; adds                      |
|      | language to Table 6 in § 17.16.060 and                     |
|      | Table 9 in § 17.22.010, zoning (Repealed                   |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1123 | Amends § 10.48.030, restricted use of                      |
|      | certain streets (10.48)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1124 | Adds § 17.08.100; adds language to Table                   |
|      | 9 in § 17.22.010 and to § 17.58.040,                       |
|      | zoning (Repealed by 1650)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1125 | Adds language to § 15.40.080(B), sign                      |
|      | regulations (Repealed by 1324)                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1126 | Rezone; approves preliminary development                   |
|      | plan PD 1371 (Special)                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1127 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1128 | Adds § 17.08.120; amends Ch. 5.52, § 17.04.160             |
|      | and Table 9 in § 17.22.010, electronic                     |
|      | game amusement centers (5.52)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1129 | Amends §§ 17.50.010 and 17.62.040, zoning                  |
|      | (Repealed by 1438)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1130 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1131 | Adds §§ 12.04.031, 12.04.032, 12.04.033,                   |
|      | 12.04.131 and 12.04.132; amends §§ 12.04.010,              |
|      | 12.04.020, 12.04.030 and 12.04.050 —                       |
|      | 12.04.130; repeals § 12.04.040, encroachments              |
|      | and excavations (12.04)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1132 | Adds § 12.16.055; amends §§ 12.16.010,                     |
|      | 12.16.030, 12.16.040, 12.16.050 and                        |
|      | 12.16.060, curbs, gutters and sidewalk                     |
|      | area (12.16)                                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1133 | Adds § 16.44.091; amends § 16.44.090;                      |
|      | repeals and replaces §§ 13.04.100 and                      |
|      | 13.08.040; repeals §§ 13.04.110 and                        |
|      | 13.08.050 — 13.08.080, extension of                        |
|      | water and sewer mains and reimbursement                    |
|      | of developers for construction that                        |
|      | benefits others (Repealed by 1598)                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1134 | Adds Ch. 17.94, zoning (Repealed by 1650)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1135 | Rezone; approves preliminary development                   |
|      | plan PD 1418 (Special)                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1136 | Rezone; approves preliminary development                   |
|      | plan PD 1425 (Special)                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1137 | Amends § 2.16.010(D), park and recreation                  |
|      | commission (2.16)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1138 | Amends §§ 2.48.060 and 2.48.080, architectural             |
|      | review commission (2.48)                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1139 | Amends § 2.12.030, planning commission                     |
|      | (2.12)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1140 | Amends § 2.20.030, mass transportation                     |
|      | committee (2.20)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1141 | Rezone; approves preliminary development                   |
|      | plan PD 1434 (Special)                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1142 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1143 | Adds §§ 13.07.060 — 13.07.110, water                       |
|      | conservation (13.07)                                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1144 | Adds (I) to § 17.89.060, zoning (Repealed                  |
|      | by 1211)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1145 | Accepts state penal code provisions relating               |
|      | to peace officer standards and training                    |
|      | (2.60)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1146 | Adds § 5.44.040; amends § 5.44.060, mobile                 |
|      | home park rent stabilization (2.60,                        |
|      | 5.44)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1147 | Amends §§ 2.36.340 — 2.36.360, personnel                   |
|      | rules and regulations (2.36)                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1148 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1149 | Rezone; approves PD 1437A (Special)                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1150 | Amends Ch. 2.56, human relations commission                |
|      | (2.56)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1151 | Amends § 17.89.050, zoning (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1553)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1152 | Amends contract between the city council                   |
|      | and the board of administration public                     |
|      | employees’ retirement system (Special)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1153 | Amends Ch. 12.24, tree regulations (Repealed               |
|      | by 1392)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1154 | Adds § 17.04.222 and Ch. 17.93; amends                     |
|      | §§ 17.16.060 and 17.22.010, zoning (Repealed               |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1155 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1156 | Amends parking and driveway standards                      |
|      | (12.38)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1157 | Amends § 17.22.010, zoning (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1158 | Amends Arts. II — VI of Ch. 13.08, sewers                  |
|      | (Repealed by 1598)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1159 | Amends § 1.12.060, general penalty; amends                 |
|      | §§ 9.12.020(T) and (U), 9.12.040, 9.12.050(A)              |
|      | and 9.12.100(C), noise control (1.12,                      |
|      | 9.12)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1160 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1161 | Rezone; amends § 17.22.010, zoning (Repealed               |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1162 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.12, alarm                      |
|      | systems (15.12)                                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1163 | Adds Ch. 9.21, second response cost recovery               |
|      | (9.21)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1164 | Adds § 17.89.060(J),water allocation                       |
|      | regulations (Repealed by 1211)                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1165 | Amends § 10.64.040, parking revenues,                      |
|      | fines and forfeitures (10.64)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1166 | Amends § 1.12.040, general penalty (1.12)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1167 | Amends § 5.44.060(C), mobile home park                     |
|      | rent stabilization (5.44)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1168 | Amends §§ 13.07.060 — 13.07.110, water                     |
|      | conservation (13.07)                                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1169 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.04, uniform                    |
|      | codes adopted (Repealed by 1287)                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1170 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.08, fire                       |
|      | prevention code (Repealed by 1214)                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1171 | Amends § 5.04.230(A), extends the business                 |
|      | license tax to all residential rental                      |
|      | units                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1172 | Amends §§ 8.16.010 — 8.16.090, prohibits                   |
|      | smoking in certain public places (Repealed                 |
|      | by 1545)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1173 | Amends § 5.44.060(C), fair market rent                     |
|      | upon the change of ownership of a mobile                   |
|      | home (5.44)                                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1174 | Amends § 10.56.010, speed limits                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1175 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1176 | Adds § 8.04.020(G); amends §§ 8.04.060(A)                  |
|      | and 8.04.070, solid waste collection                       |
|      | and disposal (8.04)                                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1177 | Franchise (Special)                                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1178 | Adds § 3.24.075, institutes a recycled                     |
|      | product procurement policy (3.24)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1179 | Not passed due to successful referendum                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1180 | Amends §§ 15.40.130(B)(3), neighborhood                    |
|      | grocery markets, 17.16.060 (Table 6),                      |
|      | 17.22.010 (Table 9); adds §§ 17.30.030,                    |
|      | 17.30.040 (Repealed by 1650)                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1181 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1182 | Amends § 17.22.010 (Table 9), allows                       |
|      | child day care centers in C-S and M                        |
|      | zones (Repealed by 1650)                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1183 | Amends § 10.56.010, speed limits                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1184 | Amends § 3.04.030, transient occupancy                     |
|      | tax rate (3.04)                                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1185 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1186 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1187 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1188 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1189 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1190 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1191 | Amends §§ 2.40.010 — 2.40.160, election                    |
|      | campaign regulations (2.40)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1192 | Amends § 8.04.020(F), placement and pickup                 |
|      | of garbage containers (8.04)                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1193 | Amends § 10.64.030, parking fines (10.64)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1194 | Amends § 10.52.010, parking meter rates                    |
|      | (10.52)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1195 | Amends §§ 13.08.110 — 13.08.420, sewers                    |
|      | (Repealed by 1598)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1196 | Amends §§ 10.80.060, 10.80.070, transportation             |
|      | permit liability and insurance (10.80)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1197 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1198 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1199 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1200 | Adds § 4.20.140, water and wastewater                      |
|      | connection fees for new development                        |
|      | (4.20)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1201 | Planned development (Special)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1202 | Amends § 1.12.060(B), designation of                       |
|      | infractions; adds Ch. 3.01, business                       |
|      | tax certification; repeals Ch. 5.04,                       |
|      | business licenses generally; repeals                       |
|      | and replaces §§ 5.08.030, 5.08.040;                        |
|      | repeals § 5.08.050, mechanical amusement                   |
|      | devices, Ch. 5.12, contractors, §§ 5.16.030,               |
|      | 5.16.050, 5.16.070; adds §§ 5.16.080,                      |
|      | solicitors and peddlers, 5.20.055; repeals                 |
|      | and replaces § 5.20.140, taxicabs; adds                    |
|      | Chs. 5.60, posting, 5.64, public dances,                   |
|      | 5.68, cardrooms (1.12, 3.01, 5.08, 5.20,                   |
|      | 5.60, 5.64, 5.68)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1203 | Adds §§ 15.04.040(Q), 15.04.041, building                  |
|      | code (Repealed by 1287)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1204 | Repeals and reenacts § 13.04.030, initiation               |
|      | and discontinuation requirements for                       |
|      | water service (13.04)                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1205 | Amends §§ 15.08.160, 15.08.180, fire                       |
|      | code (Repealed by 1214)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1206 | Repeals and reenacts Ch. 8.24, nuisance                    |
|      | abatement (8.24)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1207 | Amends §§ 2.20.020 — 20.20.040, mass                       |
|      | transportation committee (2.20)                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1208 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1209 | Adds Ch. 13.20, water-efficient landscape                  |
|      | standards (Repealed by 1650)                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1210 | Mixed use zone (Repealed by 1438)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1211 | Repeals and reenacts Ch. 17.89, water                      |
|      | allocation regulations (Repealed by                        |
|      | 1553)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1212 | Adds Ch. 8.17, prohibiting cigarette                       |
|      | vending machines (8.17)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1213 | Repeals and reenacts Ch. 15.04, uniform                    |
|      | codes; repeals Chs. 15.16, retaining                       |
|      | walls, 15.28, garden walls, §§ 15.32.010 —                 |
|      | 15.32.240, Ch. 15.44, excavation and                       |
|      | grading; and retitles Ch. 15.32, docks;                    |
|      | adds § 17.08.130, location of swimming                     |
|      | pools and equipment (Repealed by 1650)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1214 | Repeals and reenacts Ch. 15.08, uniform                    |
|      | fire code (Repealed by 1288)                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1215 | Amends § 5.16.070, regulation of solicitors                |
|      | (Repealed by 1594)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1216 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1217 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1218 | Amends §§ 15.40.130 — 15.40.150, sign                      |
|      | regulations (Repealed by 1324)                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1219 | Amends § 2.48.150(C), streamlining architectural           |
|      | review for aesthetically insignificant                     |
|      | projects (2.48)                                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1220 | Not passed; replaced with Ord. 1222 (Not                   |
|      | codified)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1221 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1222 | Amends §§ 17.16.060 (Table 6), 17.22.010                   |
|      | (Table 9), retail uses in the C-N zone                     |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1223 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1224 | Adds Ch. 13.06, mandatory plumbing retrofit                |
|      | standards (13.06)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1225 | Adds §§ 17.04.095, 17.08.045; amends                       |
|      | §§ 17.04.150(F), 17.16.060 (Table 6),                      |
|      | 17.22.010 (Table 9); repeals § 17.08.040(D)(6),            |
|      | zoning regulations for day care facilities                 |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1226 | Amends §§ 5.44.010, 5.44.060(C), space                     |
|      | rent increases in mobile home parks                        |
|      | upon change of ownership (5.44)                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1227 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1228 | Amends § 5.44.030, exemptions from mobile                  |
|      | home park rent stabilization (5.44)                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1229 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1230 | Repeals § 15.04.050(D); amends § 15.040(E),                |
|      | (G) seismic zone criteria for structural                   |
|      | analysis of unreinforced masonry buildings                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1231 | Amends §§ 16.16.180, 16.36.250(J), relating                |
|      | to water service connections and tentative                 |
|      | map time extensions (Repealed by 1490)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1232 | Amends § 3.04.030, transient occupancy                     |
|      | tax rate (3.04)                                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1233 | Amends § 10.52.010, parking meter rates                    |
|      | (10.52)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1234 | Amends §§ 3.01.505, 3.04.080, penalties                    |
|      | on delinquent payments (3.01, 3.04)                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1235 | Amends § 17.22.010, zoning regulations                     |
|      | Table 9 (Repealed by 1650)                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1236 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1237 | Not given final passage                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1238 | Adds Ch. 5.72, cable TV franchises (Repealed               |
|      | by 1542)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1239 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1240 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1241 | Amends contract with board of administration               |
|      | of state public employees’ retirement                      |
|      | system (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1242 | Amends § 15.40.140, sign regulations                       |
|      | in O zoning districts (Repealed by 1324)                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1243 | Adds Ch. 9.06, prohibits aggressive soliciting             |
|      | (9.06)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1244 | Amends Ch. 2.56, purpose and function                      |
|      | of the human relations commission (2.56)                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1245 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1246 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1247 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1248 | Amends § 17.22.010 (Table 9), to allow                     |
|      | utility offices and pay points in the                      |
|      | office and public facility zones (Repealed                 |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1249 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1250 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1251 | Amends § 17.12.020(A), to allow exceptions                 |
|      | to the merger provisions for adjacent                      |
|      | nonconforming lots under certain circumstances             |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1252 | Amends § 1.20.040, notice of appeal hearing                |
|      | (1.20)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1253 | Amends §§ 15.40.020, 15.40.140, 15.40.160,                 |
|      | 15.40.180, relating to sign illumination                   |
|      | in O districts (Repealed by 1262)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1254 | Amends Ch. 2.40, election regulations                      |
|      | (2.40)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1255 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1256 | Adds Ch. 4.56, transportation impact                       |
|      | fees (Repealed by 1646)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1257 | Amends § 17.22.010 (Table 9), dry cleaning                 |
|      | plants in the C-N zone (Repealed by                        |
|      | 1650)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1258 | Amends § 17.22.010 (Table 9), allowing                     |
|      | video stores in the C-N zone (Repealed                     |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1259 | Amends § 17.84.030(I), (J) and (CC),                       |
|      | 17.84.110(G), 17.84.130(C)(2) and 17.84.160,               |
|      | flood damage prevention regulations                        |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1260 | Not given final passage                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1261 | Amends § 9.12.050(B) and (B)(10), noise                    |
|      | control — prohibited acts (9.12)                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1262 | Amends §§ 15.40.020, 15.40.140, 15.40.160,                 |
|      | and 15.40.180, relating to sign illumination               |
|      | in O districts (Repealed by 1324)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1263 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1264 | Amends §§ 10.36.170, 10.36.180, 10.36.200                  |
|      | and 10.36.220, residential parking;                        |
|      | deletes § 10.36.210, fee for residential                   |
|      | parking permit; adds §§ 10.36.221, 10.36.232               |
|      | and 10.36.233, permit replacement, enforcement             |
|      | and parking in yard (10.36)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1265 | Adds §§ 17.04.85, 17.04.125, 17.04.221,                    |
|      | 17.04.273 and 17.04.345, zoning definitions;               |
|      | amends §§ 17.04.050, 17.08.010 — 17.08.130,                |
|      | 17.12.010, 17.12.020, 17.16.005 — 17.16.070,               |
|      | 17.16.090 — 17.16.110, 17.18.010 — 17.18.080,              |
|      | 17.20.010, 17.20.020, 17.56.010 — 17.56.040,               |
|      | 17.58.010 — 17.58.070 and 17.62.010,                       |
|      | zoning; deletes §§ 17.16.080, fire protection              |
|      | and 17.30.030, 7.30.040, neighborhood                      |
|      | markets (Repealed by 1650)                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1266 | Rescinds §§ 10.72.010 — 10.72.090, 10.72.110,              |
|      | bicycle licensing                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1267 | Not given final passage                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1268 | Amends § 5.44.060(E), automatic adjustments                |
|      | to rent in mobile home parks (5.44)                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1269 | Amends § 17.74.140, portions of the official               |
|      | building setback line for Orcutt Road                      |
|      | between Broad Street and Johnson Avenue                    |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1270 | Amends § 12.20.115, regulating consumption                 |
|      | of alcohol in city parks (12.20)                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1271 | Adds Ch. 2.64, municipal advocates (2.64)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1272 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1273 | Amends § 9.12.050(B)(10), hours when                       |
|      | power blowers may be operated (9.12)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1274 | Adds § 8.16.040(F) and amends § 8.16.070,                  |
|      | smoking prohibited in certain areas                        |
|      | (Repealed by 1545)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1275 | Zoning regulations                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1277 | Adds definitions §§ 17.04.195, 17.04.245,                  |
|      | 17.04.325, 17.04.455; adds § 17.16.015,                    |
|      | recreational vehicles as dwelling unit,                    |
|      | Ch. 17.17, property maintenance standards;                 |
|      | amends § 17.08.010(C) by adding subsection                 |
|      | (C)(4) and thus requiring the renumbering                  |
|      | of § 17.08.010(C)(4) — (C)(7) as § 17.08.010(C)(5) —       |
|      | (C)(8); amends § 17.16.020(C)(3) (Repealed                 |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1278 | Grants cable franchise to Sonic Cable                      |
|      | (Special)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1279 | Amends § 5.44.060(E), relative space                       |
|      | rent adjustment (5.44)                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1280 | Amends Ch. 17.89, water allocation regulations             |
|      | (Repealed by 1553)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1281 | Repeals Ch. 5.40, adult entertainment                      |
|      | establishments (Repealed by 1286)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1282 | Amends Ch. 17.90, affordable housing                       |
|      | incentives (Repealed by 1591)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1283 | Adds Ch. 8.32, liability for costs of                      |
|      | response to hazardous waste or substance                   |
|      | spills, releases and other incidents                       |
|      | (8.32)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1284 | Adds § 11.04.010, trip reduction measures                  |
|      | (11.04)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1285 | Amends § 10.64.030, parking fines (10.64)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1286 | Adds Ch. 17.95, establishment of adult                     |
|      | entertainment businesses (Repealed by                      |
|      | 1650)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1287 | Amends Ch. 15.04, uniform codes adopted;                   |
|      | repeals § 17.16.100, utility services                      |
|      | (Repealed by 1353)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1288 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.08, fire                       |
|      | prevention code (Repealed by 1353)                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1289 | Amends § 13.12.040, establishing underground               |
|      | district 12 (13.12)                                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1290 | Zoning regulations                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1291 | Amends § 3.24.150, sealed bids (3.24)                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1292 | Amends § 13.12.040, establishing under                     |
|      | ground district 13 (13.12)                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1293 | Zoning regulations                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1294 | Adds § 17.88.070(H), exempting certain                     |
|      | affordable housing projects from residential               |
|      | growth regulations (Repealed by 1359)                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1295 | Amends Ch. 17.94, Table 9, distinguishing                  |
|      | types of commercial antennas and broadcasting              |
|      | facilities                                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1296 | Zoning regulations                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1297 | Approves sale and leaseback of property                    |
|      | with city’s capital improvement board                      |
|      | in conjunction with the issuance of                        |
|      | lease revenue bonds (Special)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1298 | Amends §§ 5.20.210 — 5.20.250, regulations                 |
|      | of taxis and taxi driver permits (5.20)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1299 | Zoning regulations                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1300 | Zoning regulations                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1301 | Zoning regulations                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1302 | Adds §§ 17.04.093, 17.04.342, 17.04.440,                   |
|      | 17.16.020(E)(1)(d) and 17.16.025, zoning                   |
|      | regulations (Repealed by 1438)                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1303 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1304 | Amends § 17.22.010(Table 9), zoning regulations            |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1305 | Amends § 17.22.010(Table 9), zoning regulations            |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1306 | Repeals Ch. 15.36, demolition and moving                   |
|      | of buildings; adds § 15.04.045, appendix                   |
|      | to Uniform Building Code (Repealed by                      |
|      | 1353)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1307 | Amends § 13.08.090, use of existing sewer                  |
|      | (Repealed by 1598)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1308 | Residential recycling agreement and green                  |
|      | waste services agreement (Not codified)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1309 | Amends §§ 12.20.020(B) and (C), 12.20.030,                 |
|      | 12.20.040(C)(1), (C)(7), and (F), 12.20.050(B),            |
|      | 12.20.060, 12.20.070, 12.20.090, 12.20.110,                |
|      | 12.20.115(A)(1); renumbers § 12.40.020                     |
|      | as § 12.20.120; adds § 12.20.130 (12.20)                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1310 | Amends §§ 17.04.085, 17.16.010, 17.16.060,                 |
|      | 17.22.010, 17.50.010; adds §§ 17.04.328                    |
|      | and 17.04.455 (Repealed by 1650)                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1311 | Amends §§ 17.04.030, 17.16.060, and 17.22.010,             |
|      | zoning regulations (Repealed by 1650)                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1312 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1313 | Amends § 2.36.330(A) and (B), personnel                    |
|      | rules and regulations (2.36)                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1314 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1315 | Amends Ch. 17.82, residential condominium                  |
|      | development and conversion (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1490)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1317 | Amends §§ 5.56.080(B) and 5.56.120(B),                     |
|      | massage establishments and massage technicians             |
|      | (5.56)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1318 | Amends Ord. 1197, rezone (Special)                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1319 | Franchise extension (Repealed by 1551)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1320 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1321 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1322 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1323 | Amends § 15.04.050, Uniform Code for                       |
|      | Building Conservation (Repealed by 1353)                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1324 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.40, signs                      |
|      | (Repealed by 1455)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1325 | Adds Ch. 8.18, regulation of the sale                      |
|      | and distribution of tobacco products                       |
|      | (8.18)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1326 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1327 | Amends § 9.12.050, noise control (9.12)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1328 | Amends § 17.22.010, Table 9, zoning regulations            |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1329 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1330 | Adds § 3.32.040 and amends § 3.32.020,                     |
|      | unclaimed property (3.32)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1331 | Adds § 10.08.070; amends §§ 10.40.010,                     |
|      | 10.40.020, 10.44.020 and 10.44.030;                        |
|      | repeals § 10.40.030, parking (10.08,                       |
|      | 10.40, 10.44)                                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1332 | Adds Ch. 12.22, open space regulations                     |
|      | (12.22)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1333 | Amends Ch. 2.40, election campaign regulations             |
|      | (2.40)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1334 | Amends § 12.36.080, downtown parking                       |
|      | (Repealed by 1516)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1335 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1336 | Amends §§ 15.08.170 and 15.08.190, fire                    |
|      | prevention code (Repealed by 1353)                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1337 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1338 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1339 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1340 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1341 | Planned development (Special)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1342 | Amends zoning map (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1343 | Amends §§ 10.44.020 and 10.44.030, vehicles                |
|      | and traffic (10.44)                                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1344 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1345 | Adds Ch. 5.76, parades and special events;                 |
|      | amends § 12.04.020, encroachments and                      |
|      | excavations (12.04)                                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1346 | Adds §§ 17.04.271, 17.08.120 and 17.16.010(E);             |
|      | amends §§ 17.04.080, 17.04.190, 17.04.330,                 |
|      | 17.12.020(A), 17.14.020(A), 17.16.010(D),                  |
|      | 17.16.060 (E), 17.21.010 — 17.21.060,                      |
|      | 17.22.010, 17.32.010(C), 17.36.010(B),                     |
|      | 17.42.020 (A), 17.46.010, 17.80.040(A)                     |
|      | and 17.80.050; repeals §§ 9.20.010 and                     |
|      | 17.21.050(D)(2), zoning (Repealed by                       |
|      | 1650)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1347 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1348 | Adds Ch. 17.91, inclusionary housing                       |
|      | element (Repealed by 1508)                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1349 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1350 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1351 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1352 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1353 | Adds Ch. 15.02; repeals and replaces                       |
|      | Chs. 15.04 and 15.08; repeals Chs. 15.20                   |
|      | and 15.24, buildings and construction                      |
|      | (Repealed by 1423)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1354 | Special consideration zoning (Special)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1355 | Approves preliminary development plan                      |
|      | (Special)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1356 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1357 | Approves sale and leaseback of property                    |
|      | with city’s capital improvement board                      |
|      | in conjunction with the issuance of                        |
|      | lease revenue bonds (Special)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1358 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1359 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.88, growth                     |
|      | management regulations (Repealed by                        |
|      | 1650)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1360 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1361 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1362 | Adds Ch. 5.50, sidewalk cafes (Repealed                    |
|      | by 1539)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1363 | Adds § 13.12.040(14), underground utilities                |
|      | (13.12)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1364 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1365 | Adds Ch. 17.33, agriculture (AG) zone,                     |
|      | and §§ 17.04.165 and 17.04.185; amends                     |
|      | §§ 17.04.095, 17.04.140, 17.08.070,                        |
|      | 17.08.100, 17.12.020, 17.16.010, 17.16.020,                |
|      | 17.16.025, 17.16.030, 17.16.040, 17.16.060,                |
|      | 17.22.010, 17.32.020, 17.34.020, 17.36.020,                |
|      | 17.38.020, 17.40.020, 17.42.020, 17.44.020,                |
|      | 17.46.020 and 17.48.020, zoning (Repealed                  |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1366 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1367 | Zones annexation (Special)                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1368 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1369 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1370 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1371 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1372 | Adds Ch. 17.98, public art requirements                    |
|      | for private development (Repealed by                       |
|      | 1650)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1373 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1374 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1375 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1376 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1377 | Amends § 2.20.020, mass transportation                     |
|      | committee (2.20)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1378 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1379 | Amends Ch. 2.52, joint recreational use                    |
|      | of school district property committee                      |
|      | (Repealed by 1574)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1380 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1381 | Adds Ch. 8.05, construction and demolition                 |
|      | debris recycling program (8.05)                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1382 | (Failed)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1383 | Amends § 12.40.050(A), datum plane (12.40)                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1384 | Deletes § 17.89.070(A), water allocation                   |
|      | (Repealed by 1553)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1385 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1386 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1387 | Adds Ch. 9.05, underage persons and alcohol                |
|      | (Repealed by 1525)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1388 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1389 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1390 | Grants pipeline franchise (Special)                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1391 | Grants pipeline franchise (Special)                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1392 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 12.24, tree                       |
|      | regulations (Repealed by 1544)                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1393 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1394 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1395 | Amends § 13.07.070, water conservation                     |
|      | (13.07)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1396 | Grants green waste and recycling collection                |
|      | service franchises (Special)                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1397 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1398 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1399 | Amends § 17.74.170, building setback                       |
|      | lines (Repealed by 1650)                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1400 | Repeals §§ 114.4.1 and 114.4.2, and amends                 |
|      | § 114.3 of Appendix Chapter I of the                       |
|      | California Building Code, permit processing                |
|      | (Repealed by 1510)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1401 | Amends § 17.74.215, building setback                       |
|      | lines (Repealed by 1650)                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1402 | Amends § 17.16.025, creek setbacks (Repealed               |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1403 | Adds Ch. 13.24, recycled water service                     |
|      | (13.24)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1404 | (Failed)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1405 | Adds §§ 17.16.035, 17.38.020(G), 17.40.020(G)              |
|      | and (H), 17.42.020(G) and (H), 17.44.020(G)                |
|      | and 17.46.020(G); amends §§ 17.16.060                      |
|      | and 17.22.010, Table 9, zoning (Repealed                   |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1406 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1407 | Adds § 2.40.170; amends §§ 2.40.030(B),                    |
|      | 2.40.040(A), 2.40.050(C), 2.40.060(A),                     |
|      | (B) and (G), 2.40.070(B), 2.40.080(A),                     |
|      | 2.40.100(B), 2.40.150(A), 2.40.160,                        |
|      | 15.40.040(N) and 15.40.280(X), campaign                    |
|      | regulations (2.40)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1408 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1409 | Adds § 17.16.120; amends § 17.22.010,                      |
|      | wireless telecommunication facilities                      |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1410 | Amends §§ 1.12.060, 12.20.110 and 12.22.060,               |
|      | parks and open space violations (1.12,                     |
|      | 12.20, 12.22)                                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1411 | Amends § 4.30.020, parking in-lieu fees                    |
|      | (4.30)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1412 | Adds § 308.4 to the Uniform Administrative                 |
|      | Code and § 17.17.075; amends §§ 2.48.170,                  |
|      | 10.36.170, 10.36.180, 10.36.232, 17.17.050                 |
|      | and 17.17.080, property maintenance                        |
|      | (2.48, 10.36)                                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1413 | Repeals Ch. 5.76, parades and special                      |
|      | events (Repealer)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1414 | Adds Ch. 5.80, parades and assemblies                      |
|      | (5.80)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1415 | Adds § 1.20.060, appeals procedure (1.20)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1416 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1417 | Amends Ch. 2.48, architectural review                      |
|      | commission (2.48)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1418 | Annexation zoning (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1419 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1420 | Amends zoning map (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1421 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1422 | Adds § 4.30.015; amends §§ 4.30.010 and                    |
|      | 17.16.060, parking in-lieu fees (4.30)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1423 | Repeals and replaces Chs. 15.02, 15.04                     |
|      | and 15.08, building codes (Repealed                        |
|      | by 1510)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1424 | Adds § 1.12.095, general penalty (1.12)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1425 | Adds § 1.12.130, general penalty (1.12)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1426 | Adds Ch. 1.24, enforcement (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1576)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1427 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1428 | Amends §§ 4.20.140, 13.04.010 – 13.04.120                  |
|      | and 13.08.090, water service (4.20,                        |
|      | 13.04)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1429 | Amends § 17.16.060, Table 6, Ch. 17.19,                    |
|      | and Ch. 17.22, Table 9, bed and breakfast                  |
|      | inns (Repealed by 1650)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1430 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1431 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1432 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1433 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1434 | Amends Ch. 17.21, secondary dwelling                       |
|      | units (Repealed by 1606)                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1435 | Amends Art. III of Ch. 3.24, procedures                    |
|      | for payment of claims and purchases                        |
|      | (3.24)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1436 | Amends § 10.56.010, speed zones (10.56)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1437 | Adds Ch. 17.41; amends Tables 2 and 5                      |
|      | of § 17.16.020; rezones properties,                        |
|      | community commercial zone (Repealed                        |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1438 | Adds §§ 17.08.072 and 17.62.045 and Ch.                    |
|      | 17.100; amends §§ 17.08.095, 17.08.120,                    |
|      | 17.10.020, 17.16.120 and 17.22.010,                        |
|      | Ch. 17.22, Table 9, §§ 17.34.010, 17.38.010,               |
|      | 17.40.010, 17.42.010, 17.44.010, 17.46.010,                |
|      | 17.48.010, 17.62.080; repeals Ch. 17.04;                   |
|      | repeals and replaces Chs. 17.50 and                        |
|      | 17.55 and § 17.62.045, zoning (Repealed                    |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1439 | Amends solid waste, recycling and green                    |
|      | waste collection franchise (Special)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1440 | Adds Ch. 8.14, tobacco retailer licenses                   |
|      | (8.14)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1441 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1442 | Adds § 13.12.040(15), underground utility                  |
|      | districts (13.12)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1443 | Amends § 16.36.160, subdivisions (Repealed                 |
|      | by 1490)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1444 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1445 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1446 | Amends § 17.08.040 and definition of                       |
|      | “service station”; repeals § 5.36.020,                     |
|      | concurrent sales of alcoholic beverages                    |
|      | and motor fuel (Repealed by 1650)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1447 | Amends § 10.44.030(C), loading and unloading               |
|      | (10.44)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1448 | Adds Ch. 5.84, filming regulations (5.84)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1449 | (Failed)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1450 | Amends zoning map (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1451 | Amends Ch. 17.22, Table 9, medical service                 |
|      | uses (Repealed by 1650)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1452 | (Failed)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1453 | Amends §§ 15.04.050 and 15.08.020, unreinforced            |
|      | masonry buildings (Repealed by 1510)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1454 | Amends §§ 10.36.170, 10.36.180, 10.36.200,                 |
|      | 10.36.220 and 10.36.221, residential                       |
|      | parking permits (10.36)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1455 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.40, sign                       |
|      | regulations (Repealed by 1667)                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1456 | Adds Ch. 9.30, nudity in public places                     |
|      | (9.30)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1457 | Approves planned development overlay                       |
|      | modification (Special)                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1458 | Amends Ch. 17.91, inclusionary housing                     |
|      | (Repealed by 1508)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1459 | Amends Ch. 17.88, residential growth                       |
|      | management (Repealed by 1650)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1460 | Amends Ch. 17.86, downtown housing conservation            |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1461 | Amends § 2.48.050, architectural review                    |
|      | (2.48)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1462 | Amends Ch. 17.22, use regulations (Repealed                |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1463 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1464 | Amends planned development (Special)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1465 | Amends planned development (Special)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1466 | Medical marijuana dispensary moratorium                    |
|      | (Special)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1467 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1468 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1469 | Adds Ch. 9.22, safety enhancement zones                    |
|      | (9.22)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1470 | Amends §§ 15.02.010 and 15.04.080, electrical              |
|      | code (Repealed by 1510)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1471 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1472 | Adds Ch. 3.50, fire and life safety inspections            |
|      | (3.50)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1473 | Adds § 8.14.085, tobacco retailer violations               |
|      | (8.14)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1474 | Adds Ch. 5.01, business license program                    |
|      | (5.01)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1475 | Amends § 5.20.260, taxicab stands (5.20)                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1476 | Amends planned development overlay modification            |
|      | (Special)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1477 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1478 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1479 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1480 | Amends § 9.30.010, nudity in public places                 |
|      | (9.30)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1481 | Airport area specific plan standards                       |
|      | (Special)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1482 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1483 | Amends Ch. 2.40, election campaign regulations             |
|      | (2.40)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1484 | Amends sections of the code to add feminine                |
|      | gender where masculine gender only appears;                |
|      | amends §§ 1.12.050, 1.12.060(B), 5.20.210(A),              |
|      | 5.20.270(A), 9.12.110, 9.22.020, 10.04.070,                |
|      | 12.04.020(B), 13.04.300, 15.04.020(Z),                     |
|      | 15.40.1000, 17.16.015, and Ch. 9.16;                       |
|      | repeals § 10.36.060 (1.12, 5.20, 9.16,                     |
|      | 10.04, 12.04, 13.04)                                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1485 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1486 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1487 | Amends § 4.30.015, parking in-lieu fee                     |
|      | area (4.30)                                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1488 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1489 | Amends § 12.24.200, tree regulations                       |
|      | (Repealed by 1544)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1490 | Repeals and replaces Title 16, subdivisions;               |
|      | repeals Ch. 17.82 (16.01, 16.02, 16.04,                    |
|      | 16.08, 16.10, 16.12, 16.14, 16.16, 16.17,                  |
|      | 16.18, 16.20, 16.22, 16.23, 16.24, 16.26)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1491 | Adds § 9.06.025 and Ch. 9.40, criminal                     |
|      | code (9.06, 9.40)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1492 | Amends § 10.52.010, parking meter zone                     |
|      | rates (10.52)                                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1493 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1494 | Amends Ch. 17.84, floodplain management                    |
|      | regulations (Repealed by 1650)                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1495 | Essential services transactions (sales)                    |
|      | and use tax (3.15)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1496 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1497 | Amends § 17.22.010 (Table 9), use regulations              |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1498 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1499 | Adds § 1.08.140, procedures for filing                     |
|      | claims for refunds (1.08)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1500 | Adds lot dimension standards to Chs.                       |
|      | 17.24 through 17.48 and definitions                        |
|      | to Ch. 17.100; amends §§ 17.08.010,                        |
|      | 17.08.072, 17.08.090, 17.08.130, 17.14.010,                |
|      | 17.14.020 and 17.16.010, Table 1, §§ 17.16.020,            |
|      | 17.16.050 and 17.16.060, Table 6, Table                    |
|      | 6.5, § 17.16.120, Ch. 17.20 (Table 8),                     |
|      | §§ 17.21.030(B), 17.21.050 and 17.22.010,                  |
|      | Table 9, §§ 17.36.030, 17.42.020, 17.44.020,               |
|      | 17.46.020, 17.48.020 and 17.62.045,                        |
|      | zoning (Repealed by 1650)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1501 | Repeals and replaces §§ 13.04.100 and                      |
|      | 16.20.020, commercial condominium water                    |
|      | service (13.04, 16.20)                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1502 | Adds Ch. 15.48, safety assessment placards                 |
|      | (15.48)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1503 | Transfers oil pipeline franchise; amends                   |
|      | Ord. 1390 (Special)                                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1504 | Transfers oil pipeline franchise; amends                   |
|      | Ord. 1391 (Special)                                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1505 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1506 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1507 | Repeals and replaces §§ 16.08.040, 16.10.020,              |
|      | 16.12.020, 16.12.025, 16.12.030, 16.12.040,                |
|      | 16.12.045, 16.17.010, 16.17.030, 16.17.040,                |
|      | 16.17.050, 16.17.060 and 16.26.035,                        |
|      | subdivisions (16.08, 16.10, 16.12, 16.17,                  |
|      | 16.26)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1508 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.91, inclusionary               |
|      | housing requirement (Repealed by 1650)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1509 | Amends Ch. 17.42, downtown commercial                      |
|      | (C-D) zone (Repealed by 1650)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1510 | Repeals and replaces Chs. 15.02 and 15.04;                 |
|      | repeals Ch. 15.08, building codes (Repealed                |
|      | by 1555)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1511 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1512 | Repeals and replaces § 12.36.080, downtown                 |
|      | parking and business improvement area                      |
|      | advisory board (Repealed by 1516)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1513 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1514 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1515 | Amends §§ 12.32.070 and repeals and replaces               |
|      | §§ 12.32.100, 12.32.120 and 12.32.130,                     |
|      | street name and address regulations                        |
|      | (12.32)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1516 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 12.36, downtown                   |
|      | parking and business improvement area                      |
|      | (12.36)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1517 | Adds Ch. 12.42, tourism business improvement               |
|      | district (12.42)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1518 | Approves planned development overlay                       |
|      | modifications for the Walter Brothers                      |
|      | Center (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1519 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1520 | Repeals and replaces § 12.42.070, imposition               |
|      | of assessment (12.42)                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1521 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1522 | Amends zoning map (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1523 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1524 | Repeals and replaces §§ 5.20.020, 5.20.050,                |
|      | 5.20.080, 5.20.110, 5.20.170, 5.20.180,                    |
|      | 5.20.210 and 5.20.230, taxicabs (5.20)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1525 | Repeals and replaces § 9.05.010, underage                  |
|      | persons and alcohol (9.05)                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1526 | Adds § 13.24.020, use and distribution                     |
|      | of recycled water (13.24)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1527 | Adds Ch. 17.23, night sky preservation                     |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1528 | Amends §§ 17.08.130, 17.16.010, 17.16.020,                 |
|      | 17.16.040, 17.16.060, 17.16.110, 17.17.040,                |
|      | 17.17.050, 17.22.010 (Table 9), 17.50.060                  |
|      | [17.62.045], 17.50.070 [17.62.050],                        |
|      | 17.50.080 [17.62.060], 17.58.050, 17.58.060,               |
|      | 17.58.070 and Ch. 17.100, zoning (Repealed                 |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1529 | Amends § 17.74.130, plan line setbacks                     |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1530 | Adds § 12.20.140, Santa Rosa Park skateboard               |
|      | park (12.20)                                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1531 | Repeals and replaces § 12.42.100, tourism                  |
|      | business improvement district board                        |
|      | (Repealed by 1536)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1532 | Amends §§ 10.52.010(B) and (D) and 10.64.040,              |
|      | parking meters (10.52, 10.64)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1533 | Adds Ch. 5.45, mobile home park conversions                |
|      | (5.45)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1534 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1535 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1536 | Repeals and replaces § 12.42.100, tourism                  |
|      | business improvement district (12.42)                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1537 | Adds §§ 8.16.020(I) and 8.16.035; repeals                  |
|      | and replaces § 8.16.050, smoking prohibited                |
|      | in certain areas (Repealed by 1545)                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1538 | Amends Ch. 2.40, election campaign regulations             |
|      | (2.40)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1539 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.50, sidewalk                    |
|      | cafes (5.50)                                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1540 | Repeals and replaces § 9.12.110, noise                     |
|      | violations (9.12)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1541 | Adds Ch. 12.23, creeks, tributaries and                    |
|      | riparian corridor regulations (12.23)                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1542 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.72, provisions                  |
|      | applicable to holders of state video                       |
|      | franchises (5.72)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1543 | Amends §§ 5.01.101, 8.05.020, 12.20.040                    |
|      | and 17.18.050(A); repeals §§ 12.40.010                     |
|      | and 13.08.130; repeals and replaces                        |
|      | Ch. 12.08, stormwater quality and discharge                |
|      | control (5.01, 8.05, 12.08, 12.20)                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1544 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 12.24, tree                       |
|      | regulations (12.24)                                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1545 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 8.16, smoking                     |
|      | restrictions (8.16)                                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1546 | Adds Ch. 9.13, unruly gatherings (9.13)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1547 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.87, water-efficient            |
|      | landscaping (Repealed by 1650)                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1548 | Repeals § 9.22.040; repeals and replaces                   |
|      | § 9.22.020, safety enhancement zones                       |
|      | (9.22)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1549 | Adds § 1.08.150, payment of taxes prior                    |
|      | to refund or judicial relief (1.08)                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1550 | Amends §§ 17.88.010 and 17.88.020; renumbers               |
|      | and amends § 17.88.040; repeals § 17.88.030,               |
|      | residential growth management regulations                  |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1551 | Grants solid waste franchise; repeals                      |
|      | Ord. 1319 (Repealed by 1624)                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1552 | Repeals and replaces § 10.52.010(B) and                    |
|      | (D), parking meter rates (10.52)                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1553 | Adds Ch. 17.65; amends §§ 17.08.010(B)                     |
|      | and (C)(8), 17.08.040, 17.08.072(C),                       |
|      | 17.08.095, 17.08.110, 17.16.010(A)(2),                     |
|      | 17.16.020(C), (D) and (E)(2)(a), 17.16.050,                |
|      | 17.16.060(F), (I), (J)(1) and Table                        |
|      | 6, 17.17.075, 17.22.010 Table 9, 17.23.040(F),             |
|      | 17.26.020(A), 17.50.020(E), 17.58.070,                     |
|      | 17.60.050, 17.94.020, 17.100.010, 17.100.020,              |
|      | 17.100.030, 17.100.040, 17.100.080,                        |
|      | 17.100.160, 17.100.190 and 17.100.200;                     |
|      | repeals Ch. 17.89, zoning (Repealed                        |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1554 | Prezone (Special)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1555 | Repeals and replaces Chs. 15.02 and 15.04,                 |
|      | building codes (Repealed by 1595)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1556 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1557 | Adds Ch. 14.01, historic preservation                      |
|      | ordinance (14.01)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1558 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1559 | Mailed ballot elections (2.42)                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1560 | Amends §§ 2.24.020, 2.24.030, 2.24.040,                    |
|      | 2.24.050, 2.24.060, 2.24.070 and 2.24.080,                 |
|      | emergency services (2.24)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1561 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1562 | Adds Ch. 9.50, curfew (9.50)                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1563 | Amends §§ 2.42.050, 2.42.060(C) and (D),                   |
|      | 2.42.070(A), (B) and (C), and 2.42.090,                    |
|      | elections (2.42)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1564 | Grants oil pipeline franchise (Special)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1565 | Amends § 10.36.220, residential parking                    |
|      | permit issuance (10.36)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1566 | Amends § 10.52.030, parking meter time                     |
|      | of operation (10.52)                                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1567 | Amends § 10.44.020, curb markings (10.44)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1568 | Amends § 10.52.010, parking meter zone                     |
|      | rates (10.52)                                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1569 | Grants oil pipeline franchise (Special)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1570 | Amends §§ 13.08.010, 13.08.090, 13.08.110,                 |
|      | 13.08.120, 13.08.130, 13.08.140, 13.08.150,                |
|      | 13.08.170, 13.08.190, 13.08.210, 13.08.220(A),             |
|      | 13.08.240(A), 13.08.250, 13.08.320 and                     |
|      | 13.08.330, sewers (Repealed by 1598)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1571 | Adds §§ 17.16.050(B)(4) and (B)(5) and                     |
|      | 17.16.060(G) and Ch. 17.49; amends §§ 17.16.020(E)(1)(a)   |
|      | and (E)(2)(f), 17.16.050(E), 17.22.010                     |
|      | Table 9 and 17.100.080; repeals and                        |
|      | replaces §§ 17.08.110(D), 17.16.010(A)(1),                 |
|      | 17.16.020(E)(1)(b), 17.16.040, 17.16.050(B)(3),            |
|      | 17.16.060 Table 6, 17.17.040(D)(1),                        |
|      | 17.17.075.1 [17.17.075(A)], 17.42.020(H),                  |
|      | zoning (Repealed by 1650)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1572 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1573 | Amends § 2.04.010, council meetings (2.04)                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1574 | Repeals Chapter 2.52, joint recreational                   |
|      | use of school district property committee                  |
|      | (Repealer)                                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1575 | Adds §§ 15.04.020(L.1) and (Z.1); repeals                  |
|      | § 15.04.100(SS), building codes (Repealed                  |
|      | by 1595)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1576 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 1.24, administrative              |
|      | code enforcement procedures (Repealed                      |
|      | by 1625)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1577 | Amends § 10.40.010, timed parking (10.40)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1578 | Adds Ch. 17.11; amends §§ 17.16.060,                       |
|      | 17.22.010, 17.100.030, 17.100.070, 17.100.120              |
|      | and 17.100.180, zoning (Repealed by                        |
|      | 1650)                                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1579 | Adds § 17.17.055; amends §§ 17.16.020(D),                  |
|      | 17.17.040(D)(7), 17.17.075, 17.17.080                      |
|      | and 17.100.060; repeals § 10.36.233,                       |
|      | front yard parking (Repealed by 1650)                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1580 | Amends § 2.04.010, council meetings (2.04)                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1581 | Adds § 6.20.070, responsibility for menacing               |
|      | and aggressive animals (6.20)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1582 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1583 | Adds Chapter 9.18, vehicle as dwelling                     |
|      | unit (Repealed by 1584)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1584 | Adds Ch. 10.34; amends § 17.16.015; repeals                |
|      | Ch. 9.18, camping restrictions (10.34)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1585 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1586 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 3.16, utility                     |
|      | users’ tax (3.16)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1587 | Transfer of oil pipeline franchise (Special)               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1588 | Transfer of oil pipeline franchise (Special)               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1589 | Amends §§ 12.24.020 and 12.24.170, tree                    |
|      | regulations (12.24)                                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1590 | Adds § 9.22.040, safety enhancement zones                  |
|      | (9.22)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1591 | Adds §§ 17.08.080(C) [17.08.020(C)] and                    |
|      | 17.16.060(D); amends §§ 15.40.600, 17.16.020(C)(3)         |
|      | and (D)(2) [(E)(2)], 17.16.120(D), 17.21.040,              |
|      | 17.21.050, 17.22.010, Ch. 17.64, §§ 17.70.020,             |
|      | 17.80.040(A), 17.100.010, 17.100.030,                      |
|      | 17.100.040, 17.100.070, 17.100.120,                        |
|      | 17.100.150 and 17.100.230; amends heading                  |
|      | of § 17.08.020; repeals and replaces                       |
|      | Ch. 17.90, zoning (Repealed by 1667)                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1592 | Adds § 17.08.115 and definition to § 17.100.190;           |
|      | amends §§ 17.16.015 and 17.22.010, safe                    |
|      | parking facilities (Repealed by 1650)                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1593 | Adds §§ 15.04.100(DDD) and (EEE), sky                      |
|      | lanterns                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1594 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.16; amends                      |
|      | § 10.36.120, solicitors and peddlers                       |
|      | (5.16, 10.36)                                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1595 | Repeals and replaces Chs. 15.02 and 15.04,                 |
|      | buildings and construction (15.02, 15.04)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1596 | Amends § 12.24.150(F), slacklining in                      |
|      | city parks (12.24)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1597 | Amends Ch. 13.04, water service (13.04)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1598 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.08, sewers                     |
|      | (13.08)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1599 | Amends Ch. 2.40, election campaign regulations             |
|      | (2.40)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1600 | Amends § 12.32.110, street name criteria                   |
|      | (12.32)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1601 | Amends § 2.04.010, council meeting times                   |
|      | (2.04)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1602 | Adds Ch. 17.61; amends § 17.08.110, zoning                 |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1603 | Amends zoning map (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1604 | Amends Ch. 3.15, essential services transactions           |
|      | (sales) and use tax (3.15)                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1605 | Adds Ch. 2.14, revenue enhancement oversight               |
|      | commission (2.14)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1606 | Amends §§ 17.22.010, 17.70.020, 17.100.010,                |
|      | 17.100.020 and 17.100.070; repeals and                     |
|      | replaces Ch. 17.21, zoning (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1607 | Amends § 13.07.030, water conservation                     |
|      | (13.07)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1608 | Amends § 3.24.060(E), cooperative purchasing               |
|      | (3.24)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1609 | Amends zoning map (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1610 | Adds Chs. 17.53 and 17.57; amends zoning                   |
|      | map and § 17.22.010, zoning (Repealed                      |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1611 | Adds § 17.08.140; amends § 17.100.220,                     |
|      | homestay rentals (Repealed by 1650)                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1612 | Adds § 15.04.060(E) and Ch. 15.14; amends                  |
|      | § 15.04.020(D), expedited permit process                   |
|      | for small residential rooftop solar                        |
|      | systems (15.04, 15.14)                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1613 | Amends §§ 8.14.020, 8.16.020, 8.16.050(A)                  |
|      | and 8.17.010, electronic smoking devices                   |
|      | (8.14, 8.16, 8.17)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1614 | Adds Ch. 8.22, offensive odors (8.22)                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1615 | Amends § 2.14.030, citizens’ revenue                       |
|      | enhancement oversight commission (2.14)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1616 | Adds Ch. 15.10, rental housing inspection                  |
|      | (Repealed by 1632)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1617 | Adds Ch. 8.06, expanded polystyrene (8.06)                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1618 | Amends Ch. 3.24, Art. I, procedures for                    |
|      | payment of claims and purchases (3.24)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1619 | Amends § 13.07.030, council water conservation             |
|      | powers (13.07)                                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1620 | Amends § 10.52.010, parking meters (10.52)                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1621 | Amends Ch. 9.13, unruly gatherings (9.13)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1622 | Adds Ch. 9.09, psychoactive herbal incense,                |
|      | psychoactive bath salts and other synthetic                |
|      | drugs (9.09)                                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1623 | Amends § 2.04.010, council meetings time                   |
|      | and place (2.04)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1624 | Grants food and green waste collection                     |
|      | franchise; repeals Ord. 1551 (Special)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1625 | Adds § 1.20.020(D), Ch. 2.30 and § 15.02.015;              |
|      | repeals and replaces Ch. 1.24, administrative              |
|      | code enforcement and administrative                        |
|      | review board (1.20, 1.24, 2.30, 15.02)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1626 | Amends § 17.87.020, water-efficient landscape              |
|      | standards (Repealed by 1650)                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1627 | Adds § 13.16.020(E), water and sewer                       |
|      | service for private use outside city                       |
|      | limits (13.16)                                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1628 | Amends §§ 10.08.010, 10.08.020, 10.08.030,                 |
|      | 10.12.020, 10.14.010, 10.14.040, 10.14.050,                |
|      | 10.14.060, 10.14.070, 10.14.080, 10.16.010,                |
|      | 10.16.020, 10.16.040, 10.20.010, 10.24.010,                |
|      | 10.28.030, 10.28.060, 10.32.010, 10.36.010,                |
|      | 10.36.030, 10.36.040(C), 10.36.090,                        |
|      | 10.36.100(A), 10.36.140, 10.36.190,                        |
|      | 10.40.010, 10.40.040(C), 10.40.060(A),                     |
|      | 10.40.070, 10.44.010(A), 10.44.020,                        |
|      | 10.44.060, 10.44.070(A) and (B), 10.48.040(A),             |
|      | 10.48.050(A), 10.52.020(A), 10.52.110,                     |
|      | 10.56.010, 10.56.020, 10.60.020, 10.80.020,                |
|      | 10.80.050(A) and (D) and 10.80.070,                        |
|      | vehicles and traffic (10.08, 10.12,                        |
|      | 10.14, 10.16, 10.20, 10.24, 10.28, 10.32,                  |
|      | 10.36, 10.40, 10.44, 10.48, 10.52, 10.56,                  |
|      | 10.60, 10.80)                                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1629 | Amends § 17.22.010, zoning (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1650)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1630 | Amends Chs. 15.02 and 15.04, buildings                     |
|      | and construction (15.02, 15.04)                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1631 | Adds § 13.07.030(D), outdoor irrigation                    |
|      | of public facility turf (13.07)                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1632 | Repeals Ch. 15.10, rental housing inspection               |
|      | (Repealer)                                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1633 | Adds Ch. 9.10, marijuana regulation                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1634 | Amends §§ 17.22.010 and 17.100.190; repeals                |
|      | and replaces § 17.21.010, accessory                        |
|      | dwelling units (Repealed by 1650)                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1635 | Amends § 10.52.010, parking meters (10.52)                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1636 | Amends § 17.94.100, development agreements                 |
|      | (Repealed by 1650)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1637 | Adds Ch. 15.15; amends § 15.04.020(F),                     |
|      | expedited permit process for electric                      |
|      | vehicle charging stations and building                     |
|      | code (15.04, 15.15)                                        |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1638 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1639 | Development agreement (Special)                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1640 | Adds Ch. 8.09, single-use straws (8.09)                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1641 | Adds Ch. 8.07, plastic bottled beverages                   |
|      | and water bottle filling stations (8.07)                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1642 | Special tax levy (Special)                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1643 | Amends Ch. 2.40, election campaign regulations             |
|      | (2.40)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1644 | Amends § 3.24.075, plastic bottled beverages               |
|      | (3.24)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1645 | Amends § 5.72.010, PEG fees (5.72)                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1646 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 4.56, development                 |
|      | impact fees (Repealed by 1663)                             |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1647 | Adds Ch. 17.99 [17.86.080]; amends Ch.                     |
|      | 17.22, Table 9 [Ch. 17.10, Table 2-1]                      |
|      | and Ch. 17.100 [17.156]; repeals and                       |
|      | replaces Ch. 9.10, cannabis regulations                    |
|      | (9.10, 17.10, 17.86, 17.156)                               |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1648 | Adds §§ 1.24.070(C), 1.24.160, 1.24.170,                   |
|      | 1.24.180, 1.24.190 and 1.24.200; amends                    |
|      | § 1.24.050(E), administrative code enforcement             |
|      | procedures (1.24)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1649 | Development agreement (Special)                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1650 | Repeals and replaces Title 17, zoning                      |
|      | regulations (Code Title 17, 17.02, 17.04,                  |
|      | 17.06, 17.10, 17.12, 17.14, 17.16, 17.18,                  |
|      | 17.20, 17.22, 17.24, 17.26, 17.28, 17.30,                  |
|      | 17.32, 17.34, 17.36, 17.40, 17.42, 17.46,                  |
|      | 17.48, 17.50, 17.52, 17.54, 17.56, 17.58,                  |
|      | 17.60, 17.64, 17.68, 17.70, 17.72, 17.74,                  |
|      | 17.76, 17.78, 17.80, 17.86, 17.92, 17.94,                  |
|      | 17.96, 17.102, 17.104, 17.106, 17.108,                     |
|      | 17.109, 17.110, 17.112, 17.113, 17.114,                    |
|      | 17.120, 17.122, 17.124, 17.126, 17.128,                    |
|      | 17.130, 17.132, 17.138, 17.140, 17.142,                    |
|      | 17.144, 17.146, 17.148, 17.154, 17.156,                    |
|      | 17.158, 17.160)                                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1651 | Amends Ord. 1130, rezone (Special)                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1652 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1653 | Amends zoning map and § 17.06.020, cannabis                |
|      | business overlay zone (17.06)                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1654 | Authorizes implementation of a community                   |
|      | choice aggregation program (Repealed                       |
|      | by 1656)                                                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1655 | Amends §§ 10.12.090, 10.36.235, 10.40.010,                 |
|      | 10.40.020, 10.40.060, 10.44.010, 10.44.020,                |
|      | 10.44.030, 10.44.040, 10.52.040 and                        |
|      | 10.52.050, vehicles and traffic (10.12,                    |
|      | 10.36, 10.40, 10.44, 10.52)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1656 | Authorizing implementation of a community                  |
|      | choice aggregation program by participating                |
|      | in Monterey Bay Community Power Authority’s                |
|      | community choice aggregation program;                      |
|      | repeals Ord. 1654                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1657 | Adds §§ 17.70.120(B)(5) and 17.86.210(E);                  |
|      | amends §§ 17.10.020, 17.18.020, 17.20.020,                 |
|      | 17.22.020, 17.32.030(E)(2)(b)(2) [17.32.030(E)(2)(b)(ii)], |
|      | 17.70.170(C)(5), 17.72.030, 17.72.040,                     |
|      | 17.72.070(B), 17.86.020(B)(5), 17.86.100(B)(2),            |
|      | 17.92.020(F), 17.138.130, 17.140.040(K),                   |
|      | 17.140.070, 17.158.014 and 17.158.044,                     |
|      | zoning (17.10, 17.18, 17.20, 17.22,                        |
|      | 17.32, 17.70, 17.72, 17.86, 17.92, 17.138,                 |
|      | 17.140, 17.158)                                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1658 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1659 | Adds Ch. 5.10, cannabis business tax                       |
|      | (5.10)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1660 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1661 | Special tax levy (Special)                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1662 | Amends development agreement (Special)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1663 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 4.56, development                 |
|      | impact fees (4.56)                                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1664 | Amends § 12.24.030; repeals and replaces                   |
|      | §§ 12.24.090 and 12.24.180, tree regulations               |
|      | (12.24)                                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1665 | Adds §§ 13.08.395 and 13.08.396; amends                    |
|      | § 13.08.390, sewer connections (13.08)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1666 | Amends §§ 10.44.010 and 10.44.040, loading                 |
|      | and unloading (10.44)                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1667 | Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.40; repeals                    |
|      | § 2.40.070, signs (15.40)                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1668 | Establishing the clean energy choice                       |
|      | program (Not adopted)                                      |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1669 | Implements clean energy choice program                     |
|      | (Not adopted)                                              |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1670 | Amends Chs. 15.02 and 15.04, building                      |
|      | codes (15.02, 15.04)                                       |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1671 | Rezone (Special)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1672 | Emergency ordinance approving “just cause”                 |
|      | eviction protections and rental rate                       |
|      | limits (Expired)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1673 | Amends §§ 9.10.070(A) and (B), cannabis                    |
|      | (9.10)                                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1674 | Amends §§ 3.04.020, 3.04.080(A), 3.04.090,                 |
|      | 3.04.100 and 3.04.130, transient occupancy                 |
|      | tax (3.04)                                                 |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1675 | Amends §§ 5.20.200, 5.20.250 and 5.20.280,                 |
|      | taxicabs (5.20)                                            |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1676 | Amends §§ 8.14.020(A) and 8.14.030, tobacco                |
|      | retailer license (8.14)                                    |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1677 | Amends §§ 13.04.060 and 13.04.110, water                   |
|      | service (13.04, 17.70)                                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1678 | Amends §§ 17.70.120, 17.86.020, 17.156.004                 |
|      | and 17.156.022, accessory and junior                       |
|      | accessory dwelling units (Expired)                         |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1679 | Amends §§ 17.70.120, 17.86.020, 17.156.004                 |
|      | and 17.156.022, accessory and junior                       |
|      | accessory dwelling units (17.86, 17.156)                   |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1680 | Amends contract with public employees’                     |
|      | retirement system (Special)                                |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1681 | Adds § 17.94.020(D), nonconforming uses                    |
|      | within the east airport annexation area                    |
|      | of the airport area specific plan (17.94)                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1682 | Adds § 2.40.060(E); amends §§ 2.40.060(C)                  |
|      | and 2.40.100(A) and (D), campaign disclosure               |
|      | documents (2.40)                                           |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1683 | (Pending)                                                  |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1684 | Amends § 15.04.110, clean energy choice                    |
|      | program (Pending)                                          |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1685 | Adds § 17.70.095; amends § 17.158.006,                     |
|      | all-electric buildings (17.70, 17.158)                     |
+------+------------------------------------------------------------+

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The San Luis Obispo Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 1685, passed July 7, 2020.
Disclaimer: The City Clerk's Office has the official version of the San Luis Obispo Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.
Note: This site does not support Internet Explorer. To view this site, Code Publishing Company recommends using one of the following browsers: Google Chrome, Firefox, or Safari.

City Website: www.slocity.org
City Telephone: (805) 781-7100
Code Publishing Company