Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 (RESERVED)
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 (RESERVED)
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 (RESERVED)
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Title 14 (RESERVED)
Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Title 17 ZONING

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.08 ARREST AND CITATION PROCEDURE
Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY
Chapter 1.16 IMPRISONMENT

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 How code designated and cited.
     The ordinances embraced in the following titles, chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated “The Susanville Municipal Code,” and may be so cited. (Prior code § 1.1)

 

1.04.020 Definitions and rules of construction.
     In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise:

     City. The words “the city” or “this city” shall be construed as if followed by the words “of Susanville.”

     Code. The words “the code” or “this code” means “The Susanville Municipal Code.”

     Community Development Director. The words “community development director” shall be construed, in the absence of an individual holding that position, to mean the building and planning division of the city of Susanville public works department, the senior planner working within the building and planning division of the public works department or such other individual designated by the city administrator to represent said department and division to perform the duties of the former community development director as set forth in and for purposes of implementation of this municipal code in that regard.

     Computation of Time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last unless the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded.

     Council. The word “council” shall be construed to mean the city council of the city of Susanville.

     County. The words “the county” or “this county” shall mean the county of Lassen.

     Day. A “day” is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.

     Daytime, Nighttime. “Daytime” is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. “Nighttime” is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.

     Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

     In the City. The words “in the city” means and includes all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.

     Joint Authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.

     Month. The word “month” means a calendar month.

     Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

     “Oath” means and includes affirmation.

     Officers, Departments, etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city of Susanville unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

     Or, and. “Or” may be read “and,” and “and” may be read “or,” if the sense requires it.

     Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.

     “Person” means and includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company.

     “Personal property” means and includes every species of property, except real property, as herein defined.

     Preceding, Following. The words “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.

     “Process” means and includes a writ of summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.

     Property. The word “property” shall include real and personal property.

     “Real property” means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

     Shall, May. “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.

     Signature or Subscription by Mark. “Signature” or “subscription” includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.

     State. The words “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the state of California.

     Tenant or Occupant. The words “tenant” or “occupant,” applied to a building or land, means and includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.

     Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.

     Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean Pacific Standard Time or Daylight Savings Time as may be in current use in the city.

     Week. A “week” consists of seven consecutive days.

     “Writing” means and includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly otherwise provided.

     Year. The word “year” means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided. (Ord. 10-974 § 1, 2010; prior code § 1.2)

 

1.04.030 Corporate name.
     The word “town” is eliminated and dropped from the corporate name of the Town of Susanville and the word “city” is submitted therefore. The corporate name of this municipality is henceforth and hereon “City of Susanville.” (Prior code § 1.3)

 

1.04.040 Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances.
     The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Prior code § 1.4)

 

1.04.050 Effect of repeal of ordinances.
     The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.

     The repeal of an ordinance shall not effect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. (Prior code § 1.5)

 

1.04.060 Severability of parts of code.
     It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code. (Prior code § 1.6)

 

1.04.070 Catchlines of sections.
     The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. (Prior code § 1.7)

 

1.04.080 Right of entry of inspection.
     A.    Whenever any officer or employee of the city is authorized to enter any building or premises for the purpose of making an inspection to enforce any ordinance, he or she may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same; provided, that he shall effect entry in the manner provided in subsection B of this section, except in emergency situations, or when consent of the person having charge or control of such building or premises has been otherwise obtained.

     B.     If the building or premises to be inspected is occupied, the authorized officer or employee shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such building or premises is unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If consent to such entry is not given, the authorized officer or employee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.

     C.     The ordinance codified in this section shall be controlling over any other ordinance or part of an ordinance on the same subject, whether heretofore or hereafter adopted, unless such ordinance or part of an ordinance provides differently by an express reference to this section. Notwithstanding any other ordinance of this city, whether heretofore or hereafter adopted, it shall not be a violation of this section to refuse or fail to consent to an entry for inspection. (Prior code § 1.15)

Chapter 1.08 ARREST AND CITATION PROCEDURE
1.08.010 Citations for violations of code.
     If any person is arrested for a violation of this code, and such person is not taken immediately before a magistrate, as is more fully set forth in the Penal Code of the state, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court. The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least ten (10) days after such arrest.

     The place specified in the notice to appear shall be either:

     A.    Before a judge of a justice court within this county who has jurisdiction of the offense and who is nearest and most accessible to the place where the arrest is made; or,

     B.     Upon demand of the person arrested before a judge of a justice court having jurisdiction of such offense at the county seat of this county; or, before a judge in the judicial district in which the offense is alleged to have been committed;

     C.     Before an officer authorized by the city to receive a deposit of bail.

     The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to the arrested person and the arrested person in order to secure release must give his or her written promise so to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody.

     The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file the duplicate notice with the magistrate specified therein. Thereupon, the magistrate shall fix the amount of bail which in his or her judgment, in accordance with the provisions of Section 1275 of the Penal Code of the state, will be reasonable and sufficient for the appearance of the arrested person and shall endorse upon the notice a statement signed by the magistrate in the form set forth in Section 815a of the Penal Code of the state. The arrested person may, prior to the date upon which he or she promises to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail, thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant shall not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited, and may in his or her discretion order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the county treasury for distribution pursuant to Section 1463 of the Penal Code of the state. No warrant shall issue on such charge for the arrest of a person who has given such written promise to appear in court, unless and until such person has violated such promise or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment, as required by law.

     Any person wilfully violating his or her written promise to appear in court, given pursuant to this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested.

     When any person signs a written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided in Section 853.6 of the Penal Code of the state, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for such person’s arrest within twenty days after his or her failure to appear as promised; or, if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he or she promised to appear, then within twenty (20) days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense.

     When such person violates his or her promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. (Prior code § 1.12)

 

1.08.020 Designation of enforcement agency for regulation of smoking in the workplace.
     Subparagraph (j) of California Labor Code Section 6404.5, which provides as follows:

 

        (j)  Any violation of the prohibition set forth in subdivision (b) is an infraction subject to the subdivision (d) of Section 17 of the Penal Code and, notwithstanding Section 19.8 of the Penal Code, is punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100) for a first violation, two hundred dollars ($200) for a second violation within one year, and five hundred dollars ($500) for a third and for each subsequent violation within one year. This subdivision shall be enforced by local law enforcement agencies including, but not limited to, local health departments, as determined by the local governing body.

 

shall be enforced within the city by the Susanville police department. (Prior code § 14.5)

Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY
1.12.010 General penalty—Violations.
     Civil Actions. The city attorney may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of any provision of this code or any other ordinance of the city, or to enforce administrative penalties imposed.

     Wherever in this code or in any other ordinance of the city including codes adopted by reference, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision of this code or other ordinance or code adopted by reference of the city shall, unless specifically defined as a misdemeanor, constitute an infraction and shall be punishable by:

     A.    A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation;

     B.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance, term, or condition within one year from the date of the first violation, or five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second violation of a building or safety code within one year from the date of the first violation;

     C.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third, and each additional, violation of the same ordinance, term, or condition within one year from the date of the first violation, or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a third violation of a building or safety code within one year from the date of the first violation;

     A second or subsequent violation need only be of the same ordinance, term, or condition to require the larger fine, and need not involve the same personnel or property, provided that the same responsible party is cited. The fine amounts shall be cumulative where multiple citations are issued.

     Wherever in this code or in any other ordinance of the city including codes adopted by reference, any act is specifically declared to be a misdemeanor, said misdemeanor violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and/or imprisonment not to exceed six months.

     Every day the violation of this code or any other city ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 17-1011 § 1, 2017)

 

1.12.020 Recovery of attorneys’ fees and costs.
     A.    In addition to all other remedies and cost recovery authorized or provided by any provision of this code or any other law, any person violating any provision of this code shall be liable to the city for the city’s reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs incurred to remedy such violation or enforce such person’s compliance with this code, including recovery of the city’s reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs in bringing an action or proceeding to enforce an administrative determination or court order against such person. This section does not apply to public nuisance abatement actions for which attorneys’ fees are authorized under subsection B of this section.

     B.     In any action or proceeding brought by the city to abate a public nuisance, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorneys’ fees; provided that, pursuant to Government Section 38773.5, attorneys’ fees shall only be available in an action or proceeding in which the city has elected, at the commencement of such action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. In no action or proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding.

     C.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the city, in its discretion, may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid city fines, taxes, interest, fees, service charges, late payment charges, civil penalties, administrative penalties, and any other sum required to be paid under any provision of this code or any other law. Upon giving advance written notice that the debtor will be subject to collection costs if the debtor does not pay the unpaid amount owed to the city, the city shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs associated with the collection of the amount owed regardless of whether the city pursues said collection through litigation or by any other means. As used herein, “costs” include, but are not limited to, city staff time incurred in the collection of the amount owed, third-party costs incurred in the collection action, and those costs set forth in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1033.5. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total amount owed has been collected. (Ord. 17-1011 § 1, 2017)

Chapter 1.16 IMPRISONMENT
1.16.010 Imprisonment for violation of ordinance—Imprisonment in County Jail.
     Any person sentenced to imprisonment for the violation of an ordinance may be imprisoned in the County Jail of the county of Lassen, state of California. (Prior code § 1.9)

 

1.16.020 Imprisonment for violation of ordinance—Performance of manual labor and suppressing forest, etc., fires.
     The chief of police of the city is authorized to require any person who is imprisoned for the violation of any city ordinance to perform labor on the public works or ways or public property within the city and to require such person to engage in the prevention and suppression of forest, brush and grass fires upon lands within the city or upon lands adjacent to the city where the suppression of fires would afford protection to lands within the city. For such purposes the chief of police may remove such persons from the County Jail for not more than eight hours in any one day, Sundays and legal holidays excepted. (Prior code § 1.10)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.08 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
Chapter 2.12 CITY CLERK AND CITY TREASURER
Chapter 2.16 POLICE OFFICERS
Chapter 2.20 CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE
Chapter 2.24 DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND BUDGET MANAGEMENT
Chapter 2.28 HOUSING DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.32 AIRPORT COMMISSION
Chapter 2.36 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.40 RECREATION AND PARK COMMISSION
Chapter 2.44 BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapter 2.48 PUBLIC LIBRARY
Chapter 2.52 CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER
Chapter 2.56 PERSONNEL SYSTEM

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
2.04.010 Councilmembers’ salaries and compensation.
     Each member of the city council shall receive compensation, commencing pursuant to applicable law, on January 1, 1996, pursuant to Government Code Sections 36516 and 36516.5 and any subsequent amendments and/or substitutions thereto as follows:

     A monthly salary of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month, plus coverage of the councilmember under the city of Susanville’s health insurance plan provided said health insurance benefits are available to and paid by the city for its employees. (Ord. 01-872 § 2, 2001; prior code § 2.1-1)

 

2.04.020 Applicability.
     This chapter shall establish the council procedure regulations of the city. It shall apply to all regular and special meetings of the city council, and in addition, Sections 2.04.030, 2.04.060, 2.04.090, 2.04.100(A), (B) and (D), 2.04.110 through 2.04.180 inclusive, shall apply to all meetings of the city planning commission, parks and recreation commission and airport commission. When applied to committees, “council” shall mean “commission,” “councilmember” shall mean “commission member,” “mayor” shall mean “chair,” “mayor pro tem” shall mean “vice chair,” and “clerk” shall mean “secretary.” References to ordinances apply only to city council. References to “public hearings” apply only to the city council and the planning commission.

     A.    “Meeting” means the gathering together of a majority of the members of the city council at the time and place established by ordinances, resolution, or motion, for regular or adjourned meetings or at such other time and place as authorized by law for special meetings, for the purpose of acting in their official capacity as the legislative body of the city; to make decisions, commitments or promises by a majority of the council or by actual vote by a majority of the vote of the council when sitting as a body or entity upon a motion, proposal, resolutions, order or ordinance.

     B.     All such meetings shall be open to the public; provided, however, the city council may hold closed sessions as authorized by state law.

     C.     No other gathering of the persons who constitute the city council or any portion thereof, shall be considered a meeting.

     D.    The foregoing shall not prevent less than a quorum, otherwise gathered at the time and place and for the purpose of conducting a meeting, from adjourning from time to time in accord with law until a quorum is present.

     E.     If at any time the legislature of the state or the final decision of an appellate court of the State should define a meeting of the city council other than as set forth in this section, such legislative or final judicial definition shall thereafter supersede the definition set forth in this section.

     F.     A majority of the full membership of the council shall constitute a quorum.

     G.    A councilmember present but abstaining shall be counted for purposes of constituting a quorum.

     H.    A councilmember disqualified from voting by law shall not be counted for purposes of constituting a quorum. (Ord. 01-872 §§ 1, 3, 2001)

 

2.04.030 Effect of nonobservance of chapter.
     Failure to observe the rules set forth in this chapter shall not invalidate any action taken which is otherwise lawful but defective only for failure to follow the procedure outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.040 Time and place of regular meetings.
     The city council shall hold regular meetings in the council chambers of the City Hall, 66 North Lassen Street in the city, or at such other place as may be determined by the council on the first and third Wednesdays of each month at four-thirty p.m. When the day for each regular meeting of the council falls on a holiday as defined in California Government Code Section 6700 et seq., no meeting shall be held on such holiday, but a regular meeting shall be held at four-thirty p.m. on the following day, or at such time and place as may be previously established by the council. (Ord. 20-1031 § 1, 2020; Ord. 07-944 § 1, 2007; Ord. 07-943 § 1, 2007; Ord. 06-937 § 1, 2006; Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.050 Special meetings.
     Special meetings shall be held and noticed as set forth in Section 54956 of the Government Code, or any subsequent amendments thereto or replacements thereof. (Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.060 Adjournment.
     A.    Any meeting may either be terminated or continued to another time, place or date by adjournment, regardless of whether or not all matters on the agenda or under discussion have been completed, acted on or concluded. Notwithstanding the above, no meeting shall be terminated before closing all public hearings noticed for that meeting or without first continuing such public hearings to another time, place and date. Subject to the above, a motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate.

     B.     If less than a majority of the council appears at a regular meeting, any member or, if all members are absent, the city clerk, shall adjourn the meeting to a stated day and hour. The city clerk shall cause notice of the new date and time to be delivered to each councilmember at least three hours before the new meeting and posted at City Hall within twenty-four (24) hours after the time of the adjournment. (Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.070 Agenda—Order of business.
     A.    All reports, communications, ordinances, contract documents or other matters, including basic fact and matters pertinent thereto which have been submitted for the agenda should be distributed to the city council no later than five p.m. of Friday before any Wednesday meeting or seventy-two (72) hours prior to any council meeting, whichever is shorter. Upon distribution to the council, the agenda materials shall become public records available to the public, except for confidential legal opinions and closed session materials. The agenda shall be posted in accordance with Government Code Section 54954.2(a).

     B.     The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order:

     1.     Call meeting to order;

     2.     Roll call;

     3.     Approval of the agenda;

     4.     Public comment regarding closed session items (if any):

     5.     Closed session;

     6.     Return to open session;

     7.     Recess if necessary

     8.     Reconvene in open session at seven p.m.;

     9.     Pledge of allegiance;

     10.   Invocation;

     11.   Proclamations, awards or presentations by the city council;

     12.   Business from the floor;

     13.   Consent calendar;

     14.   Public hearings;

     15.   Council items;

     16.   New business;

     17.   Susanville community development agency;

     18.   Susanville municipal energy corporation;

     19.   Continuing business;

     20.   City administrator’s reports;

     21.   Council items;

     22.   Adjournment.

     The regular order of business may be changed or suspended for any purpose at any particular meeting by the mayor with the consent of the majority of the councilmembers present. (Ord. 20-1025 § 1, 2020; Ord. 06-937 § 1, 2006; Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.080 Procedure for public hearing.
     Whenever a public hearing must be held pursuant to any provision of law, the city council shall observe the following procedural requirements:

     A.    A public hearing shall be opened by the mayor.

     B.     Once opened, the city staff shall present their reports, comments and responses to council inquiries on the subject of the public hearing.

     C.     Public testimony on the matter shall be invited and heard; the council and staff may comment on the public testimony.

     D.    The public hearing shall be closed by the mayor.

     E.     After the public hearing is closed, the city council and staff may discuss the matter, but no new information may be introduced unless the public hearing is reopened. A public hearing may only be reopened at the meeting where the public hearing occurred, and then only upon a motion of a member of the city council, approved by a majority vote, and only if all persons who spoke during the hearing are still present.

     F.     The city council shall take action on the subject matter of the public hearing. (Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.090 Minutes of meeting.
     A.    Tape recordings, word processors, electronic aids, and every other means of recording upon any form of communication or representation, including letters, words, pictures, sounds or symbols, or combination thereof, and notes, papers, magnetic or paper tapes, magnetic or punched cards, discs or drums may be used by the city clerk for the sole purpose of facilitating the preparation of the minutes of the city council meeting and not for preserving its information content for public reference.

     B.     Nothing in this section shall be construed to replace the provisions of Government Code Section 54953.5.

     C.     Unless the reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a member of the council, such minutes may be approved as a consent item.

     D.    No minutes or written record of closed sessions of the city council shall be kept except as required by state law or as directed by majority vote of the city council. The council shall report at a public meeting any action taken in closed session, as required by Government Code Section 54957.1. (Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.100 Voting.
     A.    Unless otherwise required by law, voting shall be conducted by voice vote. When a member of the council votes to “abstain,” such member shall audibly state the reason for abstaining.

     B.     When the council is voting by voice vote, an affirmative vote shall be registered by the oral statement of “yes” or “aye” by the councilmember voting, or by a show of hand in the case of a councilmember who is unable to speak; provided, however, that as to councilmembers who are able to speak, silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote. A negative vote shall be registered by the oral statement “no” or “nay” by the councilmember voting or by a show of hand in case of a councilmember who is unable to speak.

     C.     Ordinances shall be voted by roll call vote as announced by the city clerk. All ordinances, resolutions and other matters submitted to the council shall be passed or defeated by a majority vote of the council unless a greater number of votes may be required by law. The word “majority” means three votes. In instances where a majority vote cannot be obtained and there have been no abstentions on the item and no additional action is taken, such matter shall automatically be added to the next agenda of the council.

     D.    Any abstention shall be accompanied by a statement of the legally authorized reason for the abstention; an abstention not authorized by law shall constitute an affirmative vote. (Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.120 Presiding officer—Designated.
     A.    The presiding officer of the council shall be the mayor, or, when absent, the mayor pro tem.

     B.     Said officer shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall immediately call the council to order.

     C.     In the absence of the mayor and mayor pro tem, the city clerk shall call the council to order, whereupon a temporary presiding officer shall be elected by the members of the council present.

     D.    Upon arrival of the mayor or/mayor pro tem, the temporary presiding officer shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the particular business immediately before the council at that time. Wherever in this chapter the term “mayor” is used, it shall apply equally to the presiding officer as defined in this section. The mayor shall have a vote but no veto power, and may move, second and debate from the chair. In the event of the taking of a roll call for the purpose of voting or otherwise, the mayor’s name shall be called last. (Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.120 Presiding officer—Duties and powers.
     A.    The mayor shall sign all ordinances, resolutions, contracts, and other documents necessitating said officer’s signature; shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the council; shall state, or call upon the clerk to state, the question before the council to be voted upon; shall call for the vote and announce the decision of the council on all subjects; shall decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal by the council or any councilmember, in which event a majority vote of the council shall govern and conclusively determine such question or order, shall have and exercise such other powers and duties as are authorized by law.

     B.     The mayor shall have power, authority and discretion, without a vote of the council to:

     1.     Set time limits on council discussion on any matter;

     2.     Set time limits on any communication from members of the public to the council; in no event shall any individual public communications exceed five minutes without the consent of a majority of the council present;

     3.     Declare the opening of a public hearing;

     4.     Rule any motion on a subject not on the agenda as being out of order, in which case the motion shall thereafter be void;

     5.     Table any motion on any matter until the next regular or special council meeting whenever the city attorney advises that there is a question as to the validity or constitutionality of the particular proposed course of action which is the subject matter of such motion;

     6.     May require any witness testifying to facts at any adjudicatory public hearing to be sworn before proceeding further with any such testimony;

     7.     Rule any speaker out of order, terminate any communication with the council from a member of the public and/or declare a recess in order to establish order to any meeting. The mayor shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a councilmember by reason of being mayor or acting as the presiding officer. (Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.130 Speaking rights of members.
     A.    Every councilmember desiring to speak shall address the chair. Upon recognition by the mayor, a councilmember shall speak only to the question under debate.

     B.     A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking except to be called to order, or as otherwise provided in this chapter. If a member is called to order while speaking, said member shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined; if in order, said member shall be permitted to proceed.

     C.     The councilmember moving the adoption of an ordinance, resolution or council action shall have the privilege of being the final speaker. (Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.140 Motions.
     A.    A motion to reconsider any action taken by the council may be made only at the meeting at which such action was taken. Such motion must be made by a member of the prevailing side. The motion shall be subject to debate. No member of the council may make or remake the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the council, if the subject matter of such motion, or such motion, has been previously tabled.

     B.     A motion to table takes precedence over all other motions and shall be subject to debate. When a motion to table is passed, the matter so tabled shall not again be considered by the council unless such matter is taken from the table by a majority vote of the council.

     C.     A matter once tabled shall not be placed on the agenda nor discussed unless a member who had voted to table such matter requests the council to have such matter taken from the table, or requests the clerk to place such matter on the agenda for the purpose of determining whether or not such matter shall be taken from the table. (Ord. 20-1027 § 1, 2020; Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.150 Rules of order.
     A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, proceedings of the council shall be governed by Rosenberg’s Rules of Order. In the event of a dispute concerning procedural matters not specifically covered in this chapter, the majority vote of the council shall prevail.

     B.     Rules adopted to expedite the transaction of business of the council in an orderly fashion are deemed to be procedural only, and the failure to strictly observe such rules shall not affect the jurisdiction of the council or invalidate any action taken at a meeting that is otherwise held in conformity with the law. (Ord. 20-1027 § 1, 2020; Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.160 Addressing the council.
     A.    Any person desiring to address the council shall first obtain permission of the mayor. Unless the mayor rules otherwise, any person shall have the right to address the council upon obtaining recognition from the mayor to speak subject to the following:

     1.     Public Hearings. Interested persons or their authorized representative may address the council orally or in writing relating to matters which are then subject to a public hearing. The order of presentation and the time thereof shall be under the direction and control of the mayor.

     2.     Written Communications. Interested parties or their authorized representatives may address the council by written communication with regard to matters with which they are concerned and are then the subject of council discussion. When copies of such communications are furnished to each councilmember present, such written communication shall not be read aloud at the meeting unless so ordered by a majority vote of the council. Written communications from the administrative staff shall not be read aloud unless requested by the writer or any councilmember.

     3.     Oral Communications.

     a.     Any person may address the council by oral communications with regard to any city-related matters with which such person is concerned and is then the subject of council discussion. Preference shall be given to those persons who have first notified the city in writing of their desire to speak.

     b.     Each person addressing the council shall speak into the microphone at the speaker’s podium when the same are in use, shall state his or her name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, and unless further time is granted by the mayor, shall limit the address to five minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the council as a body, and not to any member thereof. No person other than the council and the person having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the council, without the permission of the mayor. No person shall address or question a councilmember, the city attorney, the city administrator, or other official without the prior consent of the mayor.

     4.     Except for public comments under “business from the floor,” the mayor shall not permit any communication, written or oral, to be made or submitted unless such communication addresses the agenda item then under discussion.

     B.     After a motion is made by a councilmember, no person shall address the council without first securing the permission of the mayor and council to do so.

     C.     Anonymous communications shall not be considered, nor placed on the agenda.

     D.    When any identifiable group of persons, as opposed to the general public at large, wishes to address the council on the same agenda item, the mayor shall have the discretion to request that a spokesperson be chosen by said group to address the council. If additional issues are to be presented at the hearing by any other member of such group, the mayor may limit the number of persons and the time periods to address the council, so as to avoid unnecessary repetition of issues before the council. (Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

 

2.04.170 Rules of decorum—Enforcement.
     A.    While the council is in session, all persons shall preserve the order and decorum of the session. The standards of order and decorum shall be governed by common sense.

     B.     All persons must conduct themselves in a manner consistent with good taste and generally accepted standards of appropriate behavior. Any person making slanderous remarks, or who engages in conduct that interrupts the due course of the meeting shall be forthwith removed from further audience before that session of the city council by the mayor, unless permission to continue is granted by majority vote of the council.

     C.     Any person who does not comply with the above rules or who otherwise disrupts the orderly course of the meeting is guilty of an infraction and may be called out of order by the mayor and barred from further audience before that session of the council. (Ord. 01-872 § 3, 2001)

Chapter 2.08 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
2.08.010 Created—Appointment.
     The office of city administrator is created and established. The administrator shall be ex officio director of finance and budget manager. The administrator shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and qualifications, and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. (Prior code § 2.51)

 

2.08.020 Eligibility.
     No person serving as a councilmember of the city shall be eligible for appointment as city administrator until one year has elapsed after such councilmember has ceased to be a member of the city council. (Prior code § 2.53)

 

2.08.030 Bond.
     The city administrator shall furnish a corporate surety bond, to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council, which shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city administrator as prescribed in this chapter. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. (Prior code § 2.54)

 

2.08.040 Compensation.
     A.    The city administrator shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the city council from time to time determines and fixes by resolution, and said compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council designates.

     B.     Such compensation and expense allowance may be set forth in the form of a contract or agreement separate and apart from an employee compensation plan.

     C.     The city administrator shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council; reimbursement shall be only made, however, when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the city council for approval. (Prior code § 2.55)

 

2.08.050 Pro tempore.
     The city administrator shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as city administrator pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city administrator. In case of the absence or disability of the city administrator and failure to appoint a city administrator pro tempore, the city council may designate some qualified city employee to perform the duties of the city administrator during the period of absence or disability of the city administrator subject, however, to such person furnishing a corporate surety bond conditional upon faithful performance of the duties required to be performed as set forth in this article. (Prior code § 2.56)

 

2.08.060 Powers and duties—Generally.
     The city administrator shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The city administrator shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have the powers set forth in Sections 2.08.070 through 2.08.170 inclusive. (Prior code § 2.57)

 

2.08.070 Powers and duties—Law enforcement.
     It shall be the duty of the city administrator to ensure the enforcement of all ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. (Prior code § 2.58)

 

2.08.080 Powers and duties—Reorganization of offices.
     It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city administrator to recommend to the city council such reorganization of offices, positions, departments or units under the city administrator’s direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business. (Prior code § 2.59)

 

2.08.090 Powers and duties—Appointment, removal, promotion and demotion of officers and employees.
     It shall be the duty of the city administrator to appoint and remove or promote or demote any and all officers and employees of the city with the approval of the city council, except the city attorney, and any elected position or officer. (Ord. 09-970 § 1, 2009; Ord. 04-912 § 1, 2004; Ord. 98-848 § 1; prior code § 2.60)

 

2.08.100 Powers and duties—Authority over employees.
     It shall be the duty of the city administrator and he or she shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city, except the city attorney, and any elected position or officer, to transfer employees from one department to another or to consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his or her direction, with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 09-970 § 2, 2009; Ord. 04-912 § 1, 2004; Ord. 98-848 § 1; prior code § 2.61)

 

2.08.110 Powers and duties—Ordinances.
     It shall be the duty of the city administrator to recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as the city administrator deems necessary or expedient. (Prior code § 2.62)

 

2.08.120 Powers and duties—Attendance at council meetings.
     It shall be the duty of the city administrator to attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom, except when his or her removal is under consideration. (Prior code § 2.63)

 

2.08.130 Powers and duties—Fiscal.
     A.    It shall be the duty of the city administrator to regulate the duties and responsibilities of the director of finance and budget manager to ensure proper fiscal management and to see that the director of finance is dutifully serving all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council that relate to financial matters.

     B.     The director of finance shall perform the responsibilities as purchasing agent for the city, performing the duties of purchasing as set forth in Chapter 3.08 of the Susanville Municipal Code. The director of finance shall report to the city administrator concerning financial reports showing revenues adequate to allow expenditures in the budget, and shall immediately report to the city administrator when revenues are inadequate to allow budgeted expenditures. (Ord. 98-848 § 1; prior code § 2.64)

 

2.08.140 Powers and duties—Investigations.
     It shall be the duty of the city administrator to make investigations into the affairs of the city, and any department or division thereof, and any contract, agreement, franchise, or the proper performance of any obligations of the city. (Prior code § 2.65)

 

2.08.150 Powers and duties—Personnel administration.
     It shall be the duty of the city administrator to prepare or cause to be prepared for submittal to the city council a personnel ordinance which sets forth rules and regulations governing the rights, privileges, duties and responsibilities of employees and officers of the city. Such personnel ordinance shall also provide for the establishment by ordinance or resolution of the city council a position classification plan with appropriate compensation schedules. (Prior code § 2.66)

 

2.08.160 Powers and duties—Public buildings.
     It shall be the duty of the city administrator and he or she shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council. (Prior code § 2.67)

 

2.08.170 Powers and duties—Additional duties.
     It shall be the duty of the city administrator to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the city council. (Prior code § 2.68)

 

2.08.180 Council-administrator relations.
     The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city administrator, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city administrator. The city administrator shall take orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the city council, and no individual council member shall give any orders or instructions to the city administrator. (Prior code § 2.69)

 

2.08.190 Departmental cooperation.
     It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and employees, and elected city officers and personnel to assist the city administrator in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by the laws and ordinances of the city. (Ord. 98-848 § 1; prior code § 2.70)

 

2.08.200 Ex officio member of board and commissions.
     The city administrator shall be an ex officio member of all boards and commissions appointed by the mayor or city council pursuant to law, with a right to participate in all deliberations or actions by his or her voice, but without vote. (Prior code § 2.71)

 

2.08.210 Termination—Total discretion of city council.
     The termination of the city administrator’s employment with the city shall be only upon a three-member vote of the entire city council in a regular council meeting. In terminating the employment of the city administrator, the city council shall use its unhindered and absolute discretion. The city administrator is an at-will employee and serves at the pleasure of the city council. The city council has the power to dismiss the city administrator with or without cause at its pleasure. The action of the city council shall be final. (Prior code § 2.72)

Chapter 2.12 CITY CLERK AND CITY TREASURER
2.12.010 City clerk’s office hours.
     The office of the city clerk, located in the City Hall at Number 66 North Lassen Street, shall be open from eight a.m. to five p.m. Monday through Friday, except on those days which have been declared a legal holiday for all city offices. (Ord. 14-995 § 3, 2014)

 

2.12.020 City treasurer.
     The finance division is authorized to perform all duties past, present and future of the city treasurer. (Ord. 14-995 § 3, 2014)

Chapter 2.16 POLICE OFFICERS
2.16.010 Duty of police officers to aid persons or animals in distress—Generally.
     In addition to the performance of their regular and ordinary duties, it shall be the duty of all police officers, at all times, and under all circumstances, to go to the aid of all persons or animals in distress or danger, and render them such help and assistance as lies within their power. (Prior code § 2.4)

 

2.16.020 Duty of police officers to aid persons or animals in distress—Injury occurring while aiding persons or animals in distress.
     In case any police officer should be injured while rendering such additional services as required by Section 2.16.010 of this code, such officer shall be deemed to be injured in the course of his or her employment and shall be entitled to workers compensation therefor, as provided by law. (Prior code § 2.5)

Chapter 2.20 CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE
2.20.010 Purpose and effect of chapter.
     Pursuant to the Political Reform Act, Government Code Sections 81000, et seq., and Fair Political Practices Commission regulation (2 Cal. Code of Regulations, Section 18730), a conflict of interest code shall be promulgated by resolution duly adopted by the city council. (Prior code § 2.32)

Chapter 2.24 DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND BUDGET MANAGEMENT
2.24.010 Department established— Appointment—Bond.
     Pursuant to Section 37209 and 40805.5 of the Government Code of the state of California, there is established in the city an office or department of director of finance and budget management; the department head thereof shall be known as director of finance and budget manager, sometimes referred to as “finance director” and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The person occupying the office created shall be the person who has been appointed finance director, (see Section 2.56.040), and shall, prior to entering upon the duties of his or her office, execute a bond to the city which shall conform to the provisions of the Government Code of the state of California relating to the bonds of public officers. The penal sum of such bond shall be in a reasonable amount recommended by the city administrator and fixed by the city council by resolution, and may be changed from time to time during the tenure of office of the director of finance. (Ord. 98-848 § 1; prior code § 2.42)

 

2.24.020 Duties generally.
     The director of finance shall perform the following duties:

     A.    Be the accounting officer of the city and shall maintain records readily reflecting the financial condition of the city;

     B.     Furnish to the controller of the state the reports requirements required by Sections 53891, 53892, 52892.2, 53892.3 of the Government Code of the state;

     C.     Cause a summary of the financial reports required by the next preceding subsection, in a form prescribed by the State Controller, to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation pursuant to Article 1 (commencing with Section 6000), Chapter 1, Division 7, Title 1 of the Government Code of the state; or, if there is no such newspaper, he or she shall cause copies of the statement to be posted in three public places in the city, designated by ordinance as the place for posting of public notices;

     D.    Cause the above mentioned report to be published or posted not later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the close of the fiscal year for which the report is compiled;

     E.     Perform all duties imposed upon the city assessor by Chapter 4 of Division 3 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 2.43)

 

2.24.030 Transfer of duties from city clerk.
     The foregoing duties imposed upon the director of finance in Section 2.24.020 are transferred from the city clerk to the director of finance. (Prior code § 2.44)

 

2.24.040 Additional duties.
     In addition to the duties above herein imposed upon the director of finance he or she shall perform the following duties:

     A.    The preparation of the annual city budget in accordance with policies recommended by the State Controller’s office and office of budget management, and adopted by the city council.

     B.     Prepare a detailed analysis of each department budget request as to its efficiency and economy of the tax dollar, which shall be submitted, along with the department requests, so that the city council can determine the best course of action for the city.

     C.     Be responsible for monitoring the fiscal activities of all city departments and reporting to the department heads, and the city administrator any deviations from the planned fiscal operation of the city as set forth in the budget.

     D.    In addition, the director of finance shall be responsible for reporting to the city council any deviations from the city budget.

     E.     Make available to the city administrator and city council monthly reports as to the revenue collection, disbursement activity, and any other pertinent fiscal information, in the manner directed by the city administrator or city council.

     F.     Prepare and annually update a capital improvement plan to project major repair, replacement, or construction of buildings, equipment, facilities, streets or roads. For the purpose of this section, “major capital improvements” are defined as any costs amounting to over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for equipment, facilities, and buildings and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for streets or roads.

     G.    Oversee and serve all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges to which the city is a party or beneficiary, and assure the city receives all sums owing or to be paid when due. (Ord. 98-848 § 1; prior code § 2.45)

 

2.24.050 Finance director’s independence in reporting.
     The finance director shall provide written fiscal reports to the city council independent of the city administrator’s approval. The reports shall be provided no less frequently than monthly and may be made either concurrently or in addition to the monthly financial reports the finance director provides during city council meetings. The city administrator shall take no disciplinary action against the finance director for his or her compliance with the requirements herein. (Ord. 04-913 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 2.28 HOUSING DEPARTMENT
2.28.010 Created.
     There is created in the city a housing department. (Prior code § 6.10)

 

2.28.020 Building inspector to enforce rules and regulations.
     The building inspector of the city has imposed upon him or her the duty of enforcing rules and regulations of the city housing department, as imposed by the Uniform Housing Code, and also of the state housing law as set forth in the California Health and Safety Code. (Prior code § 6.11)

Chapter 2.32 AIRPORT COMMISSION
2.32.010 Created—Composition.
     There is created in the city the Susanville airport commission, an airport commission of the city. The airport commission shall have five members and one alternate. (Ord. 07-940 § 1, 2007; Ord. 03-887 § 1, 2003: prior code § 3.30)

 

2.32.020 Appointment and qualifications of members.
     All commission members and the alternate shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. One member shall hold membership on the Lassen County Airport land use commission. Two members shall be pilots. All members shall reside within fifteen (15) miles of the city limits. In the absence of any member from a meeting of the Susanville airport commission, the alternate shall serve in the same manner as that member. (Ord. 07-940 § 1, 2007; Ord. 03-887 § 1, 2003: prior code § 3.31)

 

2.32.030 Terms of office—Vacancies.
     The term of office of members of the airport commission and the alternate shall be for four years. It is the intent of this chapter that the remaining offices now held by members of the airport commission shall continue the same terms of office they presently hold. The alternate shall be appointed to an initial term of four years. When the alternate’s term ends, or each member’s term ends, then that term shall be filled as otherwise provided herein this chapter. (Ord. 07-940 § 1, 2007; Ord. 03-887 § 1, 2003: prior code § 3.32)

 

2.32.040 Powers and duties.
     The airport commission shall have the powers and shall perform all duties as outlined below:

     A.    Advise the city council in the maintenance and revisions of the comprehensive airport master plan for physical growth and development of the airport;

     B.     Serve as an advisory body to the city council on matters related to the airport growth and development and on such other matters as may be requested by the council. The commission shall provide input to the city council regarding policies and regulations governing the operations and the conduct of business on the airport;

     C.     Promote public interest in airport planning and encourage citizen participation in the formation of the airport master plan;

     D.    Engage in a program of acquainting the public with the performance and alternate solutions relating to aviation transportation and ensure that the public and private facilities and services will be provided by an orderly and balanced growth of the airport and airport activity;

     E.     At the earliest possible time, take advisory action, if referred by the city administrator or city council, on all matters concerning the Susanville airport properties and adjacent areas affecting the airport properties. (Prior code § 3.33)

Chapter 2.36 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.36.010 Planning commission—Creation.
     A planning commission is created for the city pursuant to Government Code Section 65100 et seq. (Prior code § 2.7-1)

 

2.36.020 Planning commission membership.
     The city’s planning commission consists of five members, who shall be appointed by a quorum of the city council. The city council may also choose to appoint up to two alternate members to the commission. (Ord. 13-987 § 1, 2012; prior code § 2.7-2)

 

2.36.030 Eligibility for office.
     A person is not eligible to hold office as a planning commissioner unless he or she is, at the time of appointment, a resident and registered voter of the city. If, during his or her term of office, a member of the planning commission moves his or her residence outside the city limits, or ceases to be an elector of the city, such member’s office shall immediately become vacant. The same eligibility requirements shall apply to alternate commission members. (Ord. 13-987 § 1, 2012; prior code § 2.7-3)

 

2.36.040 Planning commission term of office.
     The term of office shall be four years from the date of such appointment, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. (Prior code § 2.7-4)

 

2.36.050 Vacancies in office.
     If the office of a member of the planning commission becomes vacant, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment as provided in Section 2.36.020, except that the new member shall complete the former commissioner’s unexpired term. If there are appointed alternate commissioners, the city council may first consider one of the alternate members for the position. (Ord. 13-987 § 1, 2012; prior code § 2.7-5)

 

2.36.060 Planning commission—Conflict of interest laws.
     The planning commission shall be subject to the conflict of interest laws of the state and the city. (Prior code § 2.7-6)

 

2.36.070 Removal from office.
     The members of the planning commission who are appointed serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed from office by the vote of a majority of the members of the city council. No public hearing need be held prior to removal and no cause for removal need be shown. The removal of a person as a member of the planning commission terminates any offices or positions he or she may hold as a planning commissioner. (Prior code § 2.7-7)

 

2.36.080 Planning commissioners’ compensation.
     Each member of the planning commission shall receive compensation, commencing on January 1, 1996, pursuant to Government Code Section 36506 and any subsequent amendments and/or substitutions thereto as follows:

     A monthly salary of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per month.

     Alternate members shall not receive compensation. (Ord. 13-987 § 1, 2012; prior code § 2.7-8)

 

2.36.090 Planning commission—Quorum.
     Three members of the commission constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. If a quorum cannot be made from the serving planning commission, a previously appointed alternate member may be used to fulfill a quorum. (Ord. 13-987 § 1, 2012; prior code § 2.7-9)

 

2.36.100 Meetings.
     The commission shall meet at least once a month and shall establish a regular meeting day and time by resolution. Planning commission regular meetings shall be held at City Hall. (Prior code § 2.7-10)

 

2.36.110 Chairperson—Vice-chairperson— Secretary—Appointment.
     A.    The commission shall appoint a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members. The chairperson and vice-chairperson serve for a term of one year or until the successor of each is appointed and takes office. Said appointments shall occur at the first meeting in July and the new chair shall presume office at the second meeting. In the event the chair and vice-chair are absent, the commission shall select an acting chair for the meeting.

     B.     The secretary of the planning commission shall be the city clerk unless otherwise designated by the city council. (Prior code § 2.7-11)

 

2.36.120 Adoption of procedural rules.
     The commission may adopt procedural rules for the transaction of its business by resolution. (Prior code § 2.7-12)

 

2.36.130 Officers and secretary—Duties.
     A.    The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the commission. The vice-chairperson shall act as the chairperson in the absence of the chairperson or in case of inability of the chairperson to act.

     B.     The secretary shall keep a record of each meeting and shall record the official action taken. The secretary shall maintain records of actions taken and shall perform such other duties as the commission assigns. (Prior code § 2.7-13)

 

2.36.140 Planning commission duties.
     The planning commission shall perform all duties assigned to it by state law and the city council, including, but not limited to, the following:

     A.    Prepare, periodically review, and revise as necessary, the general plan;

     B.     Implement the general plan through actions including, but not limited to, the administration of specific plans and zoning and subdivision ordinances;

     C.     Annually review the capital improvement program of the city and the local public works projects of other local agencies for their consistency with the general plan, pursuant to Government Code Section 65400 et seq.;

     D.    Endeavor to promote public interest in, comment on, and understanding of, the general plan, and regulations relating to it;

     E.     Consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other organizations generally concerning implementation of the general plan;

     F.     Promote the coordination of local plans and programs with the plans and programs of other public agencies;

     G.    Perform all functions of a board of zoning adjustment that have not been otherwise delegated to the zoning administrator in the city zoning ordinance;

     H.    Perform other functions as the legislative body provides from time to time, including conducting studies and preparing plans other than those required or authorized by this title;

     I.      Develop and publish procedural rules for conduct at hearings, pursuant to Government Code Section 65804. (Prior code § 2.7-14)

Chapter 2.40 RECREATION AND PARK COMMISSION
2.40.010 Established.
     There is created and established a recreation and park commission which is named “Susanville recreation and park commission” and which is hereinafter referred to as the “commission.” (Prior code § 2.16)

 

2.40.020 Membership—Appointment.
     A.    The commission shall consist of seven members who shall serve without compensation and who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. The mayor shall consider appointments to the commission on the basis of an interest by the potential member in one, or more, of the following areas: parks/trees, schools (elementary and high school), college, culture/arts, competitive sports, youth activities (day camp and day care), and seniors. Two members of the commission shall be appointed for two years, two members for three years, and three members for four years, to be determined by the mayor at the time the appointment is made. After completion of the initial term, subsequent members shall thereafter serve four-year terms from date of appointment.

     B.     Meetings of the commission shall be held not less often than quarterly on a date to be established by the commission. Should a commissioner be absent without the appropriate authorization by the commission for three consecutive meetings, regular or special, the seat shall automatically become vacant.

     C.     Vacancies in the membership of the commission, due to the member’s removal, resignation or other cause creating such vacancy, shall be filled as provided in subsection (a) of this section, except that the new member shall complete the former commissioner’s unexpired term.

     D.    Four members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

     E.     The commission shall be subject to the state’s conflict of interest laws and the Brown Act.

     F.     A staff member shall perform the duties of the recreation and parks director and shall report to the public services director.

     G.    The commission shall have the power and is encouraged to appoint standing committees to deal with issues that require resolution through a meeting process.

     H.    A minimum of five members of the commission shall live within the city limits of the city of Susanville. (Prior code § 2.17)

 

2.40.030 Ex officio members.
     The superintendent of the elementary school district, superintendent of the high school district, superintendent of the college district, one high school student to be chosen by the high school, city recreation supervisor and city administrator shall be ex officio members. (Prior code § 2.18)

 

2.40.040 Officers.
     The officers of the commission shall consist of a chairperson and vice chairperson to be elected by the commission from its own membership at the regular meeting in January. (Prior code § 2.21)

 

2.40.050 Goals of the commission.
     A.    Parks. Recommend policies and advise the city council and city staff on the acquisition, maintenance, development and use of park property and the promotion of park facilities in Susanville.

     B.     Recreation. Recommend policies and advise the city council and city staff on the number, type, and operation of city recreation programs; on the development and use of city recreation facilities and facilities that affect recreation opportunities in Susanville and Lassen County; and on ways to promote city recreation programs.

     C.     Arts and Culture. Recommend policies and advise the city council and city staff on the promotion of arts and cultural activities and programs for all residents, and on the development and maintenance of facilities devoted to arts and culture. (Prior code § 2.23)

 

2.40.060 Powers and duties.
     A.    The commission shall review annually the proposed budget to assure that there are adequate funds budgeted to provide the programs, and may make recommendations to the council on the proposed budget.

     B.     The commission shall be responsible for review and recommendation of all projects that directly or indirectly impact the parks, recreation or arts/culture activities and facilities in Susanville.

     C.     Under the jurisdiction of the city council, and with the approval of the city council, the commission may accept all gifts, donations, legacies or bequests, either real or personal property from any other source, public or private. All such money shall be deposited in the treasury of the city in the recreation fund and paid out with the approval of the city administrator. (Prior code § 2.24)

 

2.40.070 Matching funds of school districts.
     The city council shall have the power to contribute funds for the purposes provided in this chapter in greater or lesser amounts than those contributed by the Lassen Community College District, the Lassen Union High School District or other school districts or agencies. (Prior code § 2.25)

Chapter 2.44 BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION AND PUBLIC SAFETY
2.44.010 The bureau.
     The fire prevention and public safety bureau (hereinafter referred to in this chapter as “the bureau”) is established to provide encouragement for fire and public safety and to enforce local, state and federal requirements and laws relating to public safety as identified by the State Fire Marshal, fire prevention, and fire. (Prior code § 8.40)

 

2.44.020 Staff.
     The bureau shall consist of the fire chief and all full- time paid employees of the fire department. (Prior code § 8.42)

 

2.44.030 Authority and responsibility.
     The bureau is authorized:

     A.    To enforce any and all local, state or federal laws, codes, and ordinances that pertain to public safety as identified by the State Fire Marshal, fire prevention, fire, and certain parking violations; and to issue warnings or citation for violations thereof;

     B.     To act as a resource for fire and public safety; to inspect all new businesses and issue bureau certificates of occupancy; to provide a regular inspection of all existing businesses; to provide enforcement of all conditions for improvements and/or development attached to property by the planning commission or the city council; to issue burn permits and enforce burn requirements as stated on the permits. (Prior code § 8.44)

 

2.44.040 Certificates of occupancy.
     The bureau shall inspect the premises of each new business required to have a business license and issue a bureau certificate of occupancy when the operation is code compliant. The fee for each bureau certificate and inspection shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00), payable to the city clerk at the time the business license is obtained. Treble fees will be assessed for failure to obtain an inspection and bureau certificate of occupancy before beginning operation of a new business. (Prior code § 8.46)

 

2.44.050 Change in ownership certificates of occupancy.
     The bureau shall inspect the premises of each business that changes ownership or alters the stated operation of the previous business license thereon and issue a bureau certificate of occupancy when the operation is code compliant. The fee for said bureau certificate and inspection shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00), payable to the city clerk at the time the business license is obtained. Treble fees will be assessed for failure to obtain an inspection and bureau certificate of occupancy before beginning operation as a change in ownership or an altered operation. (Prior code § 8.48)

 

2.44.060 Public safety responsibilities.
     The bureau is authorized to enforce:

     A.    All codes, laws and ordinances relating to the following:

     1.     Red zones;

     2.     Hydrants;

     3.     Alleys;

     4.     No-parking areas;

     5.     School bus loading zones;

     6.     Handicap parking;

     7.     Burning permits;

     B.     Conditions imposed on the improvement and/or development of property by the planning commission or city council. (Prior code § 8.50)

 

2.44.070 Fines.
     Fines for violations of any code, law, or ordinance as specified in this chapter shall be as specified by city ordinance or by the court having jurisdiction over the matter; provided, however, that for the violations of burning without a permit, or burning after permit hours, burning during “no burn” times, fines are as follows:

     A.    First offense, twenty-five dollars ($25.00);

     B.     Second offense, fifty dollars ($50.00);

     C.     Third offense, up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) fine. (Prior code § 8.52)

Chapter 2.48 PUBLIC LIBRARY
2.48.010 Establishment of public library.
     There is established in the city a public library, to be known as the Susanville Public Library. (Prior code § 2.6)

Chapter 2.52 CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER
2.52.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall, when used in this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     “Civil defense” means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters. It shall not include, nor does any provision of this chapter apply to any condition relating to a labor controversy.

     “Disaster” means actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, earthquake, epidemic, riot, general civil disobedience, multiple law violations or the threat of any or all of the foregoing or other similar public calamity, including, but not limited to, uncontrolled or uncontrollable assemblages of people. (Prior code § 7.1)

 

2.52.020 Purpose of chapter.
     The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the civil defense of persons and property within the city in the event of a disaster, and to provide for the coordination of the civil defense and disaster functions of this city with all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and organizations. Any expenditures made in connection with such civil defense and disaster activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Prior code § 7.2)

 

2.52.030 Civil defense and disaster council— Created—Composition.
     The city civil defense and disaster council is created and shall consist of the following:

     A.    The mayor, who shall be chairperson.

     B.     The director of civil defense and disaster.

     C.     The assistant director, appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council who, under the supervision of the director, shall develop civil defense and disaster plans and organize the civil defense and disaster program of this city, and shall have such other duties as may be assigned by the director.

     D.    Such deputy directors and chiefs of operating civil defense and disaster departments, services or divisions as are provided for by resolution pursuant to this chapter.

     E.     Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official group or organization civil defense and disaster responsibility as may be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. (Prior code § 7.3)

 

2.52.040 Civil defense and disaster council—Powers and duties.
     It shall be the duty of the city civil defense and disaster council, and it is empowered, to review and recommend for adoption by the city council, civil defense and disaster and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. (Prior code § 7.4)

 

2.52.050 Civil defense and disaster council—Meetings.
     The civil defense and disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairperson, or, in the chairperson’s absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the vice-chairperson. (Prior code § 7.5)

 

2.52.060 Director of civil defense and disaster—Office created— Designated.
     There is created the office of director of civil defense and disaster. The mayor shall be the director of civil defense and disaster. In the absence or incapacity of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall exercise the powers and perform the duties of the director of civil defense and disaster and in the absence or incapacity of both the mayor and the mayor pro tempore, such councilperson as is designated by the remaining members of the city council or a majority of them, shall exercise the powers and perform the duties of director of civil defense and disaster. In the absence or incapacity of all of the foregoing, the chief of police shall exercise the powers and perform the duties of director of civil defense and disaster. (Prior code § 7.6)

 

2.52.070 Director of civil defense and disaster—Powers and duties— Generally.
     The director of civil defense and disaster is empowered:

     A.    To request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a disaster and the termination thereof, if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session, subject to confirmation by the city council at the earliest practicable time;

     B.     To request the governor to proclaim a state of extreme emergency when in the opinion of the director the resources of the area or region are inadequate to cope with the disaster;

     C.     To control and direct the effort of the civil defense and disaster organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

     D.    To direct coordination and cooperation between divisions, services and staff of the civil defense and disaster organization of this city, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

     E.     To represent the civil defense and disaster organization of this city in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to civil defense and disaster. (Prior code § 7.7)

 

2.52.080 Director of civil defense and disaster—Powers and duties— Powers of director in event of proclamation of disaster.
     A.    In the event of the proclamation of a disaster as herein provided, or the proclamation of the state of extreme emergency, by the governor or the state director of civil defense, the director is empowered:

     1.     To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council;

     2.     To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people, and bind the city for the fair value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

     3.     To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the governor in the region in which this city is located, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she thinks necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered civil defense and disaster worker volunteers.

     4.     To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency.

     5.     To execute all of his or her ordinary powers as mayor, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution adopted pursuant thereto, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, agreement approved by the city council, or by any other lawful authority, and in conformity with Section 38791 of the State Government Code, to exercise complete authority over the city and to exercise all police power vested in the city by the Constitution and general laws.

     6.     The director of civil defense and disaster may order a general curfew applicable to the entire city or such geographical areas thereof as he or she deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals. As used herein “curfew” is defined as a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing, riding or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or private property except as authorized by the owner, lessee or person in charge of such private property. Persons officially delegated to the duty with reference to such civil emergency and representatives of news media, physicians, nurses, ambulance operators performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential public services, firemen and law enforcement officers and other such personnel as well as those specifically authorized to duty by duly delegated authority are exempted from the foregoing curfew requirements.

     7.     The director of civil defense and disaster may order the closing of any business establishment anywhere within the city, such businesses to include, but not limited to, those selling alcoholic beverages, gasoline or firearms.

     8.     The director of civil defense and disaster may order that no persons shall consume any alcoholic beverage in a public street or place which is publicly owned or in any other public or private area on which the consumption of such alcoholic beverages shall be found by the director of civil defense and disaster, on just cause, to precipitate a clear and present danger to the well being of the community during the emergency.

     9.     The director of civil defense and disaster may order that no person shall carry or possess any gun, bomb, firebomb, knife, rock or any other such weapon or item, the use of which would intend to inflict great bodily harm on persons or damage to property.

     10.   The director of civil defense and disaster may designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicular parking area closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic during the course of such an emergency.

     B.     The foregoing specific authorizations of authority vested in the director of civil defense and disaster and other such authorizations as deemed necessary during such emergencies are declared to be imminently necessary for the protection of life and property during such periods.

     C.     Once a proclamation of disaster is issued by the director of civil defense and disaster he or she may request the governor for all necessary assistance, requisition necessary personnel or materials from any city department or other source, control and direct all city personnel and equipment, obtain vital supplies and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people and bind the city for the fair market value thereof, and if required, commandeer immediately such property, equipment and personnel necessary for the public use during the term of the emergency.

     D.    The director of civil defense and disaster may also require emergency services of any city official or employee and may command the aid of as many citizens of this city as he or she determines to be necessary in the execution of his or her duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all the privileges and immunities as are provided by state or local law for registered civil defense and disaster worker volunteers.

     E.     Any state or local emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall terminate after forty-eight (48) hours from the issuance thereof or upon the issuance of the proclamation terminating the emergency by the director of civil defense and disaster, whichever occurs first; provided however, that such emergency may be extended for an additional period of time as deemed obligatory by the director of civil defense and disaster.

     F.     Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or executive order issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one year or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 7.8)

 

2.52.090 Civil defense and disaster organization—Composition.
     All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during a disaster, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of laws, including persons commandeered under the provisions of Section 2.52.080(C) of this code, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such disaster, shall constitute the civil defense and disaster organization of the city. (Prior code § 7.9)

 

2.52.100 Civil defense and disaster organization—Organization—
               Powers and duties of members.

     A.    The functions and duties of the city civil defense and disaster organization shall be distributed among such divisions, services and special staff as the city council shall prescribe by resolution.

     B.     The city council shall concurrently with the adoption of this chapter, adopt a resolution setting forth the form of organization, establishment and designation of divisions and services, the assignment of functions, duties and powers, the designation of officers and employees. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the federal government and the civil defense agency of the state. (Prior code § 7.10)

 

2.52.110 Violations of chapter.
     It shall be a misdemeanor and a violation of this chapter for any person during a disaster:

     A.    Wilfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the civil defense or disaster organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter;

     B.     To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

     C.     To wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the civil defense and disaster agency of the state. (Prior code § 7.11)

Chapter 2.56 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
2.56.010 Adoption of personnel system.
     In order to establish an equitable and uniform system for dealing with personnel matters, and to comply with applicable laws relating to the administration of the personnel process, the personnel system is adopted. (Prior code § 2-A.1)

 

2.56.020 Definitions.
     The terms used to administer the personnel system shall be defined in the personnel rules. (Prior code § 2-A.2)

 

2.56.030 Administration.
     The city administrator shall administer the city personnel system and may delegate any of the powers and duties to a personnel director or may delegate the appointing authority granted to the city council to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in Section 2.56.130 of this chapter. The city administrator shall:

     A.    Act as the appointing authority for the city with the consent of the city council;

     B.     Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council;

     C.     Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules;

     D.    Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications and revisions of the plan;

     E.     Have the authority to discipline employees in accordance with this chapter and the personnel rules of the city;

     F.     Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for positions in the city service; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting and grading of tests; the certification of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the city service; and performing any other duty that may be required to administer the personnel system. (Prior code § 2-A.3)

 

2.56.040 City service.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city, except:

     A.    Elective officers.

     B.     City administrator.

     C.     The city attorney and any assistant or deputy city attorneys.

     D.    Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees.

     E.     All department heads, including city clerk, community services director (sometimes also referred to as parks and recreation director), director of finance, police chief, fire chief, director of public works (previously designated Public Services Director in this code), community development director, and building official.

     F.     Persons engaged under contracts to supply expert, professional, technical or any other services.

     G.    Volunteer personnel such as volunteer firemen.

     H.    Emergency employees who are hired to meet immediate requirements of emergency conditions, such as extraordinary fire, flood, or earthquake which threatens life or property.

     I.      Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in permanent positions. “Regularly employed in permanent position” means an employee hired for an indefinite term into a budget position, who is regularly scheduled no less than one thousand forty (1,040) hours per year, and has successfully completed the probationary period and been retained as provided in this chapter in the personnel rules.

     J.      Employees not included in the city service under this section shall serve at the pleasure of their appointing authority. (Ord. 98-848 § 1; prior code § 2-A.4)

 

2.56.050 Adoption and amendment of rules.
     The personnel system shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. The system may establish regulations including:

     A.    Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the city service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

     B.     Appropriate announcement of the selection process and acceptance of applications for employment;

     C.     Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment;

     D.    Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists and the making of provisional appointments;

     E.     Establishment of probationary testing periods;

     F.     Evaluation of employees during the probationary testing period and thereafter;

     G.    Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the city service;

     H.    Separation of employees from the city service;

     I.      The establishment and maintenance of adequate personnel records for purposes of accounting and legal requirements;

     J.      The establishment of any necessary appeal procedures;

     K.    Other items deemed necessary by the city administrator for the operation of the personnel system. (Prior code § 2-A.5)

 

2.56.060 Appointments.
     A.    Appointments to vacant positions in the city service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by city examination. Examinations may be used and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates such as achievement and aptitude tests, written tests, personal interview, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples or any combinations of these or other tests. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Physical, medical and psychological tests may be given as part of any examination.

     B.     In any examination, the city administrator or designee may include, in addition to city tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards therefor.

     C.     The appointing authority of employees in the city service, except where reserved by the city council, is the city administrator. (Prior code § 2-A.6)

 

2.56.070 Probationary period.
     A.    All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than six months or longer as determined by the personnel rules. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or hearing.

     B.     An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which the employee has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which the employee was promoted unless he is discharged from the city service as provided in the personnel rules. If no vacancy exists in such position, the employee shall be placed on a reemployment list as provided in the personnel rules.

     C.     An employee in the city service promoted or transferred to a position not included in the city service shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which the promotion or transfer originated if action is taken to reject the employee unless the employee is discharged in the manner provided in this chapter and the personnel rules for positions in the city service. If no vacancy exists in such a position, the employee shall be placed on a reemployment list as provided in the personnel rules. (Prior code § 2-A.7)

 

2.56.080 Status of present employees.
     A.    Any person holding a position included in the city service who, on the effective date of this chapter, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the city service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for the class, shall assume regular status in the city service in the position held on such effective date without qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules.

     B.     Any other persons holding positions in the city service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. (Prior code § 2-A.8)

 

2.56.090 Demotion, dismissal, reduction in pay, suspension, reprimand.
     The city administrator shall have the authority to reprimand or suspend any regular employee for cause in accordance with procedures included in the personnel rules. (Prior code § 2-A.9)

 

2.56.100 Performance evaluations.
     The city administrator shall establish and maintain a plan for evaluating the performance of employees in the city service. Evaluation shall be made periodically, and one copy of each report shall be filed in the employee’s personal history file. Evaluations shall be considered in approving transfers, promotions, salary increases, demotions, discharges and other personnel actions. (Prior code § 2-A.10)

 

2.56.110 Right of appeal.
     Any employee in the city service shall have the right to appeal a demotion, reduction in pay, suspension, evaluation or discharge for disciplinary or medical reasons, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the personnel rules.

     All appeals shall be processed in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules. (Prior code § 2-A.11)

 

2.56.120 Layoff and reemployment.
     Layoff and reemployment actions shall follow the process outlined in the personnel rules. (Prior code § 2-A.12)

 

2.56.130 Political activity.
     The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law and any local provision adopted pursuant to state law. (Prior code § 2-A.13)

 

2.56.140 Contracts for special service.
     The city administrator shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter:

     A.    The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

     B.     The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

     C.     The preparation, conduct and grading of city tests;

     D.    The conduct of employee training programs;

     E.     Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. (Prior code § 2-A.14)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY
Chapter 3.08 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Chapter 3.12 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER
Chapter 3.16 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.20 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.24 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.28 TRAFFIC SAFETY FUND
Chapter 3.32 PUBLIC FACILITIES IMPACT FEE
Chapter 3.36 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY

Chapter 3.04 FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY
3.04.010 For nonpayment of bills, service changes, fees.
     Except as otherwise provided by state law and unless otherwise provided in this code or by contract, when fees, bills, or charges for services (including but not limited to water and geothermal) are not paid by the thirtieth day after the billing date, interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per year shall be imposed and accrue on said debt and/or obligation until paid in full. Said interest accumulations shall be construed as being part of the original debt and/or obligation. (Prior code § 1.16)

 

3.04.020 Fees and charges for certain recreational programs and facility use.
     The city council shall set fees and charges for certain recreational programs and facility use. Said fees and charges will be set forth in a schedule and adopted from time to time by resolution.

     The amount set forth shall not exceed the actual cost of providing such recreational programs and facility use. (Prior code § 2.26)

 

3.04.030 Refund of certain storm drain extension costs.
     If any person is required by the city to advance costs of extending a water and storm drain adjacent to property other than their own so that storm and water drainage is available for such other property without further extension of the storm drain, the city shall require the owner of the other property, prior to connecting to the storm and water drain, to pay the city a pro-rata portion of the original cost of the storm drain extension. The city, upon approval of the city council, may then refund a portion of the funds originally paid by the first owner. The right to require subsequent users to pay the pro-rata portion shall not continue for more than ten (10) years after the date of installation of the extension of the storm and water drain. The amount to be refunded shall be based on a square footage ratio of individual property owners and total square footage of all potential users; and the council shall deduct therefrom no more than ten (10) percent in administrative costs, to be paid to the city before refund is made. (Prior code § 17.21)

 

3.04.040 Assessment of property—Collection of taxes on personal property.
     All the duties of assessing property within the city, provided by law to be performed by the assessor of the city, shall be performed by the county assessor of the county of Lassen, the county in which the city is situated. These duties shall be performed at the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for the assessment of other property, and all taxes on personal property within the city, unsecured by real estate, shall be collected by the county assessor. (Prior code § 18.1)

 

3.04.050 Functions of city tax collector to be performed by county tax collector.
     All the duties of collecting taxes provided by law to be performed by the tax collector of the city, shall be performed by the county tax collector of the county of Lassen, the county in which the city is situated, at the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for the performance of his or her duties as county tax collector. (Prior code § 18.2)

 

3.04.060 Development review services.
     The city of Susanville community development and public works departments provide engineering and other services for implementation of the city’s standard specifications and local and state planning laws, including, but not limited to, zoning and subdivision law. The city incurs expenses when providing these services. The expenses include, but are not limited to, staff time, engineering review, notice and conduct of public meetings and hearings, plan review, field inspections, materials and supplies and related indirect costs.

     State law allows the city to establish fees and charges to support the work of the community development department, public works department and city engineer. The fees and charges are not to exceed the reasonable cost of providing the service for which the fee or charge is applied. The city of Susanville has determined a reasonable cost for providing development review services based upon the type of service provided. (Prior code § 21.80)

 

3.04.070 Development review services—Fees and charges.
     Fees and charges are established for the development review services performed by the community development department, public works department and city engineer. The fees and charges shall be identified by resolution of the city council and may be expanded upon and/or amended as may be necessary from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 21.81)

Chapter 3.08 PURCHASING SYSTEM
3.08.010 Adoption of purchasing system.
     In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchasing of supplies and equipment, to secure for the city supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted. (Prior code § 20.1)

 

3.08.020 Purchasing authority established.
     There is created a centralized purchasing authority in which is vested authority for the purchase of equipment, supplies, nonprofessional services and services not involving particular ability. (Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.2)

 

3.08.030 Purchasing authority designated— Powers and duties.
     A.    The city finance director (hereinafter “finance director”) is designated as purchasing authority for the city of Susanville. The finance director may delegate the routine administrative responsibilities as specified in this chapter, or in any other applicable purchasing regulation as shall be prescribed by the city council.

     B.     The finance director shall:

     1.     Negotiate the purchase of equipment, supplies, nonprofessional services or services not involving particular ability required by any office or department of the city in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, and such other rules or regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council. No contract shall be entered into without city council written approval and no contract shall be signed except as provided in Government Code Section 40602.

     2.     Act to procure for the city the needed quality in equipment, supplies, nonprofessional services or services not involving particular ability required by any office or department of the city, at least expense to the city.

     3.     Encourage uniform bidding, and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases hereunder.

     4.     Prepare and recommend to the city administrator and city council rules governing the purchase of equipment, supplies, nonprofessional services or services not involving particular ability for the city.

     5.     Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing prices, market conditions and new products.

     6.     Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations of the city.

     7.     Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed, and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department, or which have become unsuitable for city use. Prepare a list from each department by July 1st of each year.

     8.     Maintain a bidders’ list, vendors’ catalogue file, and records for the efficient operation of this chapter. (Ord. 10-975 § 1, 2010; Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.3)

 

3.08.040 Filing of estimated requirements.
     All city departments using the services of the finance director pursuant to this chapter shall file detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies, services and equipment in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the finance director shall prescribe. (Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.4)

 

3.08.050 Exemptions from centralized purchasing.
     The finance director, upon written approval of the city administrator, may authorize in writing any city department to purchase or contract for specified supplies, services and equipment independently of the purchasing authority, but he or she shall require that such purchases or contracts be made pursuant to the procedures established by this chapter, and shall further require periodic reports from the department on the purchases and contracts made under such written authorization. (Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.5)

 

3.08.060 Public projects exempted.
     This chapter is expressly made to supersede the bidding requirements for public projects, governed by the procedures set forth in the California Public Contract Code, including, but not limited to, Section 20160 et seq. The provisions contained in the California Public Contract Code, including, but not limited to, Section 22000 et seq. define and establish the bidding and other procedures the city shall follow regarding public projects. (Ord. 13-993 § 1, 2013; Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.6)

 

3.08.070 Purchases under the CUCCAC’s current limit.
     A.    Open Market Procedures. Purchases of equipment, supplies, and nonprofessional services, of an estimate value less than the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission’s (CUCCAC) limit, may be made by the finance director in the open market, pursuant to the procedure prescribed in this chapter; provided, however, all bidding may be dispensed with in an emergency, or where said goods and/or services can be obtained from only one source. An emergency is a situation where the public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health and/or property. The CUCCAC revisits this amount every five years and adjusts as necessary.

     1.     Minimum Number of Quotations. Open market purchases shall, whenever possible, be based on at least three quotations and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder.

     2.     Notice Inviting Quotations. The finance director shall solicit bids by written request to prospective vendors or by telephone.

     3.     Written Quotations. Written quotations shall be submitted to the finance director who shall keep a record of all open market orders and quotes for a period of one year after the submission of quotes or the placing of orders. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection.

     4.     Written Contract. Where contracts are entered into for purchases made under this section, the contracts shall be approved by city council with signature as provided in Government Code Section 40602.

     B.     Requisition Forms. The using department shall submit a request for the equipment, supplies, nonprofessional services, or services not involving a particular ability, to the finance director by standard requisition form. (Ord. 13-993 § 1, 2013; Ord. 10-975 § 1, 2010; Ord. 03-904 § 1, 2003; Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.7)

 

3.08.080 Encumbrance of funds.
     Except in cases of emergency as hereinabove described, the finance director shall not issue any purchase order for equipment, supplies, nonprofessional services or services not involving particular ability for which there is an insufficient appropriation in the budgetary account against which said purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.8)

 

3.08.090 Formal contract procedure—Bid requirements.
     Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases of equipment, supplies, nonprofessional services, and nonprofessional services not involving particular ability, of a value greater than the state’s current limits shall be by written contract, with the lowest responsible bidder, pursuant to the procedure set forth herein.

     A.    Notice Inviting Bids. Notice inviting bids shall include a general description of the equipment, supplies, nonprofessional services or nonprofessional services not involving particular ability, to be purchased and shall state where bid blanks, forms and specifications may be secured, and the date, time and place of opening bids.

     1.     Published Notice. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten (10) days before the day of opening bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city; or, if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in the city.

     2.     Bidder’s List. The finance director, or appropriate city department with approval of the finance director, shall also solicit sealed bids from responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidder’s list; provided, however, should said supplier desire to participate, said supplier shall comply with the requirements herein.

     B.     Bidder’s Security. When deemed necessary by the finance director, bidder’s security of ten (10) percent of the amount bid shall be required in the public notice(s) inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security upon execution of the contract by the successful bidder, upon rejection of bids, or upon the readvertisement for bids; provided that a successful bidder shall forfeit his or her bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) days after notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder (the “first awarded bidder”) to execute the contract, award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder (the “second awarded bidder”). In the event the city council does so, the first awarded bidder shall forfeit only that portion of security equal to the difference between said first awarded bidder’s bid and the bid of the second awarded bidder. If the second awarded bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract, he or she shall forfeit his or her bid security.

     C.     Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids, identified as bids on the outer envelope, shall be submitted to the city clerk. Bids shall be opened in public at the date, time and place stated in the public notice(s). Tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening.

     D.    Rejection of Bids. In its discretion, the city council may by majority vote reject any and all bids presented, and:

     1.     Authorize negotiation of a contract; or

     2.     Re-advertise for bids; or

     3.     Take no further action.

     E.     Award of Contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder, except in the case of the bidder not meeting the bid requirements.

     F.     Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality, service and delivery being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the city council may accept the one it chooses. The city council’s determination in that regard shall be final.

     G.    Performance Bonds. The finance director shall have authority to require a performance bond, in such amount as it shall be found reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the finance director requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids.

     H.    One Source Bids. Purchase of equipment, supplies, nonprofessional services and nonprofessional services not involving a particular ability which can be obtained from only one source may be made by the finance director without advertising and after approval by the city council. (Ord. 13-993 § 1, 2013; Ord. 10-975 § 1, 2010; Ord. 03-904 § 1, 2003; Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.9)

 

3.08.100 Inspection and testing of materials and services.
     The finance director may inspect supplies and equipment delivered, and determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The finance director shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids, and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. He or she may also delegate this duty to an appropriate department of the city. (Ord. 10-975 § 1, 2010; Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.10)

 

3.08.110 Surplus supplies and equipment.
     All using departments shall submit to the finance director at such times and in such form as he or she shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used which have become obsolete or worn out. The finance director shall have authority to sell all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department, or which have become unsuitable for city use, or to exchange the same for, or trade the same in, on new supplies and equipment. City council approval is needed for sale of supplies and/or equipment as surplus. The finance director shall also have the authority to make transfers between departments of any usable surplus supplies or equipment. (Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.11)

 

3.08.120 Splitting orders to avoid competitive bidding prohibited.
     It is unlawful to split or separate into smaller orders the purchase of supplies, materials, or services of the purpose of evading the competitive bidding provisions of this chapter. Violation of this section constitutes an infraction. (Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.12)

 

3.08.130 Equipment leasing agreements.
     A.    As used in this section:

     1.     “Leasing of nonpurchasable equipment” means equipment which is available through “lease only” plans.

     2.     “Leasing purchasable equipment” means equipment which can be acquired through “lease with option to purchase” type plans.

     B.     Equipment Leasing. Leasing of purchasable or nonpurchasable equipment shall be in accordance with Sections 3.08.070 and 3.08.090 of this chapter. Bidding can be dispensed with only as permitted in Section 3.08.070.

     C.     It shall be the policy of the city of Susanville that when property is acquired by lease rather than outright purchase that all lease agreements must be reviewed by both the finance director and city attorney prior to consideration by city council and must be signed by the mayor or other designee of the city council after said review and approval.

     D.    It shall also be the policy for all lease agreements that the head of the department acquiring said asset shall be required to provide a cost analysis of payment options which shall include lease versus purchase and review of any lease agreement proposed. The cost analysis shall include, but not be limited to, the type of lease, be it operating lease or capital lease, purchase options (cash versus financing), lease rate, purchase price, payment schedule, interest rate, expected useful life, residual value at lease end, maintenance, service and supply costs. (Ord. 10-975 § 1, 2010; Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.13)

 

3.08.140 Maintenance agreements.
     A.    As used in this section, “maintenance agreements” means a written contract wherein the contractor (or vendor) agrees to maintain city equipment in good operating condition subject to terms and conditions agreeable to both the contractor (or vendor) and the city.

     B.     Maintenance agreements shall be signed as provided in Government Code Section 40602, or terminated before agreement expiration, by the finance director with prior approval of the department head responsible for the equipment. (Ord. 10-975 § 1, 2010; Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.14)

 

3.08.150 Cooperative purchasing agreements with county or other agencies.
     Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the voluntary participation by the city in any voluntary cooperative purchasing agreement(s) or programs entered into between the city and the state, county and/or other municipal corporations situated within the boundaries of the county. Any such voluntary cooperating purchasing agreement shall be approved in writing by the city council, and the finance director is empowered and authorized to act under the provisions of this chapter to procure for the city equipment and supplies in conjunction with such voluntary cooperative purchasing agreement(s) or programs as may be entered into by the city. All formal contract and bidding procedures to be followed in such cases shall be those specifically enumerated in the voluntary cooperative purchasing agreement or program. (Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.15)

 

3.08.160 Local preferences.
     To qualify for local bidder preference, a local bidder must submit a copy of a current city business license, issued by the city of Susanville, and complete and sign a declaration under penalty of perjury, stating that as of the date the request for bids was issued, the business as listed on the bid was physically maintained and operated at a fixed office or other business premises located within the geographical limits of Lassen County, and providing such other information as may be requested.

     “Local bidder preference” is a two and one-half percent [higher bid] difference of bid price over the next bidder. (Ord. 98-847 § 1; prior code § 20.16)

 

3.08.170 Purchase of recyclable products and products made with recyclable materials.
     A.    When purchasing materials and supplies for the city, preference should be given to recyclable materials and supplies and/or materials and supplies containing recycled post-consumer materials, provided such materials and supplies are sufficient in performance, reasonably available and cost effective.

     B.     When purchasing materials and supplies for the city, efforts should be made to avoid unnecessary waste generation. Consideration should be given to extended product life, product reusability, bulk purchasing, and avoidance of excessive packaging materials.

     C.     To the extent feasible and practical, double-sided copying and electronic communications and electronic-assisted printing should be used to reduce the generation of waste paper. (Ord. 01-881 § 1)

Chapter 3.12 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER
3.12.010 Short title—Adoption authority.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Susanville.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Prior code § 18.5.1)

 

3.12.020 Imposition.
     There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. (Prior code § 18.5.2)

 

3.12.030 Payment.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 18.5.2 hereof shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Prior code § 18.5.3)

 

3.12.040 Exemptions from tax—Instrument to secure debt.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Prior code § 18.5.4)

 

3.12.050 Exemptions from tax—Public agencies.
     The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. (Prior code § 18.5.5)

 

3.12.060 Exemptions from tax—Plans of reorganization or adjustment.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

     A.    Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

     B.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code as amended;

     C.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

     D.    Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

     Subdivisions A to D, inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Prior code § 18.5.6)

 

3.12.070 Exemptions from tax—Orders of Securities and Exchange Commission.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

     A.    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

     B.     Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

     C.     Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Prior code § 18.5.7)

 

3.12.080 Exemptions from tax— Partnerships.
     A.    In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

     1.     Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

     2.     Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

     B.     If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

     C.     Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Prior code § 18.5.8)

 

3.12.090 Administration.
     The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Prior code § 18.5.9)

 

3.12.100 Refunds.
     Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (Prior code § 18.5.10)

 

3.12.110 Operative date.
     This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county of Lassen, pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California, or upon the effective date of this chapter, whichever is the later. (Prior code § 18.5.11)

Chapter 3.16 SALES AND USE TAX
3.16.010 Purpose.
     The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish these purposes:

     A.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California;

     B.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

     C.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax at rates stated in Sections 3.16.050 and 3.16.090 and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.

     D.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this  chapter. (Prior code § 18.4)

 

3.16.020 Effective date of chapter—Contract with State Board of Equalization to perform all functions concerning the local sales and use tax.
     This chapter shall become operative on October 1, 1956, and prior thereto the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax chapter; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization, as above set forth, prior to October 1, 1956, this chapter shall not be operative until the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract by the city and by the state board of equalization; provided, further, that this chapter shall not become operative prior to the operative date of the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the county. (Prior code § 18.5)

 

Editor’s note: The conditions required prior to the taking effect of this chapter by this section have been complied with and this chapter is in full force and effect.

 

3.16.030 Effect of subsequent amendments to the Revenue and Taxation Code.
     All amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the effective date of this section which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Prior code § 18.6)

 

3.16.040 Enjoining collection forbidden.
     No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Prior code § 18.7)

 

3.16.050 Imposition of tax—Rate.
     For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the following rates of the gross receipts of the retailer for the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter:

     A.    A rate of ninety-nine hundredths of one percent for the period from January 1, 1992, through June 30, 1992;

     B.     A rate of ninety-seven hundredths of one percent on and after July 1, 1992, through June 30, 1993;

     C.     A rate of ninety-five hundredths of one percent on and after July 1, 1993. (Prior code § 18.9)

 

3.16.060 Presumption that retail sales consummated at retailer’s place of business.
     For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the board of equalization. (Prior code § 18.10)

 

3.16.070 Revenue and Taxation Code— Adoption of certain provisions by reference—Sales taxes.
     Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7200 et seq.), all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 6001 et seq.) applicable to sales taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Prior code § 18.11)

 

3.16.080 City tax credits.
     The following provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7202(a)(8)(B) are applicable in the city:

 

             Provisions identical to those contained in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of this division, insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, except that the name of the city as the taxing agency shall be substituted for that of the state (but the name of the city shall not be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203) and that an additional seller’s permit shall not be required if one has been or is issued to the seller under Section 6067 of this code.

(Prior code § 18.12)

 

3.16.090 Imposition of tax—Rate.
     An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the following rates of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

     A.    A rate of ninety-nine hundredths of one percent for the period from January 1, 1992, through June 30, 1992;

     B.     A rate of ninety-seven hundredths of one percent on and after July 1, 1992, through June 30, 1993;

     C.     A rate of ninety-five hundredths of one percent on and after July 1, 1993. (Prior code § 18.15)

 

3.16.100 Revenue and Taxation Code— Adoption of certain provisions by reference—Use taxes.
     Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as amended and in force and effect on October 1, 1956, applicable to use taxes are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein. (Prior code § 18.16)

Chapter 3.20 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.20.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known as the uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance of the city. (Prior code § 18.19)

 

3.20.020 Definitions.
     Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

     “Hotel” means any structure (or portion thereof), any camping site or space at a campground (excepting state parks) or recreational vehicle park, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location or other similar structure or portion thereof, excepting owners or guests at timeshare facilities.

     “Occupancy” means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

     “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this article, and shall have the same duties and liabilities as the principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

     “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

     “Tax administrator” means the city finance director.

     “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient for purposes of this chapter until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. (Ord. 06-929 § 1, 2006: prior code § 18.20)

 

3.20.030 Imposition—Amount—Where payable.
     For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, motel or recreational vehicle (RV) park, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten (10) percent of the rent charged by the operator beginning July 1, 2004. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel, motel or RV park at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel, motel or RV park. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, motel, or RV park, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. No state employee or government employee is exempt from the transient occupancy tax of the city established herein. (Ord. 04-900 § 1, 2004: prior code § 18.21)

 

3.20.040 Collection—Advertising that payment of tax not required prohibited.
     Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Prior code § 18.22)

 

3.20.050 Transient occupancy registration certificate.
     Within fifteen (15) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within fifteen (15) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from the tax administrator a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

     A.    The name of the operator.

     B.     The address of the hotel.

     C.     The date upon which the certificate was issued.

     D.    This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the uniform transient occupancy tax chapter by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting such tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the city. This certificate does not constitute a permit. (Prior code § 18.23)

 

3.20.060 Reports and remittances.
     Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by the tax administrator, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he or she may require further information on the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Prior code § 18.24)

 

3.20.070 Penalties for failure to remit tax when due.
     A.    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

     B.     Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed.

     C.     Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

     D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

     E.     Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Prior code § 18.25)

 

3.20.080 Failure of operator to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by tax administrator—Notice and hearing.
     If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect such tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last-known place of address. Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter file written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.20.080. (Prior code § 18.26)

 

3.20.090 Appeal.
     Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last-known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Prior code § 18.27)

 

3.20.100 Records to be kept for a period of three years.
     It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Prior code § 18.28)

 

3.20.110 Refunds.
     A.    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refused as provided in subsections B and C of this section; provided, a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty or perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

     B.     An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

     C.     A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

     D.    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Prior code § 18.29)

 

3.20.120 Action by city to collect tax.
     Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Prior code § 18.30)

 

3.20.130 Violation of provisions of chapter deemed misdemeanor—Penalties.
     A.    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     B.     Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (Prior code § 18.31)

Chapter 3.24 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.24.010 Created.
     To comply with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of the Streets and Highway Code, with particular reference to the amendments made thereto by Chapter 642, Statutes of 1935, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the special gas tax street improvement fund. (Prior code § 2.13)

 

3.24.020 Payments into fund.
     All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highway Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.” (Prior code § 2.14)

 

3.24.030 Expenditures from fund.
     All moneys in the special gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code. (Prior code § 2.15)

Chapter 3.28 TRAFFIC SAFETY FUND
3.28.010 Created.
     In compliance with Division 18, Chapter 2, Section 42200 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California, there is created a special fund to be designated as the traffic safety fund for the city. (Prior code § 2.10)

 

3.28.020 Moneys to be placed in fund.
     Of the total amount of fines and forfeitures received by the city under Section 1463 of the Penal Code, that proportion which is represented by fines and forfeitures collected from any person charged with a misdemeanor under the Vehicle Code shall be paid into the treasury of the city and deposited in a special fund to be known as the traffic safety fund. (Prior code § 2.11)

 

*   As to the disposition of fines collected for traffic violations and deposited into traffic safety fund, see Section 10.04 of this code.

 

3.28.030 Expenditures from fund.
     The funds in the traffic safety fund shall be used exclusively for traffic signs, signals and other traffic-control devices, the maintenance thereof, equipment and supplies for traffic law enforcement and traffic accident prevention, and for the maintenance, improvement or construction of public streets, bridges and culverts within the city. Such funds shall not be used to pay the compensation of traffic or other police officers. The fund may be used to pay the compensation of school crossing guards who are not regular full-time members of the police department of the city. (Prior code § 2.12)

Chapter 3.32 PUBLIC FACILITIES IMPACT FEE
3.32.010 Purpose.
     In order to implement the goals and objectives of the city’s general plan and the Police, Fire and Street Maintenance Facilities Mitigation Analysis prepared in 1990 by the public service consultants of the Abbey Group, Incorporated, and upon other relevant evidence received and considered by the city council, and to mitigate the law enforcement, fire protection, and street, highway, road and traffic impacts caused by new residential, commercial and industrial development in the city, certain public road, street, and highway improvements must be or have had to be constructed and certain public services and community amenities must be provided for. The city council has determined that a development impact fee, hereinafter referred to as police, fire, street and traffic capital facility and maintenance mitigation fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements, public services and community amenities and to pay for the development’s fair share of the construction costs of these improvements, public services and community amenities. In establishing the fee described in the following section, the city council has found the fees to be consistent with its general plan and, pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city’s housing needs as established in the housing element of the general plan. (Prior code § 21.60)

 

3.32.020 Public facilities defined.
     As used in this chapter, the term “public facilities” shall be given the same definition as that set forth in Government Code Section 66000. (Prior code § 21.62)

 

3.32.030 Description of police, fire, street and traffic capital facility and maintenance fee.
     A public facilities impact fee for police, fire, street and traffic capital facilities and maintenance (hereinafter the “fee”) is established on issuance of all building permits and/or subdivision maps (as the case may be) for development in an area encompassing the entire city, to pay for public improvements, public services, and community amenities. The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements, public services, and community amenities to be financed, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments and set forth time for payment. As described in the fee resolution, this fee shall be paid by each developer either at the time of subdivision map approval, at the time of issuance of a building permit, or prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the commercial or industrial project or the respective dwelling units in a residential project, depending on the applicability of Government Code Section 66007. On an annual basis, the city council shall review this fee to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the impacts of developments and whether the described public facilities are still needed. (Prior code § 21.64)

 

3.32.040 Limited use of fees.
     The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in separate and special accounts, which shall be known as the “police capital facilities fee fund,” “fire capital facilities fee fund,” and the “traffic and street capital facilities and maintenance fee fund,” and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account shall be used solely to:

     A.    Pay for the city’s future construction of public facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 3.32.030, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed public facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or

     B.     Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted, by Section 3.32.050, to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental size, length, or capacity.

     Moneys deposited in these funds shall not be commingled with general fund or other revenues, with the exception of short term investments. Money deposited in said funds, and all accruing interest, shall be used exclusively for the acquisition of land and easements for police, fire, and street maintenance facilities, design and construction of police, fire or street maintenance facilities, and/or police, fire or street maintenance capital expenditures made necessary by the development of new residential, commercial, industrial, or other projects in the city. (Prior code § 21.66)

 

3.32.050 Developer construction of facilities.
     Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a public facility described in a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.32.030 which facility is determined by the city to have supplemental size, length or capacity over that needed for the impacts of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and a credit against  the fee, which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter on the development project, shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the portion of the improvement needed to provide services or mitigate the need for the facility or the burdens created by the development. (Prior code § 21.68)

 

3.32.060 Fee adjustments.
     A.    A developer of any project subject to the fee described in Section 3.32.030 may apply to the city council for an adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon either: (1) the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the traffic, law enforcement, fire protection, road, street, maintenance and/or capital facility impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facility to be financed; or (2) the proposed development involves replacement of all or part of a previously existing habitable/usable structure which has been destroyed or demolished.

     B.     The application shall be made in writing and filed: (1) with the city clerk not later than ten (10) days prior to the final city council decision on the planning permit for the project when the project requires a planning permit from the city council; or (2) with the building official at the time of filing of the request for a building permit, grading permit or other construction permit when the project does not require a planning permit from the city council. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of adjustment or waiver.

     C.     The city council may consider the application at either the time that the final decision is made on the planning permit or at a separate public meeting held within sixty (60) days after the filing of the fee adjustment application. The decision of the city council shall be final.

     D.    In those cases where a proposed development involves replacement of all or part of a previously existing land use, or structure which has been destroyed or demolished, a fee adjustment may be granted in an amount no greater than the size of the previously existing structure or land use only when it can be found that the previously existing structure or land use had been used in substantially the same manner as is expected from the new structure or land use. If an adjustment, reduction or waiver is granted, any significant change in the type of land use or zoning on the site shall invalidate the fee adjustment, reduction or waiver of the fee and the adjusted portion of said fee shall become immediately due and payable. (Prior code § 21.70)

Chapter 3.36 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
3.36.010 Duties of police department.
     When lost, stolen, abandoned or otherwise unclaimed property, except vehicles subject to registration under the Vehicle Code of the state, comes into possession of the police department of this city, such department may hold or store the same with some responsible person until it is claimed and all just and reasonable charges for saving and storage thereof have been paid. (Prior code § 2.30)

 

3.36.020 Sale of property to pay charges.
     A.    If the owner or other person entitled to the possession thereof fails to claim the property within six months and to pay the charges, the police department or the chief of police may sell it to the highest bidder at public auction at the place where the same may be held or stored, having first caused notice of sale to be given at least five days before the time fixed therefor, by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city.

     B.     Any excess in the proceeds of the sale after paying such charges and expenses of sale, including but not limited to the cost of advertising and a fee of not exceeding ten dollars ($10.00) to be charged by the department for making the sale, shall be deposited in the city treasury in the general fund.

     C.     Upon payment of the price bid for the property sold, the delivery of the property, with the chief of police’s bill of sale vests title in the purchaser.

     D.    In any case where there is no bid offered for the property, or if the highest bid offered does not exceed the charges for saving, holding and storage and the expenses of sale, the same shall become the property of the city as compensation for expenses incurred and may thereafter be sold by the city, as surplus property, without notice and without bids, for such sum as the city council, upon the recommendation of the chief of police, shall deem satisfactory. (Prior code § 2.31)

Title 4 (RESERVED)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Chapter 5.08 LABOR RELATIONS
Chapter 5.12 BINGO
Chapter 5.16 CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
Chapter 5.20 VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Chapter 5.24 UPTOWN HISTORIC SUSANVILLE BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA
Chapter 5.30 TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Chapter 5.40 MOBILE FOOD TRUCKS

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Note
*    As to dog licenses, see Sections 6.08.010 to 6.08.080 of this code. As to garbage collector’s license, see Sections 8.08.020 to 8.08.050.

 

5.04.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

     “Business” means professions, trades, including mail order houses, and occupations and all and every kind of calling carried on for profit or livelihood.

     “Business by vehicle” means the business of running, driving or operating any automobile, automobile truck, automobile tank wagon, or any vehicle used for transportation, selling, collection or delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, or other personal property of any kind from a vehicle, either as his or her or its principal business, or in connection with any other business, or of soliciting for work, labor or services to be performed on goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property to be taken for such purpose to a plant or establishment inside or outside of the city limits.

     The term shall not be deemed to apply to the persons operating such vehicles together, and in conjunction with a fixed place of business within the city, for which such business a license fee is paid under the other provisions of this chapter or to businesses which pay a license fee under other provisions of this chapter.

     The provisions of this chapter are not to be construed as imposing a tax upon vehicles, but as a method of classification of businesses between those maintaining a fixed place of business in the conduct of which vehicles are used and those maintaining a business in the conduct of which vehicles are used but who do not have a fixed place of business in the city.

     “Gross receipts” means the total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service, or employment of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such service, act, or employment is done as a part or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in “gross receipts” shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, and any amount for which credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from “gross receipts” shall be cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; and such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit.

     “Quarter” means a regular quarter of a calendar year.

     “Tax collector” as used in this Chapter 5.04 means the finance director or his or her designee. (Ord. 06-925 § 1, 2006: prior code § 11.1)

 

5.04.020 Purposes of chapter.
     This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. (Prior code § 11.2)

 

5.04.030 Effect of chapter on other license ordinances.
     Any person required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business which has been required under any other ordinance of the city but shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of such other ordinance. This section shall not apply to inspection fees. (Prior code § 11.3)

 

5.04.040 Effect of chapter on prior actions and obligations.
     Neither the adoption of this chapter nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bid or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed, or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Prior code § 11.4)

 

5.04.050 Applicability of chapter.
     This chapter shall apply not only to those doing business at a fixed place of business within the city, but also to those whose places of business are outside the city, but who solicit retail sales, or deliver goods, wares or merchandise at retail within the city and also to businesses by vehicle as defined in Section 5.04.010 of this code. (Prior code § 11.5)

 

5.04.060 Required.
     There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings, and occupations specified in this chapter license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed, and it shall be unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city so to do, or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 11.6)

 

5.04.070 Separate license required for each branch establishment and location—Exception as to warehouses and distributing plants.
     A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location. Each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (Prior code § 11.7)

 

5.04.080 Exemptions.
     A.    Generally. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to require payment of any license fee to operate any charitable institution, organization or association organized for charitable purposes and conducted for charitable purposes only, nor shall a license fee be required for the conducting or staging of any concert, exhibition, lecture or entertainment where the major portion of the receipts, if any, derived therefrom are to be used solely for charitable or benevolent purposes within the city and not for the purpose of private gain. Nor shall any license be required to be paid by any religious, charitable, cultural, fraternal, educational, student body, military, state, county or municipal organization or association or an association or organization holding a state or national convention in this city, for the conducting or staging of any entertainment, game, dance,  concert, exhibition or lecture where the major portion of the receipts, if any, derived therefrom are to be used fully for the benefit of such organization and not for the purpose of private gain. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting or carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment to municipal corporations of such taxes as are herein prescribed.

     B.     Claim of Exemption. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a verified statement with the tax collector stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed.

     C.     License. The tax collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under subsection B of this section without payment to the city of the license tax required by this chapter.

     D.    Revocation. The tax collector may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein. (Prior code § 11.8)

 

5.04.090 Application for license—Issuance.
     Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for the same to the tax collector of the city and upon payment of the prescribed tax the tax collector shall issue to such person a license which shall contain (1) the name of the person to whom the license is issued, (2) the business licensed, (3) the place where such business is to be transacted and carried on, (4) the date of the expiration of such license, and (5) such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 11.9)

 

5.04.100 Affidavit of person applying for first license—Estimate of gross receipts.
     Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued hereunder or for a newly established business, in all cases where the amount of license tax to be paid is based upon gross receipts, such person shall furnish to the tax collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form provided by the tax collector, sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary properly to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant.

     If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is based upon the gross receipts, he or she shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the tax collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall, within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the tax collector with a sworn statement, upon a form furnished by the tax collector, showing the gross receipts during the period of such license, and the license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes for other businesses, after deducting from the payment found to be due, the amount paid at the time such first license was issued.

     The tax collector shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or any other business, until such person shall have furnished to him the written statement and paid the license tax as herein required. (Prior code § 10)

 

5.04.110 Affidavit for renewal of license.
     In all cases the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the tax collector for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form to be provided by the tax collector, sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth such information concerning the applicant’s business during the preceding year as may be required by the tax collector to enable him or her to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 11.11)

 

5.04.120 Statements not to be conclusive— Examination and audit of business records, etc.
     No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the tax collector, his or her deputies, or authorized employees of the city, who are authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due.

     All licensees, applicants for licenses, and persons engaged in business in the city are required to permit an examination of such books and records for the purpose aforesaid. (Prior code § 11.12)

 

5.04.130 Information furnished in affidavits to be confidential.
     The information furnished or secured pursuant to Sections 5.04.100, 5.04.110 and 5.04.120 of this code, shall be confidential. Any unwarranted disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the city shall constitute a misdemeanor and such officer or employee shall be subject to the penalty of this chapter. (Prior code § 11.13)

 

5.04.140 Procedure upon failure to file statement or corrected statement.
     If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by the tax collector he or she fails to file a corrected statement, the tax collector may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as he or she may be able to obtain.

     In case such a determination is made the tax collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office in the city, postage prepaid; addressed to the person so assessed at his or her last known address. Such person may, within ten (10) days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the tax collector for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application is made, or if application is not made within the time prescribed, the tax collector must cause the matter to be set for hearing at the next regular meeting of the city council. The tax collector shall give at least ten (10) days notice to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed above for the service of notice of assessment. The city council shall consider all evidence produced, and written notice of its findings thereon, which findings shall be final, shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of assessment. (Prior code § 11.14)

 

5.04.150 Appeals from refusal to issue license—Leaving before council— Notice of hearing.
     Any person aggrieved by any decision of an administrative officer or agency with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a license may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the city council. The city council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The clerk of the council shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office in the city, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. (Prior code § 11.15)

 

5.04.160 Extension of time for filing statements—Waiver of penalties— Compromise of claims.
     In addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her, the tax collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued; and shall have the further power, with the consent of the city council, to compromise any claim as to the amount of license tax due. (Prior code § 11.16)

 

5.04.170 Licenses not transferable— Exception as to change of location.
     No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may upon application therefor without fee have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the license at some other location at which the business is or is to be moved. (Prior code § 11.17)

 

5.04.180 Duplicate licenses.
     A duplicate license may be issued by the tax collector to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing an affidavit attesting to such fact, and without fee. (Prior code § 11.18)

 

5.04.190 Licenses to be posted or kept on person.
     All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner:

     A.    Any licensee transacting and carrying on a business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.

     B.     Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. (Prior code § 11.19)

 

5.04.200 When taxes due and payable.
     Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual licenses, under provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of January of each year; provided that license taxes covering new operations, commenced after the first day of January, may be prorated for the balance of the license period.

     Except as otherwise herein provided license taxes, other than annual, required hereunder shall be due and payable as follows:

     A.    Semiannual license taxes on the first day of January and the first day of July of each year.

     B.     Quarterly license taxes on the first day of January, April, July and October of each year.

     C.     Monthly license taxes on the first day of each and every month.

     D.    Weekly license taxes on Monday of each week in advance.

     E.     Daily license taxes each day in advance. (Prior code § 11.20)

 

5.04.210 Penalty for failure to pay license fee when due.
     For failure to pay a license fee when due, the tax collector may add a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the license tax on the forty-sixth day after the end of the quarter, or the due date of the license fee thereof. (Prior code § 11.21)

 

5.04.220 Limitations on issuance of licenses.
     A.    No license shall be issued for a less period than the full period for which the rate of fee or license tax is herein prescribed nor for a less license tax than that herein fixed.

     B.     No license shall be issued under this license chapter for the use of any portion of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public places, for the transaction of businesses, other than such business as is necessarily transacted upon such public streets or places. (Prior code § 11.22)

 

5.04.230 Right of entry of business places— Failure to exhibit license.
     The tax collector and each and all of his or her assistants and any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter, and demand an exhibition of its license certificate. Any person having such license certificate hereunder issued, in his or her possession or under his or her control, who wilfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 11.23)

 

5.04.240 Complaints against violators of chapter.
             It shall be the duty of the tax collector and each of his or her assistants to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 11.24)

 

5.04.250 Examination of places of business.
     The tax collector in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him or her by this chapter, and acting through his or her deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. (Prior code § 11.25)

 

5.04.260 Enforcement of chapter.
     It shall be the duty of the tax collector, and he or she is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement of this chapter as may from time to time be required by the tax collector or the city council. (Prior code § 11.26)

 

5.04.270 License a debt to city.
     The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person carrying on any business without first having procured a license from the city so to do, shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of license tax and penalties imposed on such business. (Prior code § 11.27)

 

5.04.280 Both civil and criminal action authorized for failure to pay— Remedies to be cumulative.
     The conviction and imprisonment of any person for engaging in any business without first having obtained a license to conduct such business shall not relieve such person from paying the license tax to conduct such business, nor shall the payment of any license tax prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 11.28)

 

5.04.290 License fee—Gross receipts as basis.
     Every person carrying on any business other than the businesses enumerated in Section 5.04.300 of this code, shall pay a quarterly license tax according to their gross receipts as hereinafter set forth: Five dollars ($5.00) plus one mill for each one dollar ($1.00) of gross receipts from the sale or furnishing of goods, wares, merchandise and services. (Prior code § 11.29)

 

5.04.300 License tax—Schedule of flat rates.
     Every person transacting and carrying on the businesses herein enumerated shall pay an annual license tax as follows:

     1.     Peddlers or itinerant vendors of merchandise of any character, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter; any person or firm having no regular place of business within the city and who brings merchandise into the city within five days before conducting a sale and with the intention of continuing such business for a period of thirty (30) days or less shall be deemed an itinerant peddler or vendor within the meaning of this section.

     2.     Auctioneers. Every person engaged in carrying on the business of auctioneer for the sale at auction of real or personal property, fifty dollars ($50.00) per month; provided, however, that any person regularly licensed under other provisions of this chapter for a period of not less than six months, may conduct an auction at such licensed place of business, of property other than job lot merchandise, not more frequently than once weekly at a license fee of twelve dollars ($12.00) per quarter, payable in advance in addition to the fee for such other license regularly held.

     3.     Hotel and public rooming houses having more than five rooms, fifty cents ($.50) per quarter for each room in excess of five.

     Auto courts and motels, fifty cents ($.50) per unit or room per quarter in advance (excluding manager’s living quarters).

     Trailer courts and mobilehome parks, twenty-five cents ($.25) per quarter payable in advance, for each trailer or mobilehome space.

     4.     Boardinghouses having ten (10) or more boarders, five dollars ($5.00) per quarter.

     5.     Shows or any other public entertainment, not otherwise herein specified, as follows:

     When the admission fee is twenty-five cents ($.25) or less, five dollars ($5.00) for each show in advance.

     When the admission fee is more than twenty-five cents ($.25) and less than fifty cents ($.50), ten dollars ($10.00) per show in advance.

     When the admission fee is more than fifty cents ($.50), fifteen dollars ($15.00) per show in advance.

     6.     Merry-go-rounds and mechanical swinging and riding devices, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per day for each in advance.

     7.     Permanent picture shows and theaters, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     8.     Circuses and menageries:

     Those charging less than fifty cents ($.50) admission, twenty dollars ($20.00) for each exhibition in advance.

     Those charging fifty cents ($.50) or more admission, forty dollars ($40.00) for each exhibition in advance.

     9.     Bowling alleys, skating rinks, shooting galleries and places of business primarily providing coin-operated amusement machines, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     10.   Pool and billiard rooms:

     For the first table, three dollars ($3.00) per quarter, and for each additional table, two dollars ($2.00) per quarter.

     11.   Laundries, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     12.   Battery repair and service stations, vulcanizing shops, gasoline service stations, tire shops and tire repair shops, each two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per quarter. In addition such businesses shall pay a quarterly license tax of one tenth of one percent per month of gross receipts.

     13.   Jitneys and taxis, thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for each car in service per year.

     14.   Blacksmith shops, twelve dollars ($12.00) per year.

     15.   Draying, express and delivery businesses, except those regulated, taxed or licensed by the state of California, forty dollars ($40.00) per quarter.

     16.   Bakeries, ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     17.   Business by vehicle, forty dollars ($40.00) per year on any part thereof.

     18.   (Blank.)

     19.   Job printing offices, ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     20.   Newspapers and radio stations, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     21.   Ice dealers, three dollars ($3.00) per quarter.

     22.   Photographers, ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     23.   Abstractors of public records, twelve dollars ($12.00) per year.

     24.   Title guaranty companies, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     25.   Wrestling, boxing and athletic exhibitions to which admission is charged, ten dollars ($10.00) each in advance.

     26.   Barbershops, five dollars ($5.00) per chair per quarter.

     27.   General contractors, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year or any part thereof.

     28.   Contractors in special lines, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year.

     29.   Marble, stone and masonry works, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year.

     30.   Sheet metal shops only, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year.

     31.   Livery stables, feed yards, feed stables, harness makers, automobile trimmers, cobblers, and coal and wood yards, seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) per quarter each.

     32.   Dance halls, public halls, and auditoriums and ballrooms, ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     33.   Gambling tables in any public place, fifty dollars ($50.00) per quarter for four or less tables and twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) per quarter for each table in excess of four.

     34.   Cleaners and dyers, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per quarter.

     35.   Undertakers and morticians, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     36.   Water companies supplying water to the city or the inhabitants thereof and telephone companies supplying telephone service thereof, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per quarter.

     37. a. Accountant, certified public, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     b.     Anesthetist, twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) per quarter.

     c.     Architect, twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) per quarter.

     d.     Assayer, ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     e.     Attorney, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     f.      Bookkeeping and accounting offices, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     g.     Real estate brokers, and insurance adjusters twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) per quarter; real estate agents or salesmen, and insurance adjusters employed by or acting as agent of or working out of the office of a real estate broker, or insurance adjusters who are compensated substantially on the basis of commissions, twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) per quarter.

     h.     Chemist, ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     i.      Chiropodist, ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     j.      Chiropractor, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per quarter.

     k.     Dental lab (technician), ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     l.      Dentist or orthodontist, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     m.    Designer, structural or building, twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) per quarter.

     n.     Draftsman, ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     o.     Engineer, registered, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     p.     Geologist, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per quarter.

     q.     Loan companies (other than banks), twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     r.      Medical laboratory technician, ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     s.      Oculist, optician, optometrists, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     t.      Physician or surgeon, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter.

     u.     Physiotherapist, ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     v.     Surveyors, licensed land, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per quarter.

     w.    Veterinarian, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per quarter.

     x.     Professional partnerships and corporations consisting of two or more persons licensed or certified by the state of California to engage in the practice of a profession or business, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter for each partner or member and for each person employed by the partnership or corporation who is similarly licensed or certified.

     38.   Persons engaged in the plumbing business, thirty dollars ($30.00) per year. In addition, said business shall pay a quarterly license tax of one tenth of one percent on gross receipts.

     39.   Beauty parlors, hairdressers, manicurists, five dollars ($5.00) per operator.

     40.   Collectors and detectives, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per quarter; collection agencies and detective agencies consisting of two or more persons shall be deemed to be a professional partnership or corporation, as defined in subsection (37)(x) of this section and shall pay the license fees therein provided.

     41.   Bootblack stands, two dollars ($2.00) per quarter.

     42.   Fortunetellers, spiritualists, phrenologists, and mediums, clairvoyants, palmists and astrologers, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year or any part thereof.

     43.   Garages as follows: Those having not to exceed five hundred (500) square feet of floor space, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year; and those having more than five hundred (500) square feet of floor space, twenty-five cents ($.25) for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor space; the latter charge to be in addition to the twenty-five dollars ($25.00) license tax above mentioned. In addition, such businesses shall pay a quarterly tax of one twentieth of one percent on gross receipts.

     44.   Automobile dealers, except those paying the license tax imposed by the next preceding subsection, utilizing an outdoor display space for new automobiles, as follows: Those having not to exceed five hundred (500) square feet of display space, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year; and those having more than five hundred (500) square feet of display space, twenty-five cents ($.25) for each one hundred (100) square feet of display space; the latter charge to be in addition to the twenty-five dollars ($25.00) license tax above mentioned. The tax imposed to be in addition to any other taxes imposed by this code.

     45.   Creameries, twenty dollars ($20.00) per quarter. Creamery products distributors, twenty dollars ($20.00) per quarter.

     46.   Frozen food lockers, ten cents ($.10) for each locker per year or any fraction of a year, but in no event less than fifty dollars ($50.00).

     47.   Music machines, ten dollars ($10.00) per year or any portion thereof for each machine.

     48.   Carnivals, seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per day in advance, except the carnivals sponsored by and conducted under the auspices of the fair board of the county of Lassen in conjunction with the annual Lassen County Livestock Show and Rodeo held during the month of August each year.

     49.   Automobile body and paint shops, except those connected with and used as part of an automobile dealership and except those paying the tax imposed by subsection 43 of this section, twenty dollars ($20.00) per quarter,

     50.   Electricians, painters, plumbers, paper hangers, sign painters, chimney sweepers, masons, stonecutters, stonemasons and other specialized businesses deriving earnings or income from such business while not carried on the payroll of an established business licensed under this section and not otherwise covered by this chapter, ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     51.   Ambulance service, five dollars ($5.00) per quarter.

     52.   Cold storage business, twenty dollars ($20.00) per quarter.

     53.   General storage and household storage, two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per quarter.

     54.   Florists, flower shops and nurseries, or any combination thereof, ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     55.   Tailoring business, ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     56. a. For any business or profession not above listed, the minimum license tax shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter.

     b.     For persons engaged in any of the above mentioned professions upon a part-time basis the fees hereinabove in this section provided shall be one-half of the amounts above set out. No person shall be deemed to be engaged in such profession on a part time basis unless employed at least forty (40) hours per week in some other business, profession or occupation. (Prior code § 11.30)

 

5.04.310 Individual stand established for each licensed taxi.
     The chief of police and the director of the department of public works shall establish and locate an individual stand for each taxi licensed pursuant to this chapter. An application for such stand shall be filed by the licensee and shall be on a form provided by the chief of police and director of the department of public works.

     It shall be unlawful for anyone to park in such individual stand other than the taxi for which it is issued. No stands for competing taxis shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of each other. (Prior code § 11.31)

Chapter 5.08 LABOR RELATIONS
5.08.010 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     Bona Fide Members. For the purpose of Sections 5.08.030 and 5.08.050 of this code, “bona fide members” means members of the labor organization in good standing in accordance with the rules and regulations of such labor organization.

     “Boycott” means any act or effort by a labor organization or person representing or purporting to represent a labor organization to persuade or coerce others from dealing or doing business with an employer, or, that is intended to or does result in the refusal by any person to deal or do business with an employer.

     Employee. For the purpose of Sections 5.08.030 and 5.08.050 of this code, “employee” means a person working at a trade or occupation coming within the classification of work over which the labor organization, requesting negotiations or the execution of an agreement, is given jurisdiction by its charter.

     “Employer” means any person owning, operating or conducting a place of business in the city and includes any persons acting in the interest of an employer, directly or indirectly, and any association of employers.

     “Labor organization” means any organization of any kind, or any agency or employee representation committee or plan, in which employees participate, and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employment or conditions of work.

     Picket and picketing means any patrolling, walking, display of banner, sign, newspaper or similar device, by a person representing, or purporting to represent, or acting on behalf of a labor organization, (1) which is intended to or does result in the refusal of any member of any labor organization to patronize, deal with or enter the place of business of any employer whether or not such refusal is pursuant to any rule, regulation or agreement among the members of a labor organization, or (2) as a means of communicating to members of labor organizations the fact that a boycott has been instituted against any employer, or (3) which is intended to or does prevent a member of any labor organization from patronizing, dealing with or entering the place of business of any employer. (Prior code § 10.1)

 

5.08.020 Employer labor practices—Unfair practices enumerated.
     It is unlawful for any employer, except under the conditions set forth in Sections 5.08.030 and 5.08.050 of this code to:

     A.    Discharge or agree to discharge any employee because of such employee’s membership or nonmembership in a labor organization;

     B.     Discharge or agree to discharge any employee because such employee refuses to join or withdraw from membership in a specific labor organization;

     C.     Discharge or agree to discharge any employee because such employee refuses to designate a specific labor organization as his agent to negotiate the terms and conditions of his employment;

     D.    Make membership or nonmembership in a labor organization a condition of employment;

     E.     Negotiate the terms and conditions of employment of any employee with an agent which has not been designated by such employee as his agent. (Prior code § 10.2)

 

5.08.030 Employer labor practices— Permissible practices.
     It shall not be a violation of Section 5.08.020 of this code for an employer to do the following:

     A.    Negotiate the terms and conditions of employment of his or her employees with a labor organization if, at the time such labor organization requests such negotiations, a majority of such employees are bona fide members of such labor organizations, or have, within thirty (30) days prior to such request authorized, in writing, such labor organization to negotiate the terms and conditions of their employment with the employer;

     B.     Execute and abide by the terms of a written agreement wherein the employer agrees to retain in his or her employ, or employ, only members of a specific labor organization, or, that his or her employees shall become and remain members of a specific labor organization if, at the time of the request for the execution of the contract, seventy-five (75) percent or more of his or her employees are bona fide members of such labor organization. (Prior code § 10.3)

 

5.08.040 Picketing and boycotts—Prohibited practices.
     It is unlawful for any person to picket or boycott, by any manner or means whatsoever, either directly or indirectly, any employer for either of the following purposes:

     A.    To induce, coerce or compel such employer to violate any provisions of Section 5.08.020 of this code, or to cause such employer any loss or damage because of such employer’s refusal to violate any provision of Section 5.08.020 of this code;

     B.     To induce, coerce or compel any employee of such employer to join or withdraw from any labor organization or to designate a specific labor organization as his or her agent to negotiate the terms and conditions of his or her employment. (Prior code § 10.4)

 

5.08.050 Picketing and boycotts—Permissible practices.
     It shall not be a violation of Section 5.08.040 of this code for any person to do the following:

     A.    Picket or boycott an employer to induce, coerce or compel such employer to negotiate the terms and conditions of employment of his or her employees with such labor organization if, at the time of the request for such negotiations, a majority of such employees are bona fide members of such labor organization, or have, within thirty (30) days prior to such request authorized, in writing, such labor organization to negotiate the terms and conditions of their employment with the employer;

     B.     Picket or boycott an employer to induce, coerce or compel such employer to execute such written agreement if, at the time of the request for the execution thereof, seventy-five (75) percent or more of the employees of such employer are bona fide members of such labor organization. (Prior code § 10.5)

Chapter 5.12 BINGO
5.12.010 Terms and conditions—Statutory authority.
     Pursuant to the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, as adopted by the Legislature of the state of California in the 1975-76 Regular Session, and as has been amended by them since being adopted, bingo games will be permitted within the city under the terms and conditions specified in this chapter. (Prior code § 5-A.1)

 

5.12.020 License—Application.
     An annual bingo license may be granted by the city to any organization which wishes to conduct bingo games within the city for the sole benefit of such organization, which organization is exempted from the payment of the Bank and Corporation Tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, and 23701(L) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and by mobilehome park associations and senior citizens’ organizations; and provided that the receipts of such games are used only for charitable purposes. Such application shall be in writing to the chief of police or his designee of the city, and shall be accompanied by the following:

     A.    An annual bingo license fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). One-half of such license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization if the application for license is denied. In addition, a fee of one percent of the monthly gross receipts over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be an additional fee and shall be collected monthly;

     B.     A statement indicating the purpose and uses for which the proceeds of such bingo games are to be used;

     C.     A report from the building, planning and fire departments of the city, stating that inspection of the property has been made and such property meets with the fire, building and safety regulations, and has adequate off-street parking for one car for each two possible participants in the bingo games. (Prior code § 5-A.2)

 

5.12.030 License—Issuance and renewal.
     A.    Licenses for bingo games shall be issued by the chief of police, or designee.

     B.     Licenses for bingo games which have been issued by the city may be renewed annually by the chief of police or his designee, upon the following conditions:

     1.     Payment of the annual bingo license fees in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). One-half of such license fee paid is to be refunded to the organization if an application for a license renewal is denied. In addition, a fee of one percent of the monthly gross receipts over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be an additional fee and shall be collected monthly;

     2.     Submission by the licensee of a verified statement on a form provided by the city, indicating the use of the funds which were derived from the games held in the previous year;

     3.     Submission of a certified statement signed by the officers of the organization holding such license for the previous year, stating that the bingo games which have been held were operated in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 5-A.3)

 

5.12.040 Operation of licensed games.
     All bingo games operated under licensing by the city, as provided herein, shall be held in strict compliance with the following restrictions:

     A.    No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo games;

     B.     An organization authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to Section 5.12.020 shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to required that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization;

     C.     All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the authorized organization;

     D.    All bingo games shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization which organized them. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision of any other phase of such game;

     E.     No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game;

     F.     With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the Bank and Corporation Tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from bingo games shall be held in a special fund or account, and shall not be commingled with any other funds or accounts. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this section, all proceeds derived from the bingo games shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes except as follows:

     1.     Such proceeds may be used for prizes;

     2.     A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty (20) percent or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, and administrative expenses;

     3.     Such proceeds may be used to pay license fees.

     G.    No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless such person is physically present at the time and place the bingo game is being conducted;

     H.    The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($50.00) in cash or in kind, or both, for each separate game which is held;

     I.      As used in this chapter, “bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. Notwithstanding Penal Code Section 330c, as used herein the game of bingo shall include cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. The winning cards shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game. All such preprinted cards shall bear the legend, “for sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and pursuant to local ordinance.” It is the intention of the city council that bingo as defined in this subsection applies exclusively to this chapter and shall not be applied in the construction or enforcement of any other ordinance provision or provision of law. (Prior code § 5-A.4)

 

5.12.050 Penalty for violations—Legal actions.
     A.    No person shall receive or pay a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game licensed under the provisions of this chapter, and any violation of this prohibition shall be punished by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of said city.

     B.     Any violation of any provision of this chapter, other than subsection (a) of this section, is a misdemeanor.

     C.     In addition to any other remedy available, the city may bring an action to enjoin any violation or threatened violation of this chapter. (Prior code § 5-A.5)

Chapter 5.16 CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
5.16.010 Definition.
     A “canvasser” or “solicitor” is defined as any individual, partnership, association or corporation and any and all members of such association, partnership or corporation, whether resident in the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatever for future delivery, including subscriptions for newspapers, magazines or other periodicals, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he or she is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. (Prior code § 6-A.1)

 

5.16.020 Permit—Required.
     It is unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser as defined in Section 5.16.010 to engage in such business without first obtaining a permit therefor from the chief of police as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 6-A.2)

 

5.16.030 Permit—Application—Contents— Investigation fee.
     An applicant for a permit under this chapter must file with the chief of police a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the chief of police, which shall give the following information:

     A.    Name and address of applicant.

     B.     Permanent home address and full local address of applicant.

     C.     A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.

     D.    If employed, or if an agent, the name and address of the employer, or principal, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship between such employee or agent and his employer or principal.

     E.     The length of time for which the right to do business is so desired. No permit shall be issued until ten (10) days after being applied for.

     F.     The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods are located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery.

     G.    Two photographs of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the filing of the application, which pictures shall be two inches by two inches showing full front view of head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.

     H.    The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of two reliable property owners of the county, who will certify as to applicant’s good character, or other available evidence in lieu of such references as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility.

     I.      A statement of whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense, and the imprisonment or penalty assessed therefor.

     J.      A statement of a reputable physician of Susanville dated not more than ten (10) days prior to the submission of the application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious, infectious or communicable diseases.

     At the time of the filing of the application, a fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall be paid to the chief of police to cover the costs of investigating the facts stated therein. (Prior code § 6-A.3)

 

5.16.040 Permit—Investigation and issuance.
     Upon receipt of the application referred to in Section 5.16.030 or upon request if no application is required, the chief of police shall cause such investigation of the applicant’s business and moral character to be made as the chief of police deems necessary for the protection of the public good. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant’s character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse upon such application his or her disapproval and the reasons therefor, and shall notify the applicant that the application is disapproved, no permit shall be issued. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant’s character and business responsibility are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall, upon compliance with all other provisions of this chapter, issue the permit applied for, upon such form as the chief of police, shall from time to time prescribe. (Prior code § 6-A.4)

 

5.16.050 Permit—Revocation.
     Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city council after a hearing upon notice for any of the following causes:

     A.    Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the application for permit, or in carrying on the business of solicitor or canvasser.

     B.     Any violation of this chapter.

     C.     Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.

     D.    Breaching the peace in conducting such business of soliciting or canvassing, or conducting such business in such a manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.

     Notice of the hearing for the revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last-known address at least five days prior to the date set for hearing. (Prior code § 6-A.5)

 

5.16.060 Permit—Appeal from action of chief of police in denial of permit.
     Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police in the denial of a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant as provided in Section 5.16.050 for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 6-A.6)

 

5.16.070 Permit—Expiration.
     All permits issued under this chapter shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of the year in which such permit is issued. (Prior code § 6-A.7)

 

5.16.080 Permit—Issuance of permit not to relieve applicant from obtaining city business license.
     Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any applicant for the permit provided for in Section 5.16.020 from also procuring from the city clerk or the city license collector such license or licenses as may be provided for the carrying on of business in the city. (Prior code § 6-A.8)

 

5.16.090 Applicability of Sections 5.16.030 and 5.16.100 to disabled honorably discharged soldiers, sailors, etc., farmers, etc., selling own produce and persons soliciting for personal services.
     The provisions of Sections 5.16.030 and 5.16.100 shall not apply to any disabled honorably discharged soldier, sailor or marine of the United States, or who has been released from active duty under honorable conditions from such service, and a license shall be issued to such soldier, sailor or marine, without cost on proof of the bona fide right of such applicant to a license under the provisions of this section, nor shall Sections 5.16.030 and 5.16.100 apply to students of elementary or secondary schools in the city or to members or representatives of local, civic, social, religious, charitable or service clubs or organizations, organized and existing in the city.

     The provisions of Sections 5.16.030 and 5.16.100 shall not apply to the following:

     A.    Any farmer, poultryman or horticulturist soliciting or peddling his or her own produce. This exemption shall apply only to natural persons and shall not apply to farmers, poultrymen or horticulturists who buy goods for resale, as well as selling their own produce.

     B.     Any person soliciting for personal services to be completely performed by the person so soliciting at the place of solicitation. This exemption shall apply only to natural persons. (Prior code § 6-A.9)

 

5.16.100 Badge.
     The chief of police shall issue a badge to each permittee at the time of the delivery of the permit, which badge shall contain the words “Solicitor’s Permit,” and a number on the permit commencing with P.1, and the permittee shall wear the same constantly on the front of his or her outer garments in such a way as to be conspicuous while soliciting. (Prior code § 6-A.10)

 

5.16.110 Hours of peddling and soliciting.
     It is unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit before the hour of nine a.m. of any day, or after the hour of five p.m. of any day. (Prior code § 6-A.11)

 

5.16.120 Entry upon premises containing signs prohibiting peddlers, solicitors, etc., unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor or any person pretending to be a peddler or solicitor for the purpose of peddling or soliciting or pretending to peddle or solicit to ring the bell or knock at any building whereon there is painted, affixed or otherwise displayed to public view any sign containing any or all of the following words: “No Peddlers,” “No Solicitors,” or “No Agents” or which otherwise purports to prohibit peddling or soliciting on the premises. (Prior code § 6-A.12)

 

5.16.130 Applicability of chapter to salespeople or agents for wholesale houses or firms, manufacturers, etc.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to salespeople or agents for wholesale houses or firms, who solicit orders from or sell to retail dealers for resale, or to manufacturers for manufacturing purposes, or to bidders for public works or supplies. (Prior code § 6-A.13)

Chapter 5.20 VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Article I. Generally
5.20.010 Purpose of chapter—Vehicle defined—Pedicab exclusion.
     The purpose of this chapter is to regulate vehicles for hire, hereinafter defined as taxis and jitney vehicles, and the owners and drivers thereof; provided, however, that pedicabs and any like vehicle driven by human motive power shall not be subject to such regulation. Whenever the word “vehicle” shall appear in this chapter, it shall mean vehicle for hire unless specifically defined otherwise. (Prior code § 11-A.010)

 

5.20.020 Taxi or taxicab defined.
     “Taxi” or “taxicab” means every vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for hire operated over the public streets of the city, but not over a defined route, the destination of such vehicle being under the direction of the passenger or such other person who hires the vehicle. (Prior code § 11-A.030)

 

5.20.030 Fares and charges.
     The city council is empowered from time to time, by resolution, when in its discretion the public welfare, health and safety require such action, to adopt and enforce a schedule of fares and charges for vehicles as herein defined. (Prior code § 11-A.050)

 

5.20.040 Unlawful operation.
     It is unlawful for any person to do, or to permit or suffer to be done, with the vehicles owned, operated, managed or under his or her control, any of the things for which a permit is required under this chapter, unless such person, the vehicle and each of the persons involved in the doing of this thing for which permit is required, does have a valid, unrevoked and unsuspended permit. (Prior code § 11-A.060)

 

5.20.050 Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation of permits.
     Any applicant for any driver’s or vehicle permit authorized under this chapter who has been denied such permit, or any person, including an owner, whose permit has been suspended or revoked, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall have the right to appeal to the city council from the action resulting in such a denial, suspension, or revocation. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the formal action resulting in the denial, revocation or suspension. Such appeal need not be in formal language, but shall state concisely the name of the appellant, the matter complained of and the date of the action appealed from. The clerk shall transmit such appeal to the council at its next regular meeting occurring more than ten (10) days hence. At such meeting, the city council shall set a date of hearing on the appeal which hearing shall be within thirty-five (35) days from the date such appeal was presented to the city council. At such hearing the appellant shall have the right to be represented by counsel and to present evidence in support of his or her appeal. At the time of the setting of the hearing, the council shall direct the clerk to give notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and to the city administrator. Upon the conclusion of such hearing, the council shall make a determination of such matter within thirty-five (35) days. Determination of the council shall be final. (Prior code § 11-A.070)

 

5.20.060 Permit and processing fees.
     The city council may prescribe by resolution such fees as shall be required for the permits and processing required herein and required by state law. Said fees shall be due and payable by the applicant therefor upon submission of his or her application to the city administrator, and shall not be refundable, irrespective of the disposition of such application. In addition to such permit fees, the permittee shall pay currently any and all other taxes or fees as may be required by the provisions of this code for the permit period, and those fees shall likewise be set by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 11-A.080)

 

Article II. Owners of Vehicles for Hire
5.20.070 Owner defined.
     An “owner,” for the purposes of this chapter, shall be defined as any person who has title, in whole or in part, to any vehicle for hire. (Prior code § 11-A.090)

 

5.20.080 Permit—Required.
     It is unlawful for any owner of a vehicle for hire to allow such vehicle to operate within the limits of the city without first obtaining an owner’s permit. The vehicle for hire shall be deemed to be operated within the city if the point of origin or terminus of such travel or operation is within the limits of the city. (Prior code § 11-A.100)

 

5.20.090 Permit—Application.
     Application for an owner’s permit shall be made in writing to the city administrator upon such form as the city administrator may prescribe. (Prior code § 11-A.110)

 

5.20.100 Permit—Qualifications of owner.
     An applicant for an owner’s permit must show to the satisfaction of the city council the applicant’s title to the vehicle, or vehicles, for which permit is sought, or a reasonable anticipation of obtaining title to such vehicle, or vehicles, within ninety (90) days of the granting of such permit, if same be, in fact, granted. If a permit be granted and title to the vehicle or vehicles is not obtained by the permittee within ninety (90) days of the date of such grant, such permit shall be null and void. (Prior code § 11-A.120)

 

5.20.110 Permits—Insurance requirements.
     Each applicant for an owner’s permit shall obtain and, at all times following issuance of a permit, maintain in full force and effect, a public liability insurance policy issued by one or more insurance companies licensed to do business in the state which has combined single limits of at least three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) and which provides coverage for any and all vehicles for hire owned and/or operated by such applicant within the city. Such insurance coverage shall be evidenced by a certificate of insurance or other form of documentation of insurance coverage as may be acceptable to the city administrator, executed by an authorized official of the insurer or insurers. In addition to the coverage hereinbefore provided for, such certificate of insurance or other documentation of insurance coverage shall provide that the city, its boards and commissions and members thereof, its officers, employees and agents are named as additional insureds under the coverage afforded, that the coverage afforded is primary to any other insurance coverage which may be available to the city, and that the insurer or insurers will provide to the city at least thirty (30) days prior notice of cancellation or material change in coverage.

     The city administrator may, based on an increase in the Consumer Price Index or by reason of the number or types of claims which have or might result from the applicant’s operation of a vehicle for hire within the city, require such applicant to increase the limits of the public liability insurance coverage required by this section; provided the city administrator shall serve such applicant with a notice of any required increase in its public liability insurance coverage at least thirty (30) days prior to the date that such insurance coverage must be in effect. (Prior code § 11-A.125)

 

5.20.120 Permit—Issuance.
     Upon a determination by the city council that the public convenience and necessity warrants the granting of an owner’s permit for one or more vehicles and that the applicant therefor meets all the qualifications required by this chapter, the council shall direct the city administrator to forthwith issue a permit to such applicant-owner in writing for the number of vehicles determined herein by the council to be so warranted. The city council may, in granting such permit, provide for certain conditions, or limitations, on the owner’s permit which shall be set forth by the city administrator, in the written permit issued. (Prior code § 11-A.130)

 

5.20.130 Permit—Term.
     The term of such permit shall be for a period of one year, and shall continue thereafter without further renewal or permit fee payment unless the city council shall determine by resolution that the public welfare, health, safety, convenience or necessity require such permit to be terminated. In such event the council shall instruct the city administrator to give a ninety (90) day notice in writing of such termination to the owner and such permit shall cease and be null and void at the end of such period. (Prior code § 11-A.140)

 

5.20.140 Permit—Suspension or revocation.
     The city administrator shall suspend any permit issued to an owner herein when the owner fails to meet any condition or requirement of the permit issued to him or her, or any other provisions of this chapter. The city administrator shall give a notice in writing to the owner specifying the reasons therefor, such notice being sent to the last known address of such owner. If the grounds of such suspension as set forth by the city administrator are not corrected within a period of thirty (30) days from the date of giving such notice, or an appeal taken to the city council as provided in this chapter, then such permit shall be revoked forthwith. (Prior code § 11-A.150)

 

Article III. Drivers of Vehicles for Hire
5.20.150 Driver defined.
     A “driver” for the purposes of this chapter, shall be defined as a person who drives, operates or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. (Prior code § 11-A.160)

 

5.20.160 Permit—Required.
     It is unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to operate such vehicle within the limits of the city without first obtaining a driver’s permit. The vehicle shall be deemed to be operated within the city if the point of origin or terminus of such travel or operation is within the limits of the city. (Prior code § 11-A.170)

 

5.20.170 Permit—Application.
     An application for a driver’s permit shall be made in writing to the city administrator upon such form as the city administrator may prescribe. Upon receiving such application, the city administrator shall refer a copy thereof to the chief of police and request a report therefrom as to whether the applicant meets the requirements of this chapter. (Prior code § 11-A.180)

 

5.20.180 Permit—Application—
               Qualifications.

     Each applicant must meet the following minimum qualifications:

     A.    Be of good moral character;

     B.     Be the age of eighteen (18) years or over;

     C.     Be able to read and write the English language;

     D.    Possess a valid driver’s license issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state;

     E.     Not have been convicted within a period of five years prior to the application of any offense involving the unlawful operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and/or drugs, reckless driving, or any crimes, whether misdemeanor or felony, involving moral turpitude. (Prior code § 11-A.190)

 

5.20.190 Permit—Investigation by the chief of police.
     Within ten (10) days following the filing of an application for a driver’s permit, the chief of police, based on information then available to the police department, shall determine if the applicant meets the minimum qualifications for a driver’s permit hereinbefore provided by this chapter and, based on such determination, shall report to the city administrator his or her recommendation on whether the application should be approved or disapproved; provided, that if the chief of police recommends the disapproval of an application for a driver’s permit, the chief of police shall also include in his or her report to the city administrator the reasons for such recommendations. In addition, if after issuing a driver’s permit, the chief of police, based on further investigation, determines that the applicant does not, in fact, meet the minimum qualifications for a driver’s permit as hereinbefore provided by this chapter, the chief of police shall promptly report such determination to the city administrator who thereupon shall take such action as may be necessary to revoke the permit issued to the applicant in the manner hereinbefore provided by this chapter. (Prior code § 11-A.195)

 

5.20.200 Permit—Issuance.
     After receipt of a report from the chief of police that the applicant meets all the requirements of this chapter, such permit shall be issued by the city administrator. (Prior code § 11-A.200)

 

5.20.210 Permit—Term.
     The driver’s permit issued hereunder shall be valid until revoked or suspended as herein provided. (Prior code § 11-A.210)

 

5.20.220 Permit—Suspension or revocation.
     The city administrator shall suspend any permit issued to a driver herein when the driver fails to meet any condition or requirement of the permit issued to him or her, or any other provision of this chapter. The city administrator shall give a notice in writing to the driver specifying the reasons therefor, such notice being sent to the last known address of such driver. If the grounds of such suspension as set forth by the city administrator are not corrected within a period of thirty (30) days from the date of giving such notice, or an appeal taken to the city council as provided in this chapter, then such permit shall be revoked forthwith. (Prior code § 11-A.220)

 

Article IV. Vehicle for Hire Permit
5.20.230 Required.
     Any vehicle, as defined in this chapter, shall not be operated or driven within the limits of the city without first obtaining a permit for such vehicle. The vehicle shall be deemed operated or driven within the city if the point of origin or terminus of such travel or operation is within the limits of the city. (Prior code § 11-A.230)

 

5.20.240 Requirements of vehicle.
     The vehicle shall meet all of the requirements of the Vehicle Code of the state and shall also:

     A.    Have posted in a conspicuous place therein a schedule of rates and charges which shall conform to any such schedule established by the city council under the provisions of Section 5.20.030; provided, however, that a vehicle used for limousine service shall not be required to have rates and charges so posted. Owners of limousine service vehicles shall advise their patrons of their rates and charges prior to providing limousine service and shall maintain in each limousine a printed schedule of their rates and charges for such service, which shall be made available to patrons upon request.

     B.     Be made available to the chief of police, or agent, at any reasonable time, to determine whether the schedule of rates and charges has been posted or is available, as required hereinabove.

     C.     No smoking shall be permitted in the vehicle at any time. (Prior code § 11-A.240)

 

5.20.250 Issuance.
     After receipt of a report from the chief of police that the vehicle meets all the requirements of this chapter, such permit shall be issued by the city administrator. (Prior code § 11-A.250)

 

5.20.260 Term.
     The vehicle permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. (Prior code § 11-A.260)

 

5.20.270 Suspension or revocation.
     The city administrator shall suspend any vehicle permit issued hereunder when the vehicle fails to meet any condition or requirement of the permit or any other provision of this chapter. The city administrator shall give a notice in writing to the owner thereof specifying the reason for such suspension. If the grounds for such suspension as set forth by the city administrator are not corrected within the period of thirty (30) days from the date of giving notice, or an appeal taken to the city council as provided in this chapter, then such permit shall be revoked forthwith. (Prior code § 11-A.270)

Chapter 5.24 UPTOWN HISTORIC SUSANVILLE BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA
5.24.010 Resolution of intention.
     The recitals hereof, which set forth facts regarding the adoption of the resolution, the conduct of a public hearing and certain findings of this city council, are true and correct and incorporated herein by reference. (Prior code § 6-C.10)

 

5.24.020 Establishment of area.
     A parking and business improvement area to be known as the “Uptown Historic Susanville Business Improvement Area” (the “area”) is established pursuant to the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989, Streets and Highways Code Section 36500 et seq. The boundaries of the area and the benefit zones within the area shall be as set forth on Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this section, as it may from time to time be amended by ordinance adopted by the city council, and found on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 06-933 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-867 § 1, 2000: prior code § 6-C.12)

 

5.24.030 Benefit assessment.
     All businesses, trades and professions located within the boundaries shown on Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this section and found on file in the office of the city clerk shall, commencing September 1, 2000, pay an annual benefit assessment to the city in the following amounts:

 

 

Benefit

Zone A

Benefit

Zone B

Type 1 - Retail

$350.00

$250.00

Type 2 - Lodging, Restaurants

275.00

200.00

Type 3 - Service and Organization

225.00

150.00

Type 4 – Professional

175.00

100.00

Type 5 – Financial

250.00

250.00

 

(Ord. 00-867 § 1, 2000: prior code § 6-C.14)

 

5.24.040 Residential exclusion.
     No one shall be required to pay an assessment based on a residential use within the area. (Prior code § 6-C.16)

 

5.24.050 New business exemption.
     Any new business established within the area shall not be required to pay an assessment hereunder for the first six months following its commencement of business. The assessment on such new business shall be prorated, omitting any charges for the first six months it was in operation. This shall not be deemed to apply to an existing business that has changed ownership or location within the district. (Prior code § 6-C.18)

 

5.24.060 Definitions.
     For the purpose of calculating the amount of assessment owed, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Financial” means and includes banks and savings and loan.

     “Fiscal year” means July 1st to June 30th of the following year.

     “Lodging and restaurant businesses” means and includes inns, hotels and motels, cafés, eating establishments, sandwich shops, dinner houses, restaurants and fast food services.

     “Professional” and “financial” mean and include attorneys, architects, engineers, surveyors, physicians, dentists, optometrists and others in a medical/health service field, real estate brokers, laboratories (including dental and optical), hearing aid services, artists and designers.

     “Retail businesses” means and includes all businesses not covered by other definitions set out in this section at least fifty (50) percent of whose gross income is derived from “retail sales” as that term is defined in the California Sales and Use Tax Law. The fact that a substantial part of its business consists of other than retail sales does not exclude the business from this classification so long as such other business component does not account for more than fifty (50) percent of such business’ gross income.

     “Service” and “organization” mean and include general office, news and advertising media, printers, photographers, builders, service stations, repairing and servicing businesses, service organizations (not including chamber of commerce), renting and leasing businesses, utilities (that are not governmental entities), vending machines businesses and other businesses not included in Types 1, 2 and 4 as set out in Section 5.24.030. (Prior code § 6-C.20)

 

5.24.070 Purposes.
     The purpose for which the funds raised by said benefit assessment shall be devoted to the statutory purposes set forth in Section 36500 of the Act, or one or more of said purposes, are as follows:

     A.    Acquisition, construction, installation or maintenance of parking facilities for the benefit of the area;

     B.     Promotion of public events which benefit businesses in the area and which are to take place on or in public places in the area;

     C.     Decoration of any public place in the area;

     D.    Furnishing of music in any public place in the area;

     E.     The general promotion of business activities which benefit businesses located and operating within the area. (Prior code § 6-C.22)

 

5.24.080 Collection of benefit assessment.
     The benefit assessment authorized by this chapter shall be billed quarterly by the city as of January 1st, April 1st, July 1st and October 1st of each fiscal year and shall be paid within thirty (30) days thereafter; provided, however, that during the first year the ordinance codified in this chapter is effective, the three-month period of assessment that would have commenced July 1, 1990, shall commence instead on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective. Each billing shall represent twenty-five (25) percent of the annual assessment. (Prior code § 6-C.24)

Chapter 5.30 TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Article 1. General Provisions
5.30.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is to promote competition in the telecommunications industry, facilitate the development of telecommunications infrastructure, minimize aesthetic impacts and damage to public property, provide for the payment of reasonable compensation for the commercial use of public property, and establish customer service standards. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.020 Definitions.
     “Basic service” means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.

     “Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and any amendments thereto.

     “Cable operator” means any person or group of persons (1) who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system, or (2) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.

     “Cable programming service” means any video programming provided over a cable system regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than: (1) video programming carried on the basic service tier; (2) video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program basis; or (3) a combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis, so long as the combined service consists of commonly-identified video programming and is not bundled with any regulated tier of service.

     “Cable service” means (1) the one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service, and (2) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service.

     “Cable system” means a facility within the city, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (1) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (2) a facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way; (3) a facility of a common carrier which is considered a cable system under federal law; or (4) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.

     “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commissioner, its designee, or any successor thereto.

.    “Gross revenues” means the revenue derived by a cable operator from the operation of the cable system to provide cable service. Gross revenues includes, but is not limited to, revenue from (1) subscriber payments for service, equipment, late fees, franchise fees and other charges; (2) advertising carried on the cable system or in subscriber bills, less any agency fees; and (3) programmers or others relating to transmissions carried on the cable system, including but not limited to payments to carry programming and home shopping revenues, to the extent not reimbursement for expenses connected with the launch of any programming. Gross revenues includes, but is not limited to, all gross revenue whether or not actually received. Gross revenues includes, but is not limited to, revenues derived from the operation of the cable system received or attributed to the franchisee, any direct or indirect affiliate of the franchisee or any partner, joint venturer or other entity related in any similar way to franchisee. Gross revenues includes revenues derived from the provision of internet access, cable modems and similar services, unless specifically excluded by federal law. Nothing, except as noted below, shall be excluded from gross revenues for any reason, including but not limited to the fact that the cable operator may itemize particular items on subscriber bills such as franchise fees. This definition shall be deemed to include all gross receipts and revenues to the full extent permitted by federal law. Gross revenues shall not include (1) excise taxes; (2) sales taxes; (3) bad debt.

     “Gross non-cable revenues” means the revenue derived from the operation of telecommunications facilities other than revenue defined in this section as gross revenue. Gross non-cable revenues includes, but is not limited to, revenue from (1) subscriber payments for service, equipment, late fees, franchise fees and other charges; (2) advertising carried on the telecommunications facilities or in subscriber bills; and (3) programmers or others relating to transmissions carried on the telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to payments to carry programming and home shopping revenues. Gross non-cable revenues includes, but is not limited to, all gross non-cable revenues whether or not actually received. Gross non-cable revenues shall include all gross non-cable revenue which is not actually received, such as the value of free service provided to telecommunications operator’s employees and the value of services bartered or exchanged for non-monetary consideration. Gross non-cable revenues includes, but is not limited to, revenues derived from the operation of the telecommunications facilities received or attributed to the franchisee, any direct or indirect affiliate of the franchisee or any partner, joint venturer or other entity related in any similar way to franchisee. Gross non-cable revenues includes revenues derived from the provision of internet access, cable modems and similar services, unless a cable operator has paid a cable television franchise fee based on the identical revenues. This definition shall be deemed to include all gross receipts or revenues to the full extent permitted by federal law.

     “Other telecommunications operator” means any person or group of persons other than a cable operator, an open video system operator, a wireless telecommunications operator or a telephone company (A) who provides telecommunications services over telecommunications facilities and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such telecommunications facilities, or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such telecommunications facilities.

     “Open video system” means a system within the city for the provision of video programming operated in compliance with Federal Communications Commission regulations.

     “Open video system operator” means any person or group of persons who have been certified by the Federal Communications Commission as an open video system operator for an open video system located within the city and (A) who provides video programming over the open video system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such open video system, or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such an open video system.

     “PEG channels” means the public channels, educational channels and governmental channels.

     “Street” means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, public road, public highway, public freeway, public lane, public path, public way, public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive and any public easement or right-of-way to which the rights of city are not limited, now or hereafter held by city which shall entitle the franchisee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a system.

     “Subscriber” means any person or entity who lawfully subscribes to any cable service whether or not a fee is paid for such cable service.

     “Telecommunications operator” means any person or group of persons (A) who provides telecommunications services over telecommunications facilities and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such telecommunications facilities, or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such telecommunications facilities.

     “Telecommunications services” means the transmission of voice, video, data or other information between two or more points along wires, optical fibers or other transmission media, or using radio waves or other wireless media, including but not limited to telephone services, cellular telephone services, personal communications services, internet services, open video system services and other similar services; however, it does not include those services of any telephone company where those services are exempted from local franchising by Public Utilities Code Section 7901.

     “Telecommunications facilities” means facilities within the city used or related to the provision of telecommunications services including, but not limited to, wires, optical fiber, antenna, cabinets, pedestals and equipment, other than telephone company facilities exempted by Public Utilities Code Section 7901.

     “Telephone Company” means any telephone or telegraph corporation as defined by Sections 234-236 of the Public Utilities Code (or any successor sections) which has obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the California Public Utilities Commission.

     “Wireless telecommunications operator” means any person or group of persons who provides wireless telecommunications services including, but not limited to, cellular telephone, personal communications system, spread spectrum or other wireless services, and (A) who provides telecommunications services over telecommunications facilities and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such telecommunications facilities, or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such telecommunications facilities. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.030 Applicability.
     All telecommunications operators shall comply with all provisions of this Article 1 (General Provisions) and all other applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.035 Registration.
     All telecommunications operators who own or lease any telecommunications facilities located in the public right-of-way (excluding telecommunication operators who merely purchase bandwidth on facilities owned by others) shall register with the city on forms provided by the community development department. These forms shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     A.    The name and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates who are required to register pursuant to this section;

     B.     The name, address and telephone number of an officer, agent or employee who will serve as the contact point for the registrant;

     C.     A description of the registrant’s existing or proposed telecommunications facilities that are owned or will be used within the city, together with a list of any other telecommunications operators who will be using those telecommunications facilities;

     D.    A description of the telecommunications services that the registrant is or will be offering using telecommunications facilities within the city;

     E.     A copy of the registrant’s applicable Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity, if any, issued by the California Public Utilities Commission

     F.     A registration fee in the amount established by resolution duly adopted by the city council (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.040 Use of public property.
     Encroachment Permit. Prior to excavating, installing telecommunications facilities upon including but not limited to placing telecommunications facilities within existing conduit or otherwise using city-owned property and rights-of-way for any purpose that requires an encroachment permit from the city, a telecommunications operator shall obtain an encroachment permit and comply with all other applicable city requirements. The encroachment permit application shall also include a description of any surplus conduit that the applicant intends to install and the capacity of the telecommunications facilities being installed. If the telecommunications operator is proposing to install telecommunications facilities without utilizing existing surplus conduit, the telecommunications operator shall submit a description of all existing surplus conduit along the proposed route together with an explanation of why that existing surplus conduit is not being utilized. In such a situation, the telecommunications operator shall also submit evidence that it has contacted all other telecommunications operators who are reasonably likely to be installing telecommunications facilities along all or part of the same route and has offered to participate in a joint installation project on reasonable terms. In such a situation where, in addition, the telecommunications operator proposes to install overhead telecommunications facilities, the telecommunications operator shall submit evidence that it has offered to participate on reasonable terms together with other entities utilizing the utility poles to install the telecommunications facilities and other facilities underground. If the telecommunications operator proposes to install utility cabinets or other above-ground facilities, the telecommunications operator shall include information about noise generated by the facilities and alternatives for reducing the aesthetic impacts of the facilities, including but not limited to size reductions, screening, alternative locations and undergrounding. The community development department may deny the encroachment permit for failure to comply with the foregoing or any other lawful reason. The community development department may also attach any reasonable conditions to the encroachment permit, including but not limited to requiring some or all telecommunications facilities to be placed underground, requiring boring rather than trenching, specifying a future time period when all excavations must take place, specifying the location where facilities may be installed, requiring trenches to remain open for a reasonable period of time to permit installation of facilities by the city or its designees, and requiring the installation of surplus conduits and dedication of such conduits to the city subject to the payment of the direct marginal cost of installing such surplus conduits by the city. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.050 Location of facilities.
     A.    All telecommunications facilities shall be installed within existing underground ducts or conduits whenever excess capacity is available on reasonable terms.

     B.     Overhead facilities may be installed only if space is available on existing utility poles.

     C.     Whenever existing telecommunications facilities or electric utility facilities are located underground along a particular street or public way, new telecommunications facilities must be installed underground along that street or public way.

     D.    Whenever any new or existing telecommunications facilities or electric utility lines are located or relocated underground along a particular street or public way, the telecommunications operator shall relocate its telecommunications facilities underground concurrently with the other lines at its sole expense to the full extent permitted by law.

     E.     Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a street or otherwise make the installation of future telecommunications facilities impractical, the telecommunications operator installing the new telecommunications facilities shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities designated by the community development department for reasonable nondiscriminatory access by other telecommunications operators. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.060 Relocation or removal of facilities.
     Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the city, a telecommunications operator shall relocate or remove, without expense to the city, any facilities installed, used and/or maintained by such telecommunications operator if and when such relocation or removal is reasonably necessary or convenient for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any city or other public improvement, or for any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any public street, way, alley or place, including the construction of any subway or viaduct, by or on behalf of the city, irrespective of the funding source or if the facilities have been abandoned or have not been used for a period of ninety (90) days. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.070 Damage to facilities.
     Unless directly and proximately caused by the willful acts of the city, the city and its officials, employees, agents and volunteers shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facilities as a result of or in connection with any public works or any other acts of the city or its officials, employees, agents or volunteers. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.080 Restoration of property.
     When a telecommunications operator or any person acting on its behalf does any work in or affecting any public property, the telecommunications operator shall, at its sole expense, promptly remove any unauthorized obstructions therefrom and restore such property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the city. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.090 Indemnification.
     A telecommunications operator shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees, agents and volunteers from and against any and all liability, loss, damage, expense, costs (including without limitation costs and fees of litigation) of every nature arising from the operations of, or the use of public property by, the telecommunications operator or its officers, employees, agents or contractors, except such loss or damage which was caused by the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the city. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.100 Waiver of provisions.
     The city council may waive in writing any provision of this chapter to the extent permitted by law in exchange for exceptional public benefits provided by a telecommunications operator. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.110 Franchises.
     Any person who does not already have a franchise with the city and is required to obtain a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall, in addition to all other requirements, reimburse the city for all of its costs, including but not limited to all costs of retaining consultants, related to the franchise application. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.120 Violations.
     A.    Criminal Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction.

     B.     Civil Penalties. any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who violates any condition of any license or permit issued hereunder, or who breaches any franchise agreement or other agreement with the city shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00). For continuing violations or breaches, each day that a violation or breach continues shall be deemed a separate violation or breach subject to an additional civil penalty.

     C.     Termination or Modification of Agreements. If any person breaches any franchise agreement or other agreement made pursuant to this chapter, the city may, following reasonable notice, opportunity to cure and opportunity to be heard, terminate the agreement or reduce the term of the agreement.

     D.    Cumulative Remedies. The foregoing remedies shall be deemed non-exclusive, cumulative remedies and in addition to any other remedy the city may have at law or in equity. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

Article 2. Cable Television.
Division 1. Franchising Procedures.
5.30.200 Franchise required.
     No person shall establish, construct, operate or maintain within this city a cable system unless a franchise has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.210 Granting.
     The city council may grant one or more nonexclusive revocable franchises to establish, construct, operate and maintain cable systems within the city. A franchise shall be effective only upon execution of a franchise agreement between the city and a cable operator and compliance with all requirements of this chapter. The franchises shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter as they may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.220 Term of franchise.
     A franchise shall be granted for ten (10) years or such other period as may be specified in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.230 Franchise applications.
     A.    All applicants for a new franchise, a franchise renewal or a franchise transfer shall submit a written application to the city. All applicants shall be expected to offer to subscribers a modern, efficient, cost-effective system that will facilitate quality maintenance, deliver a variety of programming and services, and provide the flexibility needed to adjust to changing technology and new developments in the industry. Proposals shall contain sufficient material to enable the city council to make fully informed judgments concerning the adequacy of the proposal and the applicant’s qualifications to construct, operate and maintain a cable system in the city. All applicants shall, at a minimum, provide the following information unless inapplicable:

     1.     The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant;

     2.     A description of the cable services that are or will be offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed facilities;

     3.     A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the cable operator to offer or provide such cable services;

     4.     Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the city, all in sufficient detail to identify:

     a.     The location and route requested for applicant’s proposed cable facilities;

     b.     The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way along the proposed route;

     c.     The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the cable facilities of other cable carriers;

     d.     The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.

     5.     If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its cable facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route;

     6.     If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:

     a.     The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant’s cable facilities;

     b.     The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant’s cable facilities.

     7.     A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates;

     8.     Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles by a certified public accountant or other accountant satisfactory to the city demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities. If in the normal course of its business, the applicant does not prepare a separate financial statement for the franchised system, the applicant may submit a combined financial statement for the local region, which statement shall include the franchised system.

     9.     Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the cable facilities and services described in the application;

     10.   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the cable services;

     11.   A detailed description of all telecommunications services that the applicant intends to provide and sufficient information to determine whether such services are subject to franchising;

     12.   An accurate map showing the location of any existing cables facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or lease;

     13.   A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the city and other public, educational and governmental institutions;

     14.   A description of applicant’s access and line extension policies;

     15.   The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area;

     16.   The number of activated, programmed channels that the applicant intends to provide together with the programming that the applicant intends to provide;

     17.   All fees, deposits or charges required by the city;

     18.   Such other and further information as may be requested by the city administrator.

     B.     if a franchise is granted to a person, firm or corporation posing as a front or as the representative of another person, firm or corporation, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.240 Application fee.
     An application fee for a new, renewal or transfer of franchise shall be required in the amount established from time to time by resolution duly adopted by the city council. The purpose of the application fee is to pay the cost of studying, investigating and otherwise processing the application, which shall be in consideration thereof and not returnable or refundable in whole or in part. Application fees are in addition to construction inspection and permit fees. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.250 New franchise procedure.
     Upon receipt of an application for a new franchise, the city council may, by resolution, approve or conditionally approve a franchise agreement with the applicant or deny the application. In making any determination hereunder as to any application, the city council shall give due consideration to: the quality of the service proposed; rates to subscribers; experience, character, background and financial responsibility of the applicant, its management and owners; system design; technical and performance quality of equipment; willingness and ability to meet construction requirements and to abide by franchise limitations and requirements; and other considerations deemed pertinent by the city council for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.260 Franchise renewal procedure.
     A.    During the six-month period which begins with the thirty-sixth (36th) month before the franchise expiration a proceeding to consider the renewal of a franchise shall be commenced either upon receipt of a written notice from the cable operator requesting such a proceeding, or upon the city’s  own initiative. If the city receives such a notice from the cable operator, it shall commence the proceeding within six months of receipt. This proceeding shall be for the purpose of, among other things, identifying the future cable-related community needs and interests, and reviewing the performance of the cable operator under the franchise during the then-current franchise term. The proceeding shall include, without limitation, a review of the foregoing matters by city staff and at least one noticed public meeting. The proceeding shall not be deemed complete until the review has been completed and the city has given the cable operator written notice of cable system and service features necessary to meet future cable-related community needs and interests, and of information that must be included in a proposal for a renewal, and of a deadline for submission of a renewal proposal.

     B.     Upon completion of the proceeding described in subsection (A) above, the cable operator may submit a proposal for renewal. Any such proposal shall include the matters described in Section 5.30.230 of this chapter and subsection (A) of this section.

     C.     Upon receipt of a renewal proposal pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, the city shall provide prompt public notice of the proposal. Within four months after receipt of the proposal, the city shall either:

     1.     Renew the franchise or renew the franchise subject to conditions by adoption of a city council resolution approving a franchise agreement; or

     2.     Issue a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed and, at the request of the operator or on its own initiative, commence an administrative proceeding concerning the renewal.

     D.    Any administrative proceeding pursuant to subsection (C)(2) of this section shall consider whether:

     1.     The cable operator has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law;

     2.     The quality of the operator’s service, including but not limited to signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing practices, but without regard to the mix or quality of cable services or other services provided over the system, has been reasonable in light of community needs;

     3.     The operator has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the services, facilities and equipment as set forth in the operator’s proposal; and

     4.     The operator’s proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests.

     E.     The cable operator shall be given at least fourteen (14) days advance written notice of the administrative proceeding. The cable operator shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to introduce evidence, to require the production of evidence and to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of the proceeding. At the completion of the proceeding, the city shall issue a written decision, with the reasons therefor, granting, conditionally granting or denying the proposal for renewal based upon the record of the proceeding. The city shall transmit a copy of the decision to the cable operator. Any denial of a proposal for renewal made in compliance with subsection (B) of this section shall be based on one or more adverse findings made with respect to the factors described in this subsection. A denial may not be based on any violation of the franchise or any events described in subsection (D)(2) of this section which occurred after 1984 unless the city provided the cable operator with notice and the opportunity to cure, or in any case in which it is documented that the city waived its right to object, or the cable operator gave written notice of a failure or inability to cure and the franchising authority failed to object within a reasonable time after receipt of such notice.

     F.     The city and a cable operator may agree to waive the provisions of subsections (A) through (D) of this section if the city and a cable operator agree to such a waiver, the cable operator may submit a proposal for the renewal of a franchise pursuant to this subsection at any time, and the city may, after affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, renew the franchise or renew the franchise subject to conditions by adoption of a city council resolution approving or conditionally approving a franchise agreement, or deny the franchise renewal. The provisions of subsections (A) through (E) of this section shall not apply to a decision to grant or deny a renewal pursuant to this subsection. The denial of a renewal pursuant to this subsection shall not affect action on a renewal proposal that is submitted in accordance with subsections (A) through (E) of this section.

     G.    The provisions of subsections (A) through (E) of this section are intended to reflect federal law and may be modified to conform to any changes in federal law. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.270 Transfer of ownership.
     A.    A franchise is a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original cable operator. A cable operator shall not sell, transfer, lease, dispose of or assign this franchise or any rights hereunder, including any beneficial interest or right to operate thereunder, by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, or by operation of law, without the prior approval of the city council.

     B.     If a cable operator is a partnership or a corporation, prior approval of the city council is also required when there is an actual change in control of the cable operator. A change in control shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to, the following:

     1.     In the case of a partnership, the general partner changes;

     2.     Ownership of twenty percent (20%) or more of its voting stock or the voting stock of any parent or affiliate which directly or indirectly through other affiliates owns twenty percent (20%) or more of the cable operator’s voting stock is to be acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert. The word “control” as used in this section is not limited to major stockholders but includes de facto control or significant influence with respect to the operation of the cable operator’s cable system. For purposes of this section, “significant influence” occurs where a person other than the cable operator or a person controlling, controlled by or under common control with the cable operator exercises working or effective control of decisions affecting the operation of the cable system.

     C.     The consent of the city council is not required for transfer of the franchise to a wholly-owned subsidiary of the cable operator or to any person controlling, controlled by or under common control with the cable operator providing any such person agrees in writing to be bound by the existing franchise and provides bonds and insurance acceptable to the city. The city shall continue to regard the cable operator and its transferee as a single entity for all purposes.

     D.    A cable operator’s execution of a deed of trust, mortgage or other instrument given merely to secure the payment of any indebtedness of a cable operator shall not constitute a transfer under this division and shall not require the consent of the city council.

     E.     Upon foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the system or upon the termination of a lease covering all or a substantial part of the system, the cable operator shall notify the city of the fact. The notification shall be considered as notice that a change in control of the cable operator has occurred. In this case the city council’s approval of the new owner of the system must be obtained as herein required.

     F.     Prior to any transfer or change in control, a cable operator shall submit to the city any form required by federal law together with the matters described in Section 5.30.230 of this chapter. The city council shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the transfer or change in control within one hundred twenty (120) days following receipt of all required material, unless an extension is agreed to by the city and the cable operator. Conditions of approval may include, but are not limited to, the following:

     1.     Resolution of any outstanding franchise violations or performance deficiencies;

     2.     Payment of any outstanding franchise fees;

     3.     Payment of city costs incurred in reviewing the transfer;

     4.     Filing of any appropriate bonds, insurance endorsements, letters of credit or guarantees; and

     5.     Written assumption of all obligations of the transferor by the transferee.

     G.    Within thirty (30) days after the date of the resolution approving transfer of the franchise, or within such extended period of time as the city council in its discretion may authorize, the transferee shall file with the clerk of the city council its written acceptance of the franchise, in a form satisfactory to the city, together with all required bonds and insurance certificates, and its agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required of it by the provisions of this division and the franchise award resolution. Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged by the transferee before a notary public and shall be in a form and content satisfactory to and approved by the city attorney.

     H.    The City may cancel a franchise sixty (60) days or later after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the cable operator, whether in receivership, or other action or proceeding, unless the receivership or trusteeship is vacated prior to the expiration of the sixty (60) days, or unless:

     1.     Within sixty (60) days after his election or appointment, the receiver or trustee complies with this division and remedies all defaults; and

     2.     Such receiver or trustee, within sixty (60) days, executes an agreement, approved by the court, whereby the receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by this division and the franchise granted to the cable operator.

     I.      Failure to comply with the requirements of this section is a material breach of this chapter, subject to the remedies provided for herein. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.280 Unauthorized operation of cable system.
     If a cable system is established, constructed, operated or maintained within the city without the franchise required by this division, the city may notify the cable operator of the franchise requirement. If the operator continues an unauthorized operation for thirty (30) days after such notice from the city, the operator shall forfeit to the city all gross revenues from the system for so long as such unauthorized operation continues. The city may also pursue any civil or criminal remedies, including but not limited to obtaining injunctive relief to immediately enjoin the continue unauthorized operation. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.290 Annexations.
     Within thirty (30) days after annexation of areas to the city which are served by a cable operator who does not have a franchise from the city, the cable operator shall apply for a new franchise. Pending consideration of such a franchise, the cable operator shall comply with each and every provision of this article, including but not limited to the franchise fee requirement. If a newly annexed area is not actively served by a cable operator, the cable operator(s) serving the area within the city contiguous to the newly annexed area shall provide service to that area subject to the provisions of its franchise agreement. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.300 Joint exercise of powers agreement.
     Should a joint exercise of powers agreement (Gov. Code, § 6500 et seq.) or similar agreement be entered between the county and any city located therein in accordance with law providing for the joint regulation of cable operators and cable services or other cooperative arrangements, involved cable operators shall be governed by, and subject to that agreement, pursuant to this Chapter’s provisions, provided that no such joint powers agreement shall impair any right or obligation of the cable operator under a franchise agreement. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.310 Reservation of rights.
     Insofar as it is not preempted by federal or state regulations, the city reserves all rights it may have or subsequently acquire under state, federal or other law with respect to the regulation of cable services or other communications services by a cable operator. The city further reserves the right to amend this chapter and apply such amendments to an incumbent cable operator in any manner that is not explicitly prohibited by a franchise agreement. A franchise granted pursuant to this article shall not be deemed to authorize or prohibit the provision of telecommunications services other than cable services. The provision of such other telecommunications services shall be governed exclusively by other articles of this chapter. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

Division 2. City Regulation of Franchise.
5.30.400 Administration.
     The office of the city administrator is designated as having primary responsibility for the administration of the franchise and this article. Whenever a right may be exercised under this article by the city or the city administrator, such right may also be exercised by a designee or employee. The city administrator is not authorized to enter into any franchise agreement or amendment thereto on behalf of the city. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.410 Basic service.
     Basic service shall be available to all subscribers. No subscriber shall be required to purchase any other service as a prerequisite to purchasing basic service. Basic service shall include all public, educational and government channels at no extra charge (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002).

 

5.30.420 Required channel capacity.
     The cable system shall have the capacity, the number of activated and programmed channels and the data/video return (“two-way” or “upstream”) capability specified in the franchise agreement. The cable system shall have maximum frequency of no less than 750 MHz or such other frequency that is specified in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.430 Performance evaluation sessions.
     The city and each cable operator shall hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions as specified in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.440 Integration of advancements in technology.
     A.    In addition to such upgrades as may be required under a franchise agreement, it is the responsibility of a cable operator to periodically review upgrading its cable system to integrate advancements in technology as may be required to meet the needs and interests of the community in light of the costs thereof. It is recognized that subscribers in the city have an especially strong interest in a system design that will eliminate the need for unnecessary set-top converters or advances in technology and/or otherwise permit subscribers to fully utilize the capabilities of consumer electronic equipment while receiving cable service.

     B.     To assist the city to understand the practical applications of developments in cable technology, each franchisee shall submit a report to the city every odd-numbered year during the franchise term. Each report shall describe developments in cable technology that have been incorporated into cable systems of comparable size in the United States, and whether, how and by what date the franchisee plans to incorporate those technology developments into the system. In addition, the report shall describe the effect of those developments on public, educational and governmental use of the cable system, and the effect and compatibility of those technological changes on other consumer electronic equipment. Except as provided in a franchise agreement, the city, on receipt of each plan, may promptly schedule hearings to consider whether the cable operator’s timetable for implementing the new technologies is adequate to meet the future cable related needs and interests of the city.

     C.     Any increased charges by a cable operator to subscribers for providing basic cable services in compressed or digitized forms shall comply with standard industry practices at the time such technology is introduced into the system. The introduction of compressed or digitized programming shall be a business decision of the cable operator made in good faith after due consideration of the needs and interests of the community, advancements in technology, the availability of programming and the cost to subscribers. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.450 Cable service to public buildings occupied by public agencies.
     A cable operator shall install, at no charge, at least one service outlet per city administrative building, school, library and city fire station within the franchise area, and shall charge only its time and material costs for any additional service outlets to such facilities. The cable operator shall provide basic cable service and cable programming service in all outlets in such buildings free of charge. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.460 PEG channels.
     The cable operator shall make available one or more dedicated channels on its cable system for purposes of public, educational and governmental access, as set forth in the franchise agreement. Such channels shall be available on the lowest tier of basic service. Such channels shall not be used for any advertisements or commercial programming without the permission of the city. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.470 Interconnection.
     A.    A cable operator shall design its system so that it may be two-way interconnected with any or all other cable television systems or similar communications systems in the area. Interconnection of systems may be made by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite or other appropriate methods.

     B.     A cable operator may interconnect its system with other cable systems upon its own initiative, or upon request of the city council to interconnect. If so requested, a cable operator shall begin good faith negotiations concerning interconnection with the other affected system or systems. If so requested, a cable operator shall interconnect with any adjacent cable system which is controlled by the cable operator or which is under common control.

     C.     All signals to be interconnected will comply with FCC technical standards for all classes of signals and will result in no more than a low level of distortion.

     D.    A cable operator shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority, state or federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, facilitating, financing or otherwise providing for the interconnection of communications systems beyond the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.480 Emergency override.
      To provide an emergency alert capability, the cable operator shall install and maintain an emergency alert system which allows the city to simultaneously override audio signals and broadcast emergency messages on all television channels. In case of public emergency, the city may, as directed by the administrator of emergency services or other authorized official, activate and use such emergency override system for the duration of the emergency. The cable operator shall assist and cooperate with the city in periodic testing of the emergency override system. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.490 Tree trimming.
     When trimming trees, a cable operator shall comply with all City regulations applicable to utilities. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.500 Removal and abandonment of cable system.
     In the event that a franchise is terminated or expires without being renewed, or if all or a portion of the cable system is not used for a period of ninety (90) days, the cable operator shall either remove the cable system or the abandoned portion thereof or shall obtain the permission of the city community development director to abandon the cable system in place within ninety (90) days. The cable operator shall obtain an encroachment permit prior to removing the cable system. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.510 Acquisition of cable system.
     Notwithstanding the granting of a franchise, the city retains the right under the laws of the State of California and any applicable Federal statutes or regulations to acquire the cable system by eminent domain. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

Division 3. Customer Service.
5.30.550 Continuity of service.
     Customers have the right to receive, and the cable operator has the obligation to provide, efficient service, high-quality reception, prompt repairs and service interrupted only for good cause and for the shortest possible time. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the cable operator are honored. In the event that the cable operator elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the system, or the city council gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew the franchise, the cable operator shall act so as to insure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.560 Non-discriminatory services.
     The cable operator shall not deny service or access or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability or occupation. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit senior discounts. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.570 Local office.
     The cable operator shall maintain a local business office at a location specified in the franchise agreement, to be open to the public on days and hours set forth in the franchise agreement.(Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.580 Line extensions.
     A.    The Cable Operator must extend and make cable television service available to every business location (other than home occupations) unless, due to the low density of businesses in a particular area, the city waives this requirement. The cable operator must extend and make cable television service available to every dwelling unit within three months in any unserved area reaching the average density of ten (10) occupied residential dwelling units per one-quarter mile, as measured from the nearest active coaxial feeder line. Extension of cable television service to any unserved area satisfying the foregoing requirements will be subject to the following:

     1.     Each occupied residential dwelling unit must be located within a distance of no more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the anticipated location of such extension, provided that an occupied residential dwelling unit located more than this distance from the anticipated location of such extension shall be counted if the owner or occupant agrees to pay the cable operator an additional amount not to exceed the actual time and materials cost of the portion of the drop to such residential dwelling unit exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet; and

     2.     The cable operator is able to secure all necessary easements or rights-of-way for purposes of locating its cable system in the area of such extension.

     B.     In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory extension of service, the cable operator shall provide, upon the request of a potential subscriber desiring service, an estimate of the reasonable costs required to extend service to the subscriber, including materials, labor, overhead and private easements, if necessary. The cable operator shall then extend service within four months upon request of the potential subscriber, who shall be responsible for all reasonable costs associated with the extension. The cable operator may require advance payment or assurance of payment satisfactory to the cable operator. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.590 System or individual outage complaints.
     A.    Upon receipt of a service complaint, the cable operator shall respond as follows:

     1.     To a system outage of one or more channels, within two hours;

     2.     To an individual outage of one or more channels, within twenty-four (24) hours; and

     3.     To all other reception problems, by the next working day or as agreed upon by the subscriber and the cable operator. The cable operator shall have available at all times a sufficient number of technicians capable of responding to the foregoing matters within the foregoing time frames.

     B.     The cable operator will be deemed to have responded to a service complaint when a field service representative competent to fix the problem arrives at the service location (which may be some portion of the cable system and not a subscriber’s residence) and begins work on the problem. In the case of a response which involves request for service at a subscriber’s residence, and the subscriber is not home when the field service representative arrives, response will be deemed to have taken place if the field service representative leaves notification of arrival and instructions for rescheduling on the subscriber’s front door.

     C.     Where the cable operator is unable to respond to a service complaint within the applicable time period specified in this section, the cable operator shall make reasonable efforts, within such time period, to notify the complainant of the reason(s) and the estimated time frame for correction, and shall proceed to correct the service complaint at the earliest possible time. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.600 Scheduling appointments.
     A.    All appointments for service, installations or disconnection shall be specified by date. At the subscriber’s option, weekday service calls shall be scheduled as morning or afternoon appointments during specified four hour blocks of time. For service calls responding to system or individual outages, holiday and weekend scheduling shall also be available. If the appointment cannot be kept, the cable operator shall make reasonable efforts to promptly notify the subscriber in advance and reschedule the appointment. A cable operator may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.

     B.     Subscribers who have experienced a missed appointment due to the fault of a cable operator shall receive installation free of charge (if the appointment was for installation). The subscriber shall receive a credit against the basic service charge in the minimum amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) if the missed appointment is for a service call. Alternatively, subscribers may pursue their remedies pursuant to Civil Code section 1722. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.610 Notification of service interruptions.
     Where service interruptions of one hour duration or longer are planned, the cable operator shall notify subscribers at least twenty-four (24) hours before the anticipated interruption, provided that no notification shall be required for service interruptions occurring between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Notification need not be repeated before each anticipated interruption as long as the initial notification advises of the possibility of repeated interruptions during a specified period not to exceed one month. To the extent feasible, the cable operator shall avoid interruptions between 5:00 p.m. and midnight. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.620 Notification of service or channel changes.
     The cable operator shall notify subscribers of any changes in programming services or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notices must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the changes are within the control of the cable operator. The cable operator shall provide a copy of all notification to the city and shall make every reasonable effort to do so at least seven days in advance of the distribution to subscribers. If the subscriber notice is not timely provided, the proposed change may not occur until and unless the proper notice is provided. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.630 Telephone communication services.
     The cable operator shall render efficient telephone communication service locally, sufficiently staffed by knowledgeable, courteous personnel. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.640 Complaint log.
     The cable operator shall keep a computer log or written record for at least three years of:

     A.    All service calls and complaints which require the dispatch of a service vehicle to respond to the service call or complaint; and

     B.     All calls regarding outages, regardless of whether a service vehicle was dispatched, together with the disposition of all such calls. This record shall be available for public inspection by the affected subscriber at the local office of the cable operator during regular office hours so that each subscriber may examine his or her own records. The log or record shall be available for inspection by the city at any time at the local office of the cable operator during regular office hours. Before making a record available for inspection under this section, the cable operator may require reasonable advance notice, which shall in no event exceed one working day. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.650 Subscriber test requests.
     Upon reasonable request or complaint by a subscriber, the cable operator shall, at its sole expense, perform such signal level tests as necessary to establish if a signal of requisite quality is being delivered to the subscriber’s premises. The test shall be conducted at the subscriber’s receiver and at other such locations deemed necessary by the cable operator, and a copy of the written test results shall be made available to the subscriber upon request. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.660 Conditions of service—Subscriber information.
     The cable operator shall send or deliver to all new and reconnected subscribers in writing and to all subscribers at least once a year, in a form easy to read and understand, information concerning the conditions of service, including but not limited to: rates, fees, charges, deposits, refunds of deposits, available levels of service (tiers), payment options, discounts (if any), service call policy, privacy protections and disconnection and reconnection policy. The cable operator shall provide a copy of such information to the city prior to its distribution to the cable operator’s subscribers for review and comment. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.670 Complaints— Subscriber information.
     Upon connection or reconnection to the system and at least once a year, the cable operator shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, printed notice on billing statement or billing insert, furnish to each subscriber information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints to the cable operator or the city, including the name, address and local telephone number of the cable operator and the city. The form and content of the complaint notice shall be subject to review and comment by the city. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.680 Investigation of complaints.
     A.    When there have been a significant number of complaints made, or where there exists other evidence which, in the judgment of the city, indicates a problem with the reliability or quality of cable service as required under this chapter or in the franchise agreement, the city council shall have the right and authority to require the cable operator to evaluate the performance, operation or administration of the cable system including without limitation matters relating to customer service. The cable operator shall fully cooperate with the city in performing such evaluation and shall prepare results and a report, if requested, within thirty (30) days after notice. Such report shall include he following information:

     1.     The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the evaluation;

     2.     What system component, operation or service was evaluated;

     3.     The equipment used and procedures employed;

     4.     The method, if any, by which such complaint or problem could be or has been resolved; and

     5.     Any other information pertinent to the evaluation which may be required.

     B.     The city may require that evaluations be supervised, or conducted, at a cost to be paid by the cable operator, by an engineer, accountant or other consultant selected by the city and not on the permanent staff of the cable operator or the city. The engineer, accountant or other consultant shall sign all records of the evaluation and forward to the city such records with a report interpreting the results of the evaluation and recommending actions to be taken. The city’s rights under this section shall be limited to evaluating specific subjects and characteristics based on complaints, circumstances or other evidence which causes the city to reasonably believe that evaluation is necessary to protect the public against substandard cable service. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.690 Noncompliance with standards.
     In the event of repeated and verifiable noncompliance with the customer service standards contained in this chapter, the city may, addition to pursuing any other civil or criminal remedy, direct the cable operator to add sufficient personnel and/or telephone lines and equipment to ensure compliance with such standards. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.700 Billing, late fees, disconnection of service and notification of rate changes.
     A.    Bills for service shall be monthly. Nothing in this section shall prohibit voluntary repayment of services by subscribers; provided, that the cable operator shall not be required to offer or accept any discount or other reduction in the amount paid by any subscriber for a voluntary prepayment of services. Bills shall include a listing of the cable operator’s customer service telephone number in a manner that makes such number significantly more prominent than any other telephone numbers listed on the bill. Bills shall not list the city’s telephone number in a manner that causes confusion to the public. All telephone numbers shall be listed on the bill in a form approved by the city.

     B.     Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits.

     C.     In case of a billing dispute, the cable operator must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days.

     D.    Before itemizing on subscriber bills any fees, taxes, assessments or other items payable to the city the itemization of which is not expressly authorized by state or federal statute or regulation, the cable operator shall submit a sample bill to the city for review and comment. In the event that the billing language proposed by the cable operator is misleading or incomplete, the cable operator shall modify the same as requested by the city or shall include a reasonable explanation as agreed to by the city and the cable operator.

     E.     Charges on a bill shall not be deemed delinquent and a subscriber shall not be subject to a late fee, so long as payment is received from the subscriber within ten (10) days after the end of the service period covered by the bill.

     F.     A cable operator shall only disconnect a subscriber’s service for good cause. A cable operator shall not disconnect service for nonpayment until the cable operator has provided the subscriber with notice, provided on or after the due date of the subscriber’s bill and separately from that bill or any other standard monthly bill, at least ten (10) days in advance of the disconnection. The notice shall specify the earliest date the disconnection will occur, the total payment required to avoid disconnection and the telephone number and office hours to contact a customer service representative. In no event shall disconnection for nonpayment occur less than fourteen (14) days after the end of any billing period for which charges are delinquent. If service is disconnected by the cable operator’s personnel at or near the drop to the subscriber, such personnel shall first attempt to visit the subscriber and give the subscriber an opportunity to continue service by paying all accrued charges. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.710 Refund of deposits.
     The cable operator shall refund all subscriber deposits within thirty (30) days of termination of service. Any outstanding balance, including any equipment not returned by the subscriber, may be deducted from the deposit. The refund shall be mailed to the subscriber at no expense, or shall be handled as otherwise agreed to by he subscriber. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.720 Parental control lock.
     The cable operator shall provide subscribers, upon request, with a parental locking device or digital code that permits inhibiting the video portions of premium channels. The cable operator may charge a reasonable rate for such a device. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.730 Privacy.
     A.    The cable operator shall not sell or otherwise release to any person, without specific written authorization from each individual subscriber, any list which identifies individual subscriber viewing habits or any list which contains the name, address and/or telephone numbers of individual subscribers,

     B.     The cable operator shall not place in a residence any equipment capable of being used by the cable operator for audio eavesdropping or video surveillance. In addition, the cable operator shall not activate any two-way communications capability of the system in a subscriber’s residence, or use the system to gather information about individual subscriber viewing habits, without the subscriber’s informed written or electronic consent. Notwithstanding the above, the cable operator shall have the right to use the system to (i) obtain information necessary to render cable service or any other service provided by the cable operator to the subscriber, (ii) verify receipt of cable service for billing purposes or (iii) detect unauthorized reception. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.740 Landlord/tenant.
     A.    Neither the owner of any residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall ask or demand any payment, service or gratuity in any form as a condition for permitting the installation of cable service to the dwelling unit occupied by a tenant or resident requesting service.

     B.     Neither the owner of any residential dwelling nor his agent or representative shall penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or resident, or discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who requests or receives cable service from a cable operator operating under a valid and existing cable franchise issued by the city.

     C.     No person shall resell, without the express written consent of the cable operator and without a franchise from the city, where required, any cable service, program or signal transmitted by a cable operator operating under a franchise issued by the city. However, the owner of a multiple dwelling unit, under the auspices of a bulk cable service agreement with the cable operator, may charge tenants for cable service, so long as such charges do not exceed the charges made by the cable operator to the owner, plus a reasonable sum to reimburse the owner for necessary administration and billing.

     D.    Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from requiring that cable system facilities conform to laws and regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to protect safety, functioning, appearance and value of premises or the convenience and safety of persons or property.

     E.     Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from requiring a cable operator to agree to indemnify the owner, or his agents or representatives, for damages or from liability or damages caused by the installation, operation, maintenance or removal of cable system facilities. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.750 Unauthorized connections and tampering.
     No person, firm or corporation shall make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable system for the purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. Also, no person, without the consent of the owner, shall tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

Division 4. Construction and Technical Standards.
5.30.800 Construction requirements.
     All construction (including, but not limited to, the initial construction of the cable system and any rebuild, expansion, replacement, repair or maintenance of all or any part of the cable system) shall be performed in compliance with this chapter. At least ninety (90) days prior to initiating any major construction (other than routine maintenance or repair, installation of subscriber drops or minor line extensions), a cable operator shall submit a construction plan to the city. The construction plan shall include a description of the work, equipment specifications, existing and proposed locations of all facilities, traffic control plans, resident and business notification plans and a detailed construction schedule. The city may approve, conditionally approve or deny the construction plan. The city may require the posting of construction bonds. Additional construction requirements may be specified in a franchise agreement. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.810 Standards.
     A.    A cable operator shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system consistent with all of the following:

     1.     All ordinances and construction standards of the city;

     2.     National Electrical Safety Code;

     3.     National Electrical Code;

     4.     Rules, regulations and orders of the Federal Communications Commission;

     5.     Rules, regulations and orders of the California Public Utility Commission;

     6.     All other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.

     B.     A cable operator shall construct, install and maintain its cable system in an orderly and professional manner, using due diligence and materials of good and durable quality. All such work shall be performed in close coordination with other public and private utilities following accepted construction procedures and practices and working through existing committees and organizations. All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with and in the same manner as electric and telephone lines on the same poles. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations.

     C.     A cable operator shall, at its own cost and expense, install and maintain shielding, filtering and grounding at affected installations with the system to eliminate television interference encountered from overload by amateur radio transmissions which are in compliance with FCC regulations.

     D.    A cable operator shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power to be engaged automatically in the event of a power failure for twenty-four (24) hours at all headends serving the city, including without limitation all switching facilities, towers, electronics and heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems and equipment located at such headends and such switching facilities. The cable operator shall also maintain on its distribution system alternative power sources (battery back-up) so that both the subscriber and the institutional networks (if any) may be maintained at full power for at least two hours beyond the time when normal power sources serving the cable system have ceased.

     E.     If the city reasonably believes that the cable system is not in technical compliance with the foregoing standards, the city may require the cable operator to conduct its own technical testing of the system, and the cable operator shall disclose the results of such tests to the city upon their completion. Any deficiencies shall be cured by the cable operator promptly and no later than thirty (30) days following completion of testing. The city shall also have the right to observe any system performance tests conducted by the cable operator and to obtain copies of the results of such tests.

     F.     A cable operator shall comply with all of the same standards and codes, including but not limited to the payment of inspection fees, to construct and maintain its system within private rights-of-way as are required by the city’s public streets. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

Division 5. Administration and Enforcement.
5.30.820 Franchise fees.
     All cable operators shall pay a franchise fee to the city in an amount equal to five percent of the cable operator’s gross revenues. The cable operator shall make franchise fee payments on the first day of each quarter year, or at such other times specified in the franchise agreement. Franchise fee payments shall be submitted together with documentation of the cable operator’s gross revenues in such form as may be required by the city from time to time. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.830 Compensation relating to non-cable telecommunications services.
     All cable operators shall pay compensation to the city for use of public property in an amount equal to five percent of the cable operator’s gross non-cable revenues. Payments shall be submitted to the city on the first day of each quarter of each calendar year together with documentation of the cable operator’s gross non-cable revenues in such form as may be required by the city from time to time. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.840 Fees on non-cable operator revenues.
     In consideration of the use of public property, any person other than a cable operator who provides cable service or any other telecommunications service over a cable system for which charges are assessed to subscribers but which are not received by a cable operator shall pay a fee to the city in an amount equal to five percent of that person’s gross revenues and gross non-cable revenues. The cable operator whose cable system is used by such person shall collect the foregoing fee from such person no later than the tenth (10th) day prior to the close of each calendar quarter and shall remit the fee to the city no later than the first (1st) day of the following calendar quarter. If the cable operator fails to collect or remit all or part of this fee, the cable operator shall be directly liable to the city for payment of the uncollected or unremitted fee. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.845 Audit.
     The city has the right to inspect and audit all of the cable operator’s books and records and those of its affiliates relevant to an accurate determination of the total amount of the cable operator’s gross revenues and gross non-cable revenues. The cable operator shall make such records available to the city within fourteen (14) days of the city’s request. Such records shall be available for inspection by the city at the cable operator’s office within the city during normal business hours. Such records shall be retained by the cable operator for a period of at least five years. The city will bear the cost of any such audit; provided, however, that if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of three percent or more of the amount due, the cable operator shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs relating to the audit. Any additional amount due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the cable operator, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. If the cable operator believes the audit report is in error, it may send a written response to the city describing the error in lieu of making the payment. If the city disagrees with the response, it shall notify the cable operator in writing, after which the cable operator shall pay the additional amount due within thirty (30) days. The city may elect to perform such audit jointly with one or more other government agencies which regulate affiliated systems. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.850 Late payments.
     In the event that the cable operator does not make any payments required by this chapter on or before the date due, a late payment penalty shall accrue at a rate of one and one-half percent month on the unpaid amount until paid. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.860 Inspection of records.
     The cable operator shall maintain at its local office within the city, and shall make available for inspection and auditing at that office within seven days after receipt of a written request by the city, complete and accurate books, records, strand maps, plans and other materials of the cable operator which are reasonably related to the city’s review of the cable operator’s compliance with this chapter and the franchise agreement. To the extent that an affiliate of the cable operator aggregates information relating to the cable system together with information bout other cable systems, the cable operator shall have copies of such records available for inspection and auditing at the local office within seven days after receipt of written request by the city. The city shall maintain the confidentiality of any of the foregoing records to the extent that they are not public, contain sensitive business information and confidentiality is permitted by law. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.870 Location of cable operator’s properties.
     A.    The cable operator shall at all times make and keep on file in the office of the community development director current, full and complete plans and records to a scale and form approved by the community development director, showing the exact location of all cable system equipment installed or in use in streets, alleys and public places in the city.

     B.     The cable operator shall file with the community development director, on or before the last day of March of each year, a current strand map or set of strand maps drawn to a scale and in the format designated by the community development director, showing all cable system equipment installed in streets, alleys and public places of the city during the previous year. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.880 Insurance.
     A.    The cable operator shall at all times during the existence of any franchise issued hereunder maintain in full force and effect at its own cost and expense the following policies of insurance:

     1.     A general comprehensive liability insurance policy with minimum liability limits of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage;

     2.     An automobile liability policy with minimum liability limits of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage; and

     3.     Workers’ compensation insurance with minimum policy limits as required by state law.

     B.     All of the foregoing policies (except workers’ compensation insurance) shall all name the city, its officers, officials, agents, employees and volunteers as insureds, and shall be primary to any insurance maintained by the city. The precise terms of these policies, including but not limited to liability limits, deductibles, acceptable insurers and other terms, shall be specified in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.890 Indemnification.
     The cable operator shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers from and against any and all liability, loss, damage, expense, costs (including without limitation costs and fees of litigation) of every nature arising out of or in connection with the cable operator’ s enjoyment of the franchise hereunder, or its failure to comply with any of its obligations contained in the franchise agreement or this chapter, or arising out of the construction, installation, maintenance, operation or removal of its cable system, except such loss or damage which was caused by the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the city. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.895 Letter of credit.
     Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of a franchise agreement, the cable operator shall deposit with the city an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount set forth in the franchise agreement in a form and with an institution approved by the city. The letter of credit may be drawn upon by the city for the purpose of remedying any noncompliance by the cable operator with any provision of this code or the franchise agreement. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.900 Possessory interest.
     The granting of a franchise pursuant to this chapter nay create an interest subject to property taxation pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 107 et seq. The cable operator shall be solely responsible for payment of any such taxes. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

Article 3. Open Video Systems
5.30.910 Prerequisites to operating an open video system.
     A.    Prior to operating an open video system, an open video system operator shall elect to either obtain a cable television franchise pursuant to Article 2 of this chapter or to comply with this article. No person or entity shall operate an open video system without first:

     1.     Submitting a written notice of its election;

     2.     Complying with Article 1 of this chapter;

     3.     Providing the city with a copy of its Federal Communications Commission certification as an open video system; and

     4.     Completing negotiations with the city and otherwise complying with the public, educational and governmental access requirements contained in Section 5.30.920 of this chapter.

     B.     If an open video system operator fails to comply with any federal, state or city requirement, it shall immediately cease operations until such compliance occurs. This article shall not be deemed to authorize an open video system operator to conduct any operations other than the provision of cable services. If an open video system operator provides other telecommunications services, those services shall comply with all applicable sections of this code. Constructing or operating an open video system shall not be deemed to give any open video system operator a vested right to continue to maintain such a system. In the event that federal law ever permits the city to require an open video system operator to obtain a franchise or license, all open video system operators shall immediately apply for such a franchise or license from the city. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.920 Public, educational and governmental access.
     Prior to operating an open video system, an open video system operator shall negotiate with the city concerning public, educational and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities and equipment. These negotiations may include the local cable operator(s) if all parties so agree. If the city and the open video system operator are unable to reach agreement, the open video system operator must satisfy the same public, educational and government access obligations as the local cable operator(s) by connecting with the cable operator’s public, educational and governmental access channel feeds and by sharing the cable operator’s costs relating to such channels. The city council may adopt a resolution governing the use of such channels and the implementation of the connection of the open video system with the cable system. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.930 Fees.
     In consideration of the use of public property, all open video system operators shall pay a fee to the city in an amount equal to five percent of the open video system operator’s gross revenues. The open video system operator shall make fee payments quarterly on the first day of each calendar quarter. Fee payments shall be submitted together with documentation of the open video system operator’s gross revenues in such form as may be required by the city from time to time. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.940 Compensation relating to non-cable telecommunications services.
     All open video system operators shall pay compensation to the city for use of public property in an amount equal to five percent of the open video system operator’s gross non-cable revenues. Payments shall be submitted to the city on the first day of each quarter of each calendar year together with documentation of the open video system operator’s gross non-cable revenues in such form as may be required by the city from time to time. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.950 Fees on non-open video system operator revenues.
     In consideration of the use of public property, any person other than an open video system operator who provides cable service or any other telecommunications service over an open video system for which charges are assessed to subscribers but which are not received by an open video system operator shall pay a fee to the city in an amount equal to five percent of that person’s gross revenues and gross non-cable revenues. The open video system operator whose open video system is used by such person shall collect the foregoing fee from such person no later than the tenth (10th) day prior to the close of each calendar quarter and shall remit the fee to the city no later than the first day of the following calendar quarter. If the open video system operator fails to collect or remit all or part of this fee, the open video system operator shall be directly liable to the city for payment of the uncollected or unremitted fee. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.960 Audit.
     The city shall has the right to inspect and audit all of the open video system operator’s books and records and those of its affiliates relevant to an accurate determination of the total amount of the open video system operator’s gross revenues and gross non-cable revenues. The open video system operator shall make such records available to the city within fourteen (14) days of the city’s request. Such records shall be available for inspection by the city at the open video system operator’s office within the city during normal business hours. Such records shall be retained by the open video system operator for a period of at least three years. The city will bear the cost of any such audit; provided, however, that if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of three percent or more of the amount due, the open video system operator shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs relating to the audit. Any additional amount due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the open video system operator, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. If the open video system operator believes the audit report is in error, it may send a written response to the city describing the error in lieu of making the payment. If the city disagrees with the response, it shall notify the open video system operator in writing, after which the open video system operator shall pay the additional amount due within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

5.30.970 Late payments.
     In the event that the open video system operator does not make any payments required by this code on or before the date due, a late payment penalty shall accrue at a rate of one and one-half percent per month on the unpaid amount until paid. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

Article 4. Telephone Companies
5.30.980 Telephone companies.
     All telephone companies shall comply with all provisions of Article 1 of this chapter, except for those services and facilities exempted by Public Utilities Code Section 7901 or other state or federal law. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

Article 5. Wireless Telecommunications Operators
5.30.990 Wireless telecommunications operators.
     All wireless telecommunications operators shall comply with all provisions of Article 1 of this chapter. All wireless telecommunications operators shall obtain a franchise from the city pursuant to Article 6 of this chapter unless such companies are exempt from franchising requirements pursuant to state or federal law. A wireless telecommunications operator shall not be deemed exempt from the franchise requirements of this article unless and until it provides documentation of such exemption to the satisfaction of the city. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

 

Article 6. Other Telecommunications Operators
5.30.995 Other telecommunications operators.
     All telecommunications operators shall comply with all provisions of Article 1 of this chapter. All telecommunications operators shall obtain a franchise from the city pursuant to this article  unless such companies are exempt from franchising requirements pursuant to state or federal law. A telecommunications operator shall not be deemed exempt from the franchising requirements of this article  unless and until it provides documentation of such exemption to the satisfaction of the city. (Ord. 02-883 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 5.40 MOBILE FOOD TRUCKS
5.40.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to regulate mobile food truck activities in order to protect public health, safety, and welfare, while accommodating commercial uses that generally promote an active and social pedestrian environment within appropriate areas of the city of Susanville. (Ord. 19-1016 § 1, 2019)

 

5.40.020 Definitions.
     The following words and terms are defined for the purpose of applying the provisions of this chapter:

     “Business license” means a city of Susanville business license.

     “Mobile food truck” means a motorized vehicle or vehicle-towed trailer, including food carts, in which food is cooked and/or prepared to order and is served to walk up customers.

     “Mobile food truck event” means an organized gathering of mobile food truck vendors which is open to the general public.

     “Mobile food truck vending” means selling, vending, supplying or providing of food, drinks or any other consumables from a vehicle, truck, trailer or cart.

     “Mobile vending license” means a license issued for the purpose of mobile vending pursuant to Chapter 5.04.

     “Property owner” means the holder of fee title to a property, whether a person, partnership, corporation or other entity recognized by law, and his/her/its lessees, permittees, assignees or successors in interest.

     “Public property” means any real property owned, leased, operated, or controlled by the city of Susanville other than a street, alley, parkway, sidewalk or other area dedicated, identified or used as a public right-of-way.

     “Public right-of-way” means any public street, road, avenue, highway, named or unnamed alley, lane, court, place, trail, parkway, sidewalk or other public way, operated and/or controlled by the city or other public entity, or subject to an easement owned by or dedicated or granted to the city.

     “Special event” means an activity or series of activities as defined in Section 12.32.020 of this code. (Ord. 19-1016 § 1, 2019)

 

5.40.030 Mobile vending license.
     No person shall conduct a mobile food truck vending operation within the city of Susanville, without first obtaining a mobile vending license from the city, except under the following conditions:

     A.    No mobile vending license shall be required when the mobile food truck activity is associated with the operation of a city-permitted special event, subject to the conditions thereof.

     B.     No mobile vending license shall be required when the mobile vending activity is limited to a single mobile food truck on private property operating solely for private catering purposes and when all of the following provisions are met:

     1.     The mobile food truck is parked entirely on private property.

     2.     Service is limited to the guests of the catered event only.

     3.     No payment transactions shall occur for individual orders taken by the mobile food truck operator. (Ord. 19-1016 § 1, 2019)

 

5.40.040 Business license requirement.
     Unless otherwise authorized by this code, it is unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food truck in the city of Susanville without having a valid business license obtained from the city of Susanville. (Ord. 19-1016 § 1, 2019)

 

5.40.050 Health permit requirement.
     It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of operating a mobile food truck in the city of Susanville without a valid permit, certificate, or other authorization as required by the county of Lassen Department of Environmental Health. A copy of said permit must be kept in the mobile food truck at all times. (Ord. 19-1016 § 1, 2019)

 

5.40.060 Sales tax reporting.
     All mobile food truck operators, are subject to reporting of tax revenues generated within the city of Susanville to the State Board of Equalization, and to show proof of a seller’s permit obtained by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 19-1016 § 1, 2019)

 

5.40.070 General provisions for mobile food trucks.
     A.    No mobile food truck may operate before seven a.m. or after ten p.m., including setup and clean-up, except for private catering functions or special events as described in Section 12.32.020.

     B.     No mobile food truck may operate within two-hundred fifty (250) feet of any off-street mobile food truck event, city-permitted special or reoccurring event. Exceptions to this prohibition are allowed when consent is provided within the special event permit. In this case, all standards and conditions required by Section 12.32.020 apply.

     C.     Mobile food trucks must not idle vehicle engines more than five minutes during any one hour time period.

     D.    Mobile food truck operators must be responsible for controlling smoke and odors caused by food preparation so as to avoid a public nuisance.

     E.     No amplified music or loudspeakers are permitted. The operation must comply with all noise provisions of the city of Susanville Municipal Code.

     F.     No temporary lighting shall be provided on the site where the mobile food truck is operating, except that localized lighting may be used on or in the mobile food trucks for the purpose of inside food preparation and menu illumination, except as otherwise permitted for a special event.

     G.    No signage other than that exhibited on the mobile food truck may be displayed at the site where the mobile food truck is operating. The prohibition includes any handheld signage and handbills.

     H.    All sales or service of alcohol by mobile food trucks is prohibited.

     I.      Mobile food trucks must not operate within two-hundred fifty (250) feet of an existing restaurant operating out of a permanent structure except with written authorization of restaurant owner or on-site manager.

     J.      The mobile food truck operator must maintain and supply to the city, copies of policies of commercial general liability and automobile liability, in an amount of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, naming the city as an additional insured. (Ord. 19-1016 § 1, 2019)

 

5.40.080 Mobile food trucks on private property.
     Mobile food trucks may operate on private property in C-2 (General Commercial/Shopping Center), PF (Public Facilities), O-S (Open Space) and UBD (Uptown Business District) pursuant to the following minimum standards and conditions:

     A.    A minimum of two off-street parking spaces must be provided for each mobile food truck. The parking required herein must not be reserved, encumbered, or designated to satisfy the off-street parking of another business or activity that is operating on the site at the same time as the mobile food truck.

     B.     Separate refuse and recycling containers must be provided on-site during all hours of mobile food truck operations. All litter generated within a minimum of a one-hundred (100) foot radius of the site must be collected prior to closure of the mobile food truck operations.

     C.     No overnight parking of mobile food trucks is allowed on the permitted vending site.

     D.    A maximum two-hundred (200) square foot uncovered seating area may be provided to serve patrons of the mobile food truck. All seating areas must be removed before the close of business for the day. The seating must be located in an area of the site that is not landscaped, reserved, encumbered, or designated to satisfy the off street parking of a business or activity that is operating at the same time as the mobile food truck, and must not obstruct any pedestrian or vehicular traffic. (Ord. 19-1016 § 1, 2019)

 

5.40.090 Mobile food trucks on public right-of-way.
     Mobile food trucks may operate in legal parking spaces located adjacent to C-2 (General Commercial/Shopping Center), PF (Public Facilities) O-S (Open Space) and UBD (Uptown Business District) districts, provided they comply with all of the following minimum standards and conditions:

     A.    Mobile food trucks must be parked directly adjacent to a paved sidewalk, free and clear for pedestrian passage.

     B.     Food service must be limited solely to that side of the mobile food truck facing the adjacent sidewalk.

     C.     The mobile food truck must be in full compliance with all parking and vehicle code provisions which apply to the location at which it is parked, including the maximum allowed parking time limit for the parking space(s) occupied.

     D.    The mobile food truck operations must not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

     E.     The mobile food truck operator must not encroach upon a public sidewalk with any part of the vehicle or any other equipment or furniture related to the operation of its business, except for required refuse and recycling receptacles, provided they maintain a clear four-foot pedestrian walkway.

     F.     No mobile food truck operator must conduct business unless he or she maintains a clearly designated refuse and recycling receptacle(s) in the immediate vicinity of the vehicle. Such receptacles must be marked with a sign requesting use by patrons. Before leaving the location, the mobile food truck operator must pick up, remove and dispose of all trash generated by the mobile food truck operations within one hundred (100) feet of the truck.

     G.    No mobile food truck is permitted to operate in such a way so as to cause an unacceptable reduction in sight distance for any cross street, crosswalk, driveway or any other similar location where traffic, be it vehicular, pedestrian or bicycle, can be expected to enter the roadway. (Ord. 19-1016 § 1, 2019)

 

5.40.100 Peddlers, solicitors, and mobile vendors.
     In the event of a conflict between the city of Susanville Municipal Code regarding peddlers, solicitors, and mobile vendors and this city of Susanville Municipal Code Chapter 5.40 with respect to mobile food trucks, this city of Susanville Municipal Code Chapter 5.40 controls. (Ord. 19-1016 § 1, 2019)

 

5.40.110 Penalty for violation.
     Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, upon conviction thereof may be punished in accordance with the provisions of this code. In addition to any other penalty prescribed for a violation of this chapter, upon a determination by the city that a person has violated any provision hereof, the city may revoke each and all business licenses which have been issued pursuant to this chapter, to the person who committed such violation and to the business by whom such person was employed when the violation occurred. In addition to any other penalty prescribed for a violation of this chapter, such a violation constitutes grounds for denial of the issuance or renewal of such a business license to the person who committed the violation and to the business by whom such person was employed when the violation occurred. (Ord. 19-1016 § 1, 2019)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 ANIMALS GENERALLY
Chapter 6.08 DOGS

Chapter 6.04 ANIMALS GENERALLY
6.04.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

     “Animals” means and includes horses, ponies, mules, jacks, jennies, cows, bulls, calves, heifers, llamas, sheep, goats, swine, rabbits, pigeons, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, fowl, emus, ostriches, and all other domestic or domesticated animals other than household pets. It does not include dogs.

     “Animal control officer” means every employee or agent of the city designated to enforce the provisions of this chapter. As used herein, animal control officer shall include police officer or sheriff’s officer as defined in Penal Code Section 830.

     “Animal shelter” means any premises designated by the city for the purpose of impounding and caring for dogs found running at large, or otherwise in violation of this chapter.

     “At large” means a dog off the premises of its owner and not under restraint, and not otherwise immediately responsive to the command of its owner, keeper or other person capable of exercising restraint over the dog.

     “Commercial animal establishment” means any pet shop, grooming shop, guard dog auction, riding school or stable, boarding or breeding kennel, whether for dogs, animals or household pets.

     “Destroy” means putting any animal or household pet to death by humane methods and by either a licensed veterinarian or the veterinarian’s authorized designee.

     “Dog” means any canine animal, male or female, spayed or neutered.

     “Exposed to rabies” means a human, animal, dog, or household pet has been exposed to rabies if it has been bitten, scratched, or exposed to, any animal, dog, household pet or wild animal known to have been infected with rabies, or suspected of having rabies.

     “Household pets” means dogs, canaries, parrots, and other kindred animals and birds usually and ordinarily kept as household pets.

     “Impound” means the taking up and confinement of a dog in an animal shelter, veterinary hospital or other facility.

     “Kennel” means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs.

     “Owner” means any person, partnership, or corporation owning, keeping or harboring one or more animals, dogs, or household pets. An animal, dog or household pet shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.

     “Poultry” means pigeons, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, emus, ostriches, and all other domestic or domesticated fowl other than household pets.

     “Restraint/physical restraint” means control over a dog by a leash, or at heel beside a person able to control said dog, and obedient to that person’s commands, or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets, or within the property limits of its owner or keeper.

     “Veterinarian” means a person authorized and licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state of California.

     “Vicious dog” means any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, attacks, bites, or injures a human being, or has, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, attacked, bitten or injured another dog, household pet, or animal. This definition shall not apply to government police dogs.

     “Wild animals” means nondomesticated birds, mammals or reptiles that are not normally domesticated in the state of California. (Ord. 98-851 § 1; prior code § 4.1)

 

6.04.020 Unlawful for animals to be in city parks or on city sidewalks.
     Except as provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person to ride or otherwise permit any animal, as defined in Section 6.04.010 of this code, to be within any city park within the city at any time or to ride, drive, or herd any such animal in or upon any sidewalk within the city. This prohibition does not apply to the annual cattle drive that occurs on the fourth Friday in August each year, commencing in the year 2000, in connection with the annual Susanville Rodeo. (Ord. 00-868 § 1, 2000: prior code § 4.1 1/2)

 

6.04.030 Keeping in foul, offensive, etc., condition.
     It is declared to be a nuisance and it is unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept upon any premises, any animals or poultry or household pets in a foul, offensive, obnoxious, filthy or unsanitary condition. (Prior code § 4.2)

 

6.04.040 Running at large—Generally.
     It is declared to be a nuisance and it is unlawful for any person to allow or permit animals or poultry other than household pets, to run at large upon any public street or place, or to trespass upon the property of another. This provision shall not be construed as permitting the running at large of any household pets who are restricted by the provisions of any other ordinance of the city or by any law applicable thereto. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.12.010 of this code a first violation of this section shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars; any subsequent violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the Lassen County jail for a period not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 4.3)

 

6.04.050 Running at large—Animals and poultry.
     It shall be the duty of every owner or person in possession and in control of animals and poultry except household pets to keep the same within a good and substantial enclosure within the city which will prevent their running at large. (Prior code § 4.4)

 

6.04.060 Keeping animals within seventy-five feet of dwelling prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal or poultry within seventy-five (75) feet of a door or window of any dwelling. (Ord. 98-851 § 1; prior code § 4.4 1/2)

 

6.04.070 Nuisances—Unnecessary noises— Annoying odors.
     It is declared to be a nuisance and it is unlawful to keep, maintain or permit on any lot or parcel of land, any animals, poultry or household pets, which by any sound or cry shall disturb the peace and comfort of any neighborhood or interfere with any person in the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life or property.

     It is declared to be a nuisance and is unlawful to make, cause or suffer, or permit to be made or caused upon any premises any unnecessary noises or sounds or odors which are physically annoying to persons of ordinary sensitiveness or which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in their use, time or place as to occasion physical discomfort. (Prior code § 4.5)

 

6.04.080 Nuisances—Abatement.
     The city council may act under this chapter to abate any nuisance upon complaint in writing signed by residents and taxpayers of the city, wherefore the complaint will be investigated. If determined to be a nuisance by the council, the owner is to be notified to abate the same within ten (10) days from the date of the notice. Mailing of the notice properly addressed with postage prepaid is hereby declared to be sufficient notice. (Prior code § 4.6)

 

6.04.090 Nuisances—Cost of abatement to be lien on property.
     Provided that the city council determines that the nuisance exists as determined by the preceding section and that it is to be abated, the cost thereof is to be paid by the owner of the premises upon which such nuisance occurs. In the event that it is necessary for the city to pay for the abatement of the nuisance, the cost of such abatement shall be a lien upon the premises to be enforced by foreclosure or by civil action. The lien shall be recorded with the county recorder of Lassen County. (Prior code § 4.7)

 

6.04.100 Public places—Sale of animals.
     It is unlawful to display in unlicensed public places within the city limits kittens and/or puppies for purposes of giving them away and/or selling them. Unlicensed public places shall include shopping centers, storefronts, street corners, sidewalks and businesses other than pet shops open to the general public. (Prior code § 4.19 1/2)

 

6.04.110 Investigation.
     For the purposes of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and to enforce its provisions the animal control officer or any police officer is empowered to enter upon any premises upon which a dog is kept or harbored and to demand the exhibition by owner of such dog of the license for such dog. It is further provided that any agent of the animal control officer may enter the premises where any animal is kept in reportedly cruel or inhumane manner and demand to examine such animal and to take possession of such animal when, in his opinion, it requires humane treatment. (Prior code § 4.23)

 

6.04.120 Enforcement.
     It is unlawful to interfere with an animal control officer or police officer in the performance of his or her duties. (Prior code § 4.24)

 

6.04.130 Violation—Penalty.
     Violation of any provision of this title that is declared to be unlawful, is an infraction, and is punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision within one year. In the case of a continuing violation, each day’s violation shall be deemed a separate violation. If any person is found guilty by a court of violation of Section 6.08.100(C) of this title, then his or her permit and/or license to own, keep, harbor, or have custody of a dog or dogs shall be deemed automatically revoked and no new permit and/or license may be issued for said person to own, keep, harbor or have custody of any dog or dogs thereafter for a period of three years. (Ord. 98-851 § 1; prior code § 4.25)

Chapter 6.08 DOGS
6.08.010 At large dogs—Exceptions.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person who owns, keeps, harbors or cares for any dog to permit such dog to run at large from the premises used and occupied by said person for residential or business purposes, unless such dog is under restraint.

     B.     No dog shall be left completely enclosed in a parked vehicle without adequate ventilation, or in such a way as to subject the dog to temperatures that would affect the dog’s health and welfare; to do so is unlawful.

     C.     Exceptions: A working dog, performing acts such as herding under the control and supervision of its owner/handler shall not be considered at large while performing its duties. A hunting, obedience, tracking or show dog shall not be considered at large while performing in those capacities. (Ord. 98-851 § 1; prior code § 4.9)

 

6.08.020 License and registration and fees therefore.
     A.    All dogs on attaining the age of four months that are kept, harbored or maintained by their owners in the city shall be licensed hereunder, and failure to do so is unlawful. All dog kennels within the city shall be registered and licensed hereunder, and failure to do so is unlawful. Applications for licenses for dogs over the age of four months, and/or for dog kennels shall be made prior to July 31st of each year. A dog license and/or kennel license shall be valid for one year in the year during which the license is obtained (unless the license is prepaid, in which case it shall be for the following year) from July 1st through the following June 30th.

     B.     Written application for a dog license shall be made to the city clerk and shall state the name and address of the owner and the name, breed, color, age and sex of the dog. The license fee shall be paid at the time of making application, a numbered receipt given to the applicant, and a numbered metallic tag showing the year of license expiration shall be issued to the owner.

     C.     Written application for a kennel license shall be made to the city clerk and shall state the following: number of dogs at the kennel, their color, breed, sex and verification that they have been vaccinated with antirabies vaccine as required in subsection E of this section. Every dog on the kennel premises shall be registered on said kennel application form; if a dog is not registered (excepting short-term [less than thirty (30) days] boarding dogs), then that dog is considered an offense as an unlicensed dog, unless the dog is individually licensed. Every dog so registered shall be issued a metallic tag which shall be fastened on the dog’s collar as set forth in subsection F of this section.

     D.    Once the kennel license is issued, a copy of the written application for the kennel license shall be kept on file at city hall, with a copy provided to the animal shelter.

     E.     No dog license shall be issued until the owner presents a current certificate by a licensed veterinarian that the dog sought to be registered and licensed has been vaccinated with antirabies vaccine in accordance with state law.

     F.     Every owner is required to see that the tag is securely fastened to the dog’s choke chain, collar or harness, which must be worn by the dog at all times. No person shall use for any dog a license receipt or license tag issued for another dog.

     G.    The dog license for any year or portion thereof on each dog licensed at or within the time herein provided shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per dog, except that license fees for spayed bitches or neutered dogs shall be seven dollars ($7.00) per dog. When application is made for a license after thirty (30) days following the start of the licensing period, a late fee of fifty (50) percent of the license fee shall be added to the license fee for any year or portion thereof on each dog, and shall be collected with the regular license fee. One day each year at the license clinic held within the city the above-listed licensing fees shall be offered at half-price, only on the day of the license clinic.

     H.    The kennel license fee shall be as follows:

 

Commercial Kennel License

Five to nine dogs

$105.00 or $20.00 per dog, whichever is less.

Ten to twenty dogs

$250.00 or $20.00 per dog, whichever is less

 

 

Non-Commercial Kennel License

(includes only dogs which are spayed or neutered, and only for use as pets)

One to five dogs

$20.00 or $7.00 per dog, whichever is less.

Six to ten dogs

$40.00 or $7.00 per dog, whichever is less.

 

     I.      These licensing provisions shall not be intended to apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents, temporarily (less than ninety (90) days) within the city, nor to guide dogs (“seeing eye dogs”) properly trained to assist blind or disabled persons when such dogs are actually being used by blind or disabled persons for the purpose of aiding them in getting from place to place.

     J.      In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by the city clerk upon presentation of a receipt showing payment of the license fee for the current year, and the payment of a two dollar ($2.00) fee for such duplicate. Dog tags shall not be transferable from one to another, and no refunds or credits shall be made on any dog license because of the death of any dog or the owner’s leaving the city before expiration of the license period.

     K.    If there is a change in ownership of a dog or kennel during the license year, the new owners may have the current license transferred upon the payment of a transfer fee of one dollar ($1.00).

     L.     Any dog owner, upon becoming a resident of the city, shall have ninety (90) days to obtain a license for his or her dog, unless such dog will have theretofore been required to be licensed and/or redeemed in compliance with the provisions hereof.

     M.    An owner moving from Lassen County to the city shall not be required to obtain a new license for that applicable city licensing period, provided the owner’s dog has a current county license for that applicable licensing period within the city. (Ord. 04-907 § 1, 2004; Ord. 98-851 § 1; prior code § 4.10)

 

6.08.030 License and permit issuance and revocation.
     A.    Prior to issuance of a kennel license, and after an application is filed, the city shall cause the kennel to be inspected. The city may refuse to issue a kennel license, or may revoke any kennel license if the person making application or holding the kennel license refuses or fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the regulations promulgated hereunder by the city, or any law governing the protection and keeping of dogs.

     B.     Any person who is denied a kennel license after making application therefor, or whose license is revoked shall, within ten (10) days after the written denial or revocation, sell, give away or humanely dispose of all dogs owned, kept or harbored. No part of the license fee shall be refunded.

     C.     It shall be a condition of the issuance of any license that the city shall be permitted to inspect all dogs and the premises where they are kept at reasonable times and upon reasonable twenty-four (24) hour notice. Should permission for such inspection be refused, the license shall either not be issued, or if already issued, shall be revoked.

     D.    If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the application for kennel license, the city shall have authority to refuse to issue a license, or to revoke a license, as the case may be.

     E.     Any person denied a license may not reapply for thirty (30) days. Each new application thereafter shall be accompanied by a ten dollar ($10.00) fee. There shall be no application fee for the initial kennel license application. (Prior code § 4.10 1/2)

 

6.08.040 Dogs under four months old.
     It is unlawful for any dog owner, owning a dog under the age of four months, to allow such dog to run at large within the city and every such owner of a dog under four months of age shall keep such dog confined to the premises of the owner or keep such dog under physical restraint by the owner, provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the sale or transportation of a dog four months of age or younger. (Prior code § 4.11)

 

6.08.050 Power of arrest.
     Every police officer, poundmaster and animal control officer shall have the power, as provided in Section 836.5 of the Penal Code, to arrest without a warrant and to prepare and give and accept written promises to appear, to give citations and exercise all powers authorized by Section 836.5 of the Penal Code. (Prior code § 4.12)

 

6.08.060 Impounding.
     A.    It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to apprehend any vicious dog, and any dog or dogs running at large or in violation of this chapter or any law of the state, and to impound such dog or dogs in the shelter designated by the city, to be confined in a humane manner for a period of not less than five days (one hundred twenty (120) hours), except as otherwise provided in Penal Code Section 597f. The animal control officer, upon receiving any dog, shall make a complete registry, entering the breed, color, and sex of such dog, and whether licensed. If licensed, the name and address of the registered owner and the number of the license tag shall also be entered in the registry.

     B.     It is unlawful for dogs to run at large within the city limits. When dogs are found running at large, and their ownership is known to the animal control officer, such dogs need not be impounded, but the animal control officer may, in his or her discretion, cite the owners of such dogs to appear in court to answer the charges of violation of the chapter.

     C.     It is unlawful for dogs to be within any city park without a leash.

     D.    No dog shall be impounded by owner surrender unless the owner signs a release form and pays a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per dog; said fees are for the purpose of offsetting the cost of administration and providing care to the dog and destruction if adoption does not occur. (Prior code § 4.13)

 

6.08.070 Notice to owner and redemption.
     Not later than twenty-four (24) hours after the impounding of any canine, the registered owner shall be notified by the United States mail, or if said owner of the dog is unknown, written notice shall be posted not later than twenty-four (24) hours after impounding, for three days at 66 North Lassen Street (City Hall) and at 1801 Main Street (Police Department), describing the canine and the place and time of taking. The owner of any canine so impounded or an adoptive-owner, may claim (redeem) such canine upon payment of the license fee, if unpaid, and penalty if owing, and of all costs and expenses incurred by the city for impounding and maintenance of said canine.

     The following charges shall be paid: A service charge for the first impoundment in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), plus twelve dollars ($12.00) per day for each day or fraction thereof such canine is kept, beginning with the day of impoundment;

     In the event that the subject canine is impounded by the city a second time, the service charge shall be increased to one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus twelve dollars ($12.00) per day for each day or fraction thereof such canine is kept, beginning with the day of impoundment and two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus twelve dollars ($12.00) per day for each day or fraction thereof such canine is kept, beginning with the day of impoundment for the third and each subsequent impoundment. If the canine is not picked up or impounded for a period of twelve (12) months from the most recent violation or impoundment, the impound fee will return to fifty dollars ($50.00) as if it were the first impoundment, and increase accordingly to one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second impoundment, and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the third and each subsequent impoundment.

     Any animals, canine or feline, that are subject to quarantine for bites and do not have a current rabies vaccination, or that do not meet the conditions of home quarantine, will be assessed a fifty dollar ($50.00) to two hundred dollar ($200.00) impound fee based on the number of violations and the impound schedule plus twenty dollars ($20.00) per day for each day or fraction thereof, such dog is kept in quarantine or impounded. No animal may be redeemed by any owner unless such owner shall produce a certificate from a licensed veterinarian that such animal has been vaccinated with anti-rabies vaccine within the preceding twenty-four (24) month period; provided, that any such owner shall have the right, consistent with the other provisions of this chapter, prior to such redemption, and at his or her own cost and expense to have a licensed veterinarian vaccinate such impounded animal. (Ord. 16-1006 § 1, 2016; prior code § 4.14)

 

6.08.080 Disposition of unclaimed or infected dogs.
     It shall be the duty of the poundmaster to keep all dogs so impounded for a period of five days (one hundred twenty (120) hours) after written notice is sent to the last known address of the registered owner. If at the expiration of the said time period from date of notice to the owner or from first posting of such notice, if such dog shall not have been redeemed, it may be destroyed, or given to an adoptive home. Any dog suffering from rabies, or infected with hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease, shall not be released, but may be immediately destroyed, without any waiting period requirement. (Prior code § 4.15)

 

6.08.090 Unclaimed dogs not for scientific purposes.
     No dog or dogs remaining unclaimed and held by the poundmaster for the city shall be sold, surrendered or given to any hospital or institution of learning for scientific purposes under any circumstances whatsoever, nor shall any official of the city nor any other person have any power or authority to so sell, surrender or give any dog herein mentioned to any hospital or institution of learning for scientific purposes. (Prior code § 4.16)

 

6.08.100 Dangerous or vicious dogs.
     A.    A dog impounded as a vicious dog and unclaimed, shall be subject to the disposition provided in Section 6.08.080. A dog impounded as a “vicious dog,” and thereafter claimed by its owner, shall not be released except: (1) on order of court on disposition of any citations or complaint for violation of this chapter which caused such impoundment or (2) on written determination of the city attorney that citation will not be prosecuted or complaint will not be issued.

     B.     The fees and charges for release of any dog impounded and held over five days as a vicious dog shall be as set out above and for all days the dog has been impounded in all cases, except that if the release from impoundment is by reason of court order after acquittal of violation of this chapter or on determination of the city attorney not to prosecute, the fees and charges shall be as set out above, but the service charge shall be limited to five days.

     C.     It is unlawful for an owner of any vicious dog to fail to keep such vicious dog under effective physical control so as to preclude its unprovoked attack upon any human being, animal, or dog. For purposes of this section, “effective physical control” means that such dog, while on the owner’s premises, shall be confined within a building or secure fence, and if off the owner’s premises, shall be on a leash and securely muzzled.

     D.    Without limiting Section 6.08.080 herein, providing for destruction of unclaimed or infected dogs, the court may, in addition to any other penalty provided in this chapter, order the destruction of any vicious dog which the court finds, should it escape from the “effective physical control,” as defined in this subsection C of this section, will either: (1) without reasonable provocation attack any human or animal or dog; or (2) constitute a threat of harm or danger to public safety or welfare. (Ord. 98-851 § 1; prior code § 4.17)

 

6.08.110 Confinement of certain dogs.
     It is unlawful for any person who owns any female dog in heat, or any dog of fierce, dangerous, or vicious propensities, to allow said dog to run at large upon the premises of one other than the owner. If any such dog is found at large in violation of this section, it shall be taken up and impounded. If any dangerous, fierce, or vicious dog so found at large cannot safely be taken up and impounded, such dog may be slain by any police officer. (Ord. 98-851 § 1; prior code § 4.18)

 

6.08.120 Animal waste.
     The owner of every dog shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by said dog on public walks, recreation areas, or private lands not belonging to said owner. Failure to do so is unlawful, and a violation of this code. (Prior code § 4.18 1/2)

 

6.08.130 Rabies control.
     A.    Every dog which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the animal control officer and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the animal control officer for a period of ten (10) days, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the animal control officer. At the discretion of the animal control officer such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at the shelter designated by the city, or, at the owner’s option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of the owner’s choice. In the case of stray animals, or in the case of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated by the city.

     B.     The owner upon demand made by the animal control officer shall forthwith surrender any dog which has bitten a human or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, which expense shall be borne by the owner, and may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of fees set forth in Section 6.08.070, and upon complying with the licensing provisions set forth in Section 6.08.020.

     C.     When a dog under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, and dies while under such observation, the animal control officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the State Health Department for pathological examination, and shall notify the proper public health officer of reports of human contacts, and the diagnosis made of the suspected animal.

     D.    No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, rabid dog, or any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting a human, except as herein provided, nor remove same from the city without the written permission from the animal control officer.

     E.     The carcass of any dead dog exposed to rabies shall upon demand be surrendered to the animal control officer.

     F.     The animal control officer shall direct the disposition of any dog found to be infected with rabies.

     G.    No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any dog for quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by the animal control officer. (Ord. 98-851 § 1; prior code § 4.19)

 

6.08.140 Vaccination.
     It is unlawful for the owner of any dog to keep or maintain such dog unless it shall have been vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with antirabies vaccine. (Prior code § 4.20)

 

6.08.150 Adoption—Sterilization.
     A.    Dogs subject to disposition at the animal shelter may be sold if the sale of any such dog is not contrary to law, or to the public interest. Dogs may not be sold at the animal shelter for purposes other than keeping as pets, and may not be sold without first having been licensed and vaccinated against rabies, and all applicable fees hereunder having been paid. No dog shall be released by the animal shelter or humane society for adoption without being spayed or neutered, unless a deposit for spaying or neutering the dog has been paid by the adopter. The minimum deposit to be so paid shall be equal to the lesser of the lowest fee charged by veterinarians within Lassen County or the sum of forty dollars ($40.00). The deposit shall be returned to the adopter provided that the adopter presents a written statement or receipt from the veterinarian or clinic that the dog has been spayed or neutered within sixty (60) days from the date of adoption.

     B.     Use of any deposit not claimed under subsection A of this section shall be limited to the following:

     1.     Public education program to prevent overpopulation of dogs and cats;

     2.     A program to spay or neuter dogs and cats;

     3.     For follow-up programs to assure spaying and neutering are being performed;

     4.     Any additional costs incurred under this section. (Ord. 04-907 § 1, 2004: prior code § 4.22)

Title 7 (RESERVED)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04 AMBULANCE SERVICES
Chapter 8.08 GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Chapter 8.12 OPEN BURNING
Chapter 8.16 PRIVIES AND SEPTIC TANKS
Chapter 8.20 STANDARDS FOR FIRE PROTECTION FACILITIES AND WATER FLOW
Chapter 8.24 WATER WELLS
Chapter 8.28 WEED AND RUBBISH ABATEMENT
Chapter 8.32 ADMINISTRATIVE NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Chapter 8.36 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES
Chapter 8.40 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Chapter 8.44 JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ADJUDICATORY ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
Chapter 8.48 SALE AND USE OF FIREWORKS
Chapter 8.50 VERY HIGH FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONE
Chapter 8.52 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Chapter 8.53 SHOPPING CART MANAGEMENT, REMOVAL, IMPOUNDMENT, RETRIEVAL AND DISPOSAL, AND PREVENTION OF ABANDONED CARTS

Chapter 8.04 AMBULANCE SERVICES
8.04.010 Ambulance service operation.
     Any ambulance service operating in the city must meet all federal, state, Northern California Emergency Medical Service, county, and local requirements for operation, licensing, equipment, and personnel. (Prior code § 8.60)

 

8.04.020 Required city licenses.
     Ambulance services performing their primary business in the city must have, in addition to the business license required by Chapter 5.04, a separate operating license for each ambulance unit used in the city. This chapter applies only to ambulance services performing their primary business in the city. (Prior code § 8.62)

 

8.04.030 Operating licenses.
     Each ambulance unit must have an operating license with a specific designation of advanced life support (ALS) or basic life support (BLS), (as defined by California Health and Safety Code Sections 1797.52 and 1797.60), and each ambulance service must have at least one unit licensed as advanced life support and used as the primary unit for emergency responses. The operating license shall be issued by the city clerk. (Prior code § 8.64)

 

8.04.040 Fee for operating license.
     The annual fee for an operating license issued to each ambulance unit is fifty dollars ($50.00) which fee shall be collected by the city clerk prior to issuance of the license. The fee shall be due annually thereafter on July 1st. The operating license shall be kept at all times in the vehicle to which it applies. (Prior code § 8.66)

 

8.04.050 Penalty—Fine—Suspension— Termination.
     Failure to procure an operating license as required herein is punishable as an infraction, subject to a fine as set forth in Government Code Section 36900; in addition, the operating license can be suspended or terminated by the city council provided the licensee receives at least ten (10) days written notice from the city clerk regarding said hearing with the reasons set forth therein and whether suspension or termination is proposed. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Prior code § 8.68)

 

8.04.060 Charges for service.
     An ambulance service doing business in Susanville must provide a current charge or rate schedule, to be kept on file by the city clerk, clearly written to show all charges applicable for services provided. A differential of at least twenty (20) percent must be provided between advanced life support and basic life support base charge or rate. (Prior code § 8.70)

 

8.04.070 Increases in charges or rates.
     The city council must approve any proposed charge or rate increase for services provided at least thirty (30) days before an increase can go into effect. The applicant’s request for an increase shall be accompanied by substantiation therefor. (Prior code § 8.72)

 

8.04.080 Exemption.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to ambulance services not performing their primary business with the city. (Prior code § 8.73)

 

8.04.090 Equipment provided to the city fire department.
     An ambulance service licensed to operate in the city pursuant to this chapter shall provide all necessary medical equipment to the fire department needed to provide EMS first responder services (excluding vehicle extrication equipment). The fire chief and director of the ambulance service shall determine what equipment will be provided to the fire department. The fire department will maintain the equipment in proper order, and the ambulance service will repair or replace equipment as needed. (Prior code § 8.74)

 

8.04.100 Extrication billing.
     The city of Susanville will provide the billing mechanism for the city when the fire department provides extrication equipment and personnel. The charge for the extrication will be set by the city council, pursuant to procedures required by law, and may be amended periodically as the city council deems proper. (Ord. 04-911 § 1, 2004: prior code § 8.76)

 

8.04.110 Radio equipment and communication.
     Each licensed ambulance operating in the city must be equipped with radio equipment that will allow the ambulance to communicate directly with the fire department. (Prior code § 8.78)

Chapter 8.08 GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
8.08.010 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

     “Garbage” means and includes offal, as the entrails of an animal or fish; refuse animal or vegetable matter from a kitchen, market or store; waste material from a house, market or store consisting of offal mixed with other refuse, as ashes, paper, tin cans, etc.; hence, anything worthless or filthy; refuse.

     “Garbage disposal licensee” means the person who has a license to engage in the business within the city of disposal and removal of garbage. (Prior code § 9.8)

 

8.08.020 License to collect garbage— Required.
     No person shall engage in the business of disposal or removal of garbage, or dispose of or remove garbage for a compensation within the city without first having procured a license so to do. (Prior code § 9.9)

 

8.08.040 License to collect garbage, recyclables and refuse.
     The license required to collect garbage, recyclables and refuse shall be obtained from the Lassen Regional Solid Waste Management Authority.  (Ord.

01-873 § 1, 2001: Prior code § 9.11)

 

8.08.060 Garbage, recyclables and refuse rates.
     The monthly and any other rates for the pickup, transportation, removal and disposal of garbage, recyclables and refuse for all customers within the city of Susanville shall be established by the Lassen Regional Solid Waste Management Authority.  (Ord. 01-873 § 1, 2001; Prior code § 9.13)

Chapter 8.12 OPEN BURNING
8.12.010 Burning trash, rubbish, etc., generally.
     It is unlawful to burn or cause to be burned any trash, rubbish, refuse or debris in an open fire without having first secured a permit from the fire chief or his duly authorized agent. Such burning shall not be permitted except within the hours of six a.m. to two p.m. On each permit there shall be stated the conditions of burning which must be complied with. (Prior code § 8.4)

 

8.12.020 Burning trash, rubbish, etc., by business.
     It is unlawful for any person having an established business at a fixed location, or who shall hereafter establish a business at a fixed place, to burn or cause to be burned any trash, refuse, rubbish or debris material or matter of any description whatever on the business premises, except in a furnace or stove having a flue or chimney not less than five feet in length, or if not in such a container such burning shall be done in an incinerator which has had the prior approval of the fire chief or duly authorized agent, which shall be kept by the operator of the incinerator. Such approved incinerator must be kept in good operative condition and will be subject to periodic inspection. (Prior code § 8.5)

 

8.12.030 Permit required to burn grass on vacant lots or open spaces.
     The fire chief or duly authorized agent may grant a special permit to burn grass upon vacant lots or other open spaces. No such burning will be lawful without such permit. Applicant for such permit will furnish the description of the lot or other open spaces to be burned. The permit shall describe the area to be burned, shall be for one day only, will set forth the time of such burning and shall require due precaution to be taken to prevent the spread of fire. The fire chief or duly authorized agents may impose additional requirements as deemed necessary. (Prior code § 8.6)

 

*    As to removal of grass, weeds, etc., generally, see Sections 8.28.010 to 8.28.040 of this code.

 

8.12.040 Premises to be kept free of fire hazards.
     Every person occupying premises as owner or lessee shall keep the premises free of all material constituting a fire hazard. Where the fire chief or duly authorized agent finds that a fire hazard exists he or she shall notify the owner or lessee of the premises to remove the hazard. Failure to comply within a reasonable time, to be fixed by the fire chief or agent, is a violation of this chapter. (Prior code § 8.7)

 

8.12.050 Burning trash, rubbish, etc.—Hours permitted.
     It is unlawful for any person, except public institutions and persons required by law, to burn debris, trash or rubbish in any incinerator at any time other than between the hours of six a.m. and two p.m. (Prior code § 8.7-1)

 

8.12.060 Enforcement of chapter.
     The fire chief and agents duly authorized by him or her, are authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter. For such purpose the fire chief and his or her agents shall have the powers of a police officer, and be subject to the provisions of this code dealing with the right of entry of inspection. (Prior code § 8.8)

Chapter 8.16 PRIVIES AND SEPTIC TANKS
8.16.010 Privy defined.
     The word “privy” as used in this chapter means any building or structure, with or without a pit or excavation underneath the same, and whether with or without toilet seats or openings, which is designed for or capable of being used as a means or place for the disposal of human excreta or other wastes from the human body, and any structure, pit, excavation or place which is actually or has been actually used for the disposal of human excreta or other wastes from the human body. (Prior code § 16.1)

 

8.16.020 Privies and septic tanks prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to construct, erect, excavate, maintain, use or suffer or permit to be used, any privy within the corporate limits of the city. It is unlawful for any person to construct, excavate or install within the corporate limits of the city any installation, tank, leach line or pit commonly known, described and referred to as a “septic” tank or any similar device or installation designed to be used for the disposition of human excreta or other wastes from the human body or sewage of any kind. (Prior code § 16.2)

 

8.16.030 Procedure for filling in existing privies.
     It is unlawful for the owner of any property within the corporate limits of the city to keep, permit, suffer to be kept or to maintain in and upon such property any privy unless such owner shall have, under the supervision of the building inspector of the city, treated the pit, place or excavation under and beneath the privy structure, with quicklime and shall thereafter have filled such pit or excavation with earth to six inches above the surrounding ground level, and unless such owner shall have removed from any such structure all toilet seats or openings and shall have sealed such openings so that the same cannot be opened or used for the purposes prohibited in the preceding section. (Prior code § 16.3)

 

8.16.040 Filling in privy, disconnection of septic tank by city—Expenses lien on premises.
     The construction, erection, excavation, maintenance or use of any privy, as defined in Section 8.16.010 and the construction or installation of a septic tank or similar installation as defined and described in Section 8.16.020 are declared to be public nuisances and the owner or occupant of any premises upon which such privies exist or upon which such septic tank has been constructed or installed after September 19, 1975, shall, within ten (10) days after having received the notice in writing from the building inspector so to do, abate such nuisance by, in the case of a privy, the filling of the pit or excavation thereunder in the manner hereinabove described or, in the case of a septic tank, by the disconnection thereof from the plumbing system of any building or structure to which it is connected and by the removal of the tank and filling the pit or excavation from which it was removed in the manner hereinabove prescribed. Should such owner or occupant fail so to do, within such ten (10) day period, then the building inspector may cause such nuisance to be abated in a manner described above, and the costs and expenses of so doing shall become a lien upon the premises upon which such privy or septic tank existed, and shall be enforced by the foreclosure thereof or by civil action against the owner or occupant of such premises for the costs and expenses of such abatement; a notice of such lien shall be filed in the office of the county recorder of the county. Nothing in this section or in Section 8.16.030, 8.16.020 or 8.16.010 shall be construed to prevent or prohibit the use, maintenance, repair or replacement of any septic tank or of the leach lines therefrom which were in existence and connected to the plumbing system of any dwelling or structure on September 1, 1975. (Prior code § 16.4)

 

8.16.050 Installation of septic tanks.
     A.    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, private sewage disposal systems, hereinafter called septic tanks, may be installed upon a single individual lot or parcel of land not created by a subdivision or parcel split within the corporate limits of the city as the same existed on March 1, 1982, provided that all of the following conditions are met and exist:

     1.     The property upon which it is proposed to install such septic tank equals ten thousand (10,000) or more square feet, and has water available from an existing public water distribution system and sufficient area to permit one hundred (100) percent expansion for leach lines; where water is available only from a private water system, approval of the lot area shall first be obtained from the Lassen County department of health, and shall additionally meet all requirements of Lahontan regional water quality control board.

     2.     Percolation tests upon said property have been performed in a manner satisfactory to the Lassen County health department and found by said department to meet all applicable laws, rules and regulations.

     3.     The slope of said property does not exceed thirty (30) percent.

     4.     No public sewer is located within two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries of said property.

     5.     A site inspection has been performed by the Lassen County health department to ensure that the foregoing conditions have been met or exist.

     6.     To the extent that subsections (A)(1) through (5) of this section do not provide for other less, greater or different requirements for septic tanks, the requirements and criteria adopted by Lahontan regional water quality control board for on-site wastewater disposal, as part of its June 26, 1975 Water Quality Control Plan for the Northern Lahontan Basin, shall determine whether or not a permit for the installation of such septic tank shall be granted.

     B.     If any septic tank is installed upon a lot or parcel of land pursuant to subsection A of this section and thereafter a public sewer line is installed and becomes operative within two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries of such lot or parcel, such septic tank shall, upon the expiration of ninety (90) days from the date upon which such public sewer line becomes operative, be discontinued and abated as provided in Section 8.16.040, and shall be a nuisance as therein provided and subject to the abatement procedures therein provided.

     C.     If the department of health of Lassen County is satisfied that the foregoing conditions exist or have been met, it shall issue a permit for the installation of the septic tank; no building permit shall be issued in connection with such property by the city building inspector unless the above mentioned permit from the Lassen County health department has first been obtained, and such permit shall require the septic tank to conform to the requirements of the uniform plumbing code currently in effect.

     D.    After the construction or installation of any septic tank pursuant to this section, no backfill shall be made or done until the installation has been inspected by the Lassen County health department and the city building inspector, and any deficiencies discovered by said department and/or inspector have been remedied.

     E.     As used in this section, the terms “private sewage disposal system” and “septic tank” include the following components: inlet line, septic tank, and leach lines. (Prior code § 16.5)

Chapter 8.20 STANDARDS FOR FIRE PROTECTION FACILITIES AND WATER FLOW
8.20.010 National Board of Underwriters’ Bulletin No. 266 adopted.
     The recommendations, guides and standards for fire protection facilities and adequate water flow published May 4, 1948, by the Committee on National Prevention and Engineering Standards, under the title “National Board of Fire Underwriters’ Bulletin No. 266” are adopted as and for the recommendations, guides and standards for fire protection facilities and adequate water flow within this city as to all matters therein contained except as herein otherwise provided. Three copies of the Bulletin No. 266 and amendments thereto shall at all times be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. (Prior code § 8.20)

 

8.20.020 Purpose of article.
     This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:

     A.    To protect public health, safety and welfare from the danger of fire because of the lack of fire protection facilities and of adequate water flow for fire protection available to buildings located a distance from public streets, alleys and rights-of-way.

     B.     To establish uniform standards for the construction and placement of fire protection facilities and the delivery of adequate water flow for fire protection upon private property.

     C.     To provide for the installation, maintenance and supervision of fire protection facilities and adequate water flow for fire protection upon private property. (Prior code § 8.21)

 

8.20.030 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     “Fire chief” means the city fire chief or his designated representatives.

     “Land” means any lot, parcel, zoning plot, acreage or building site or any other land or portion thereof, whether improved or unimproved.

     “National standards” means the recommendations, guides and standards for fire protection facilities and adequate water flow published May 4, 1948, by the Committee on National Prevention and Engineering Standards, under the title “National Board of Fire Underwriters’ Bulletin No. 266.”

     “On-site fire protection facilities” means and includes such facilities whether installed before or after the effective date of this chapter.

     “Standards specifications” means the Standard Specifications of the city of Susanville, adopted April 16, 1973 by Resolution No. 73-1162.

     “To develop land” means to make any improvements or do any work upon such lands as would require the issuance of a building permit under this code. (Prior code § 8.22)

 

8.20.040 Standards and costs of installation of facilities.
     When any land is to be developed in such a manner that any part of a proposed building or structure to be located thereon will be in excess of three hundred (300) feet from the nearest fire hydrant located, or to be located prior to the completion of the building or structure, in a public street, alley or place, the owner or developer shall provide at the same time of such development of land in the public street, alley or place or on site, such fire protection facilities and adequate water flow for fire protection as the fire chief shall deem necessary, according to the national standards. All facilities required to be installed shall be approved by and meet the specifications of the fire chief as to location, size and type of materials and manner of installation; provided, that all water mains, fittings and hydrants shall conform to national standards and to the standard specifications of the city. No main shall be installed which is less than six inches in diameter. Hydrant branches of six-inch diameter shall be circulating if more than five hundred (500) feet in length.

     If the fire chief shall determine that the installation of a circulating six-inch branch would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, he or she may permit the installation of a single, noncirculating, eight-inch branch if such branch is connected to a water main of at least eight inches in diameter or is connected to a circulating six-inch water main of not more than one thousand (1,000) feet in length. All installations made in a public street, alley or place shall be subject to the inspection of and approval by the director of public works and subject to the conditions of an encroachment permit issued therefor.

     The costs and expenses of installing on site fire protection facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer of the land. The costs and expenses of installing off-site fire protection facilities, including main and branch mains, shall also be the responsibility of the owner or developer, but the city may, at its discretion, share in the expense of installation of such facilities in such proportion and according to such policies as may be determined by the city council. (Prior code § 8.23)

 

8.20.050 Building permit applications— Generally.
     Every application for a building permit and its accompanying plans, if any, filed with the building inspector, pursuant to the Uniform Building Code and/or city ordinance shall be referred to the fire chief for review and comment. (Prior code § 8.24)

 

8.20.060 Building permit applications— Approval or disapproval.
     When any plans are submitted under Section 8.20.050 the fire chief shall review the same and determine whether or not the fire protection facilities and water flow for fire protection existing or to be provided are adequate according to national standards. If the fire chief shall have determined that the facilities and water flow for fire protection existing or to be provided are adequate according to national standards, he or she shall endorse the plans with his or her approval and return the same to the building inspector. If the fire chief shall have determined that the facilities existing or to be provided are not adequate according to national standards, he or she shall:

     A.    Disapprove the plans and indicate in writing to the building inspector wherein they are deficient. In such event the building inspector shall require from the owner revised plans to cure the deficiency and the revised plans shall be submitted to the fire chief; or

     B.     Conditionally Approve the Plans. In such event such conditions shall be made a part of such plans and the issuance of a permit by the building official shall be so conditioned. If the fire chief shall fail for a period of fifteen days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, from the date of submission to him or her by the building inspector, to take any action with respect to any plans, the plans shall be deemed approved and the building inspector may issue a permit. (Prior code § 8.25)

 

8.20.070 Access for firefighting equipment.
     Whenever any fire protection facilities, hydrants or other appurtenances for use by the fire department are required to be installed pursuant to this chapter, there shall be included in the development plan and delineated thereon, adequate provision for access by firefighting personnel and equipment to and from all such fire protection facilities, including, but not limited to hydrants and appurtenances. Such access shall be approved by the fire chief and the owner may be required to dedicate to the city as a condition of approval of the development plan, an easement sufficient for access by firefighting equipment to such fire protection facilities. All such access easements shall be maintained in such a manner as to provide clear and unobstructed ingress and egress by fire-fighting personnel and equipment at all times. (Prior code § 8.26)

 

8.20.080 Facilities—Installation prerequisite for occupancy permits, etc.
     No final inspection by the building inspector as to all or any portion of the development shall be deemed completed and no certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until the installation of the prescribed fire protection facilities and accessways have been completed and approved by the fire chief. (Prior code § 8.27)

 

8.20.090 Facilities—Maintenance generally— Right of entry—Order to repair, etc.
     All on-site fire protection facilities shall at all times be maintained as installed, free of leaks and in good working order by the owner of the land. The fire chief is empowered, at his or her discretion, to enter upon the land at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to conduct periodic tests and inspections of such facilities. If the fire chief determines that any on-site fire protection facilities are being maintained in such manner as not to meet national standards, he or she shall order the owner to make such repairs, alterations, or additions as shall conform the facilities to national standards. The fire chief shall designate a reasonable time within which such repairs, alterations, or additions are to be made and it shall be unlawful for any person so ordered to wilfully fail or refuse to comply with such order. Without limiting the foregoing, the wilful failure or refusal to comply with such an order shall constitute an occupancy violation within the meaning of the applicable provisions of the city building code. (Prior code § 8.28)

 

8.20.100 Facilities—Alteration, etc.
     On-site fire protection facilities may be altered or repaired with the written consent of the fire chief subject to the provisions of Section 8.20.040. (Prior code § 8.29)

 

8.20.110 Facilities—Maintenance, etc., of on-site fire hydrants.
     All on-site fire hydrants and off-site facilities on private property shall be maintained and repaired by the property owner. Officers, employees, agents, and contractors of the city are authorized to enter upon the land upon which said hydrants are installed at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of testing the hydrants to ascertain if they comply with the maintenance and repair standards of the city fire department. All repairs of on-site and off-site fire hydrants on private property shall be inspected and approved by the fire chief. (Prior code § 8.30)

 

8.20.120 Facilities—Filing of map prerequisite for occupancy permits.
     A map showing the size and location of all water pipes and hydrants installed pursuant to this chapter and stating the material of which such pipes are made and the date of their installation and approval shall be filed in the office of the building inspector prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit under the provisions of the building code. (Prior code § 8.31)

Chapter 8.24 WATER WELLS
Article I. Purpose and Definitions
8.24.010 Intent.
     It is the intent of this chapter to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the state of California and the city by ensuring that the groundwater of this state will not be polluted, contaminated, wasted or overdeveloped. To this end, minimum requirements are contained in this chapter for construction, reconstruction, maintenance, operation, use, repair, modification and destruction of water wells, cathodic protection wells, geothermal heat exchange wells and monitoring wells within the city. Private and/or commercial property owners shall not be allowed to drill water wells; provided, however, certain water wells may be drilled in connection with and as a condition of development and/or subdivision of property, provided a permit is issued by the city pursuant to this chapter, and provided said water well is dedicated to the city once it meets the standards set forth in this chapter. No person shall be allowed to drill a water well for the purpose of selling water. (Ord. 09-964 § 1, 2009; prior code § 24A.01)

 

8.24.020 Definitions and interpretations.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

     As Defined in Other Documents. Except as otherwise required by the context of this chapter, the terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in Chapter 10 of the Division 7 of the California Water Code and the Department of Water Resources Bulletin 74-81 and subsequent supplements or revisions.

     “City council” means the governing board of the local jurisdiction having well standards authority within the city of Susanville.

     “Community water supply well” means a water well for domestic purposes in systems subject to Chapter 7 of Part 1 of Division 5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

     “Destroy/destroyed” means properly filling a well casing or hole with aggregate base or concrete or by other approved method and capping the surface with concrete as directed by the director.

     “Director” means the public works director of the city or his/her duly authorized representative.

     “Geothermal heat exchange well,” as used in this chapter, means any uncased artificial excavation, by any method, that uses the heat exchange capacity of the earth for heating and cooling, in which excavation the ambient ground temperature is thirty (30) degrees Celsius (eighty-six (86) degrees Fahrenheit) or less, and which excavation uses a closed loop fluid system to prevent the discharge or escape of its fluid into surrounding aquifers or other geologic formations. Geothermal heat exchange wells include ground source heat pump wells.

     “Groundwater” means subsurface and/or over land or drainage water, that part of water which is in the zone of saturation.

     “Individual domestic well” means a water well used to supply water for domestic needs of an individual residence or commercial establishment.

     “Person” means any person, firm, corporation or governmental agency, to the extent authorized by law.

     “Public works department” means that agency designated by the city council to administer and enforce this chapter.

     Section headings, when contained in this chapter, shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any section.

     Tense or Gender. Words used in the present tense include the future as well as the present. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

     “Well or water well” means any excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from, or injecting water into, the underground. Potholes, drainage trenches, or canals, waste water ponds, shallow root zone piezometers, stock ponds, or similar excavations are not included within the definition of wells. (Ord. 09-964 § 1, 2009; prior code § 24A.02)

 

Article II. Permits/When Well-Drilling Permitted Within the City of Susanville
8.24.030 Intent.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the state of California, and of the city, and to protect all aspects of the municipal water system owned and operated by the city by ensuring that the groundwater of this state will not be polluted or contaminated. To this end, regulation of private water wells (including community water supply wells and individual domestic wells) within the city is set forth herein and minimum requirements are contained in this chapter for construction, reconstruction, maintenance, operation, use, repair, modification and destruction of water wells, geothermal heat exchange wells, cathodic protection wells and monitoring wells. (Ord. 09-964 § 1, 2009; prior code § 24A.03)

 

8.24.040 Water well and geothermal heat exchange well drilling within city limits.
     Private and/or commercial property owners shall not be allowed to drill water wells; provided, however, certain wells may be drilled in connection with and as a condition of development and/or subdivision of property, provided a permit is issued by the city pursuant to this chapter provided said well is dedicated to the city once it meets its standard set forth in this chapter.

     No person shall be allowed to drill a well for the purpose of selling water. No water well or geothermal heat exchange well shall be drilled within the city unless a permit issued by the city is first obtained therefor. Any water well or geothermal heat exchange well drilled within the city shall meet the requirements set forth in this chapter and any additional standards adopted hereinafter by the city of Susanville. Any water well or geothermal heat exchange well drilled within the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that does not meet the requirements of this chapter, shall be destroyed by the owner of the property on which the well is located at the cost of the owner. Cross connection or interconnection of private water wells to the city municipal water system is strictly prohibited and shall not be authorized. (Ord. 09-964 § 1, 2009; prior code § 24A.04)

 

8.24.050 Permit applications.
     A.    When Required. No person shall dig, bore, drill, deepen, modify, repair or destroy a water well, geothermal heat exchange well, cathodic protection well, observation well, monitoring well, or any other excavation that may intersect groundwater without first applying for and receiving a permit as provided in this chapter unless exempted by law.

     B.     Penalty for Failure to Obtain Permit. Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by this chapter without having obtained a permit shall be required, if subsequently granted a permit for this work, to pay double the standard permit fee.

     C.     Emergency work. The above provisions in subsections A and B shall not apply to emergency work required on short notice to maintain drinking water or agricultural supply systems. In such cases, the person responsible for the emergency work shall:

     1.     Urgency. Satisfy the director that such work was urgently necessary.

     2.     Conformance with Standards. Demonstrate that all work performed was in conformance with the technical standards as designated in Article III of this chapter. (Ord. 09-964 § 1, 2009; prior code § 24A.05)

 

8.24.060 Application procedure.
             Applications for permits shall be made to the director on forms approved by the director and shall contain all such information the director requires to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. The application shall be accompanied by the required filing fee. If the director finds the application contains all necessary information, he or she shall issue to the applicant a comprehensive permit containing such conditions as are necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. (Prior code § 24A.06)

 

8.24.070 Filing fees/permit fees.
     Filing fees and permit fees may be set by the city council from time to time by resolution. (Prior code § 24A.07)

 

8.24.080 Permit conditions.
     A.    Limitations. When the director issues a permit pursuant to this chapter, he or she may condition the permit in any manner necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, such quantity and quality testing methods as the director finds necessary.

     B.     Performance Bond. The director may require a performance bond as a condition to the permit.

     C.     Persons Permitted to Work on Wells. All construction, reconstruction, or destruction work on wells shall be performed by a person who possesses an active C-57 contractor’s license in accordance with the provisions of the California Business and Professions Code, Section 7000 et seq. and Water Code Section 13750.5.

     D.    Proper Disposal of Drilling Fluids. The permit shall contain a clause requiring the safe and appropriate handling and disposal of drilling fluids and other drilling materials used in connection with the permitted work.

     E.     Abandoned Wells. As a condition of a construction or reconstruction permit, any abandoned wells on the property shall be destroyed in accordance with standards provided in this chapter.

     F.     Posting of Permit. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to maintain a copy of this permit on the drilling site during all stages of construction or destruction. (Prior code § 24A.08)

 

8.24.090 Permit—Denial.
     The director shall deny an application for a permit if, in his or her judgment, issuance of a permit is not in the public interest. (Prior code § 24A.09)

 

8.24.100 Permit—Expiration.
     The permittee shall complete the work authorized by the permit within the time and before the date set out in the permit. If there have been exceptional circumstances, the director may grant the applicant an extension. Upon the expiration of the permit, no further work shall be done unless and until the applicant has received an extension or a new permit. (Prior code § 24A.10)

 

8.24.110 Permit—Suspension and revocation.
     A.    Circumstances for Such Action. The director may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, whenever he or she finds that the permittee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or has misrepresented any material fact in the application for the permit, or any supporting documents for the permit. Prior to ordering any such suspension or revocation, the director shall give the permittee an opportunity for a hearing thereon, after reasonable notice. The hearing shall be before the city council or its designated representative. An appeal may be made as set forth below.

     B.     Consequences. No person whose permit has been suspended or revoked shall continue to perform the work for which the permit was granted until, in the case of suspension, such permit has been reinstated by the director.

     C.     Ordered Additional Work. Upon suspending or revoking any permit, the director may order the permittee to perform any work reasonably necessary to protect the underground waters from pollution or contamination, if any work already done by the permittee has left a well in such condition as to constitute a hazard to the quality of the underground waters. No permittee or person who has held any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall fail to comply with any such order. (Prior code § 24A.11)

 

Article III. Well Standards
8.24.120 Well standards—Sources.
     All water wells, geothermal heat exchange wells, monitoring wells and cathodic protection wells shall be constructed, reconstructed, repaired, destroyed and inactivated or converted in accordance with the standards set by state law, including those regulations and standards issued by the California Department of Water resources and in accord with adopted city standards.(Ord. 09-964 § 1, 2009; prior code § 24A.12)

 

Article IV. Special Groundwater Protection
8.24.130 Designated areas.
     The director may designate areas where groundwater quality problems are known to exist and where a well will penetrate more than one aquifer. The director may require in these designated areas special well seal(s) to prevent mixing of water from special aquifers. Where an applicant proposes well construction, reconstruction, or destruction work in such an area, the director may require the applicant to provide a report prepared by a registered geologist or registered civil engineer (California Business and Professions Code Sections 7850 and 6762 respectively) that identifies all strata containing poor quality water and recommends the location and specifications of the seal or seals needed to prevent the entrance of poor-quality water or its migration into other aquifers. (Prior code § 24A.13)

 

Article V. Inspections
8.24.140 Made when.
     The director shall make an inspection of the annular seal construction work, and may make an initial inspection of each drilling site, and inspection at the completion of the work, and inspections at such other times as the director deems appropriate. (Prior code § 24A.14)

 

8.24.150 Initial inspection.
     Upon receipt of an application, the director may make an inspection of the drilling site prior to issuance of a well permit. The purpose of this inspection is to determine whether there are any site conditions such that the director shall do the following:

     A.    Relocation of Drilling Site. Require relocation of the drilling site should the location shown on the permit application be too close to potential sources of pollution.

     B.     Additional Conditions. Set additional conditions, if needed to remediate any previously unknown ground water quality protection problems. (Prior code § 24A.15)

 

8.24.160 Inspection of well seal.
     The director shall inspect the annular space grout depth prior to the sealing.

     A.    Required Notice. The director shall be notified by the well driller a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours prior to sealing the annular space. Drillers who anticipate completing a well in less than one day shall notify the director twenty-four (24) hours prior to commencement of drilling and provide the anticipated time to commence the sealing of the annular space.

     B.     Should Director Fail to be Present. If the director wishes to allow a seal to be tremied or placed without inspection, the driller shall seal the well in accordance with the standards of this chapter and any permit conditions. No seal shall be tremied or placed until permission to proceed is given. (Prior code § 24A.16)

 

8.24.170 Final inspection.
     If requested by the director, the driller shall notify the director within seven days of the completion of the work at each drilling site. The director may make a final inspection after completion of the work to determine whether the well was completed in accordance with this chapter. (Prior code § 24A.17)

 

8.24.180 Waiver of inspections.
     The director may waive inspections should any of the following conditions exist:

     A.    Well Inspected by Other Agencies. Inspections may be waived where the work will be inspected by the staff of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board or the California Department of Health Services if these designated agencies will inspect and report to the director on all drilling features required by the Standards.

     B.     Monitoring Wells Under Specified Condition. Inspections may be waived for monitoring wells that will penetrate only aquifers containing degraded waters or will penetrate only formations that normally contain no water.

     C.     Drilling Sites Known to Have No Threats to Groundwater Quality. Initial inspections may be waived when the drilling site is well known to the director’s staff and it is known that no significant threats to groundwater quality exist in the area. (Prior code § 24A.18)

 

Article VI. Completion Reports
8.24.190 Provided when.
     The driller shall provide the director a completion report within thirty (30) days of the completion of any well construction, reconstruction, or destruction job. (Prior code § 24A.19)

 

8.24.200 Submittal of state report of completion.
     A copy of the report of completion (Water Well Driller’s Report, Department of Water Resources Form 188) required by California Water Code Section 13751 shall be submitted by the permittee to the director within thirty (30) days of construction, alteration, or destruction of any well. This report shall document that the work was completed in accordance with the standards and all additional permit conditions. This section shall not be deemed to release any person from the requirement to file said report with the State Department of Water Resources. (Prior code § 24A.20)

 

8.24.210 Confidentiality of report.
     In accordance with California Water Code Section 13752, reports shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available for inspection by governmental agencies for use in making studies. Reports shall be made available to any person who obtains written authorization from the owner of the well. (Prior code § 24A.21)

 

8.24.220 Other agency’s requirements.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to excuse any person from compliance with the provisions of California Water Code Sections 13750 through 13755 relating to notices and reports of completion or any other federal, state, or local reporting regulations. (Prior code § 24A.22)

 

Article VII. Right of Entry and Inspection
8.24.230 Right of entry and inspection.
     Representatives of the director shall have the right to enter upon any premises at all reasonable times to make inspections and tests for the purpose of such enforcement and administration. If any such premises are occupied, the director or his or her representatives shall first present proper credentials and demand entry. If the same is unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of same and demand entry. If such entry is refused, he or she shall have recourse to such remedies as are provided by law to secure entry. (Prior code § 24A.23)

 

Article VIII. Abatement of Abandoned Wells
8.24.240 Abatement of abandoned wells.
     All persons owning an abandoned well as defined in the well standards shall destroy it before July 1, 1996, except those excluded by California Health and Safety Code Section 24440. (Prior code § 24A.24)

 

Article IX. Criminal and Civil Enforcement
8.24.250 Violation—Misdemeanor.
     Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 24A.25)

 

8.24.260 Notice of violation recordation.
     Whenever the director determines that a well (a) has not been completed in accordance with a well permit or the plans and specifications relating thereto, (b) has been constructed without the required permit, or (c) an abandoned well has not been destroyed in accordance with the standards, the director may record a notice of violation with the office of the county recorder. The owner(s) of the property, as revealed by the assessment roll, on which the violation is situated and any other person responsible for the violation shall be notified in writing of the recordation.

     If the property owner(s) or authorized agent disagree with the determination, said owner(s) or authorized agent may submit evidence to the director indicating that there is no violation and then shall have a right to appeal an adverse decision of the director to the city council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 24A.26)

 

8.24.270 Removal of violation notice.
     The director shall submit a removal of notice of violation to the county recorder when:

     A.    It is determined by the director or, (in the case of an appeal), by the city council, after review, that no violation of this chapter exists; or

     B.     All required and corrective work has been completed and approved by the director. (Prior code § 24A.27)

 

8.24.280 Civil enforcement—Nuisance.
     Violations of this chapter are expressly declared to be a nuisance. In addition to being subject to criminal prosecution, any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be made the subject of a civil action. Appropriate civil action includes, but is not limited to, injunctive relief and cost recovery. (Prior code § 24A.28)

 

8.24.290 Remedies cumulative.
     The remedies available to the city to enforce this chapter are in addition to any other remedies available under ordinance or statute, and do not replace or supplant any other remedy but are cumulative thereto. (Prior code § 24A.29)

 

Article X. Appeals
8.24.300 Right of hearing.
     Any person whose application for permit has been denied, or granted conditionally, or whose permit has been suspended or revoked, or against whose property a notice of violation has been recorded, may appeal to the city council, in writing, within fifteen (15) days after written notice of any such denial, conditional granting, suspension, revocation, or recording is mailed to the applicant/permittee. Such appeal shall specify the grounds upon which it is taken, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee established pursuant to Section 8.24.070 of this chapter. The city clerk shall set such appeal for hearing at the earliest practicable time, and shall notify the appellant and the director, in writing, of the time so set at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. (Prior code § 24A.30)

 

8.24.310 Appeal—Procedure.
     A.    The evidence before the city council shall consist of the records in the director’s files and any other relevant evidence which, in the judgment of the city council, should be considered to effectuate and implement the policies of this chapter.

     B.     The city council may continue the hearing from time to time; provided, however, that the decision of the city council shall be rendered no later than forty-five (45) days after the date first scheduled for the appeal. (Prior code § 24A.31)

 

8.24.320 Action by city council.
     After such hearing on the appeal, the city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order or determination appealed from. (Prior code § 24A.32)

 

Article XI. Reports to the Regional Board
8.24.330 Contents.
     Pursuant to California Water Code Section 13225(c), the director shall submit a report, not less than annually, to the California Regional Water Quality Control Board(s) having jurisdiction in the city. This report shall contain the following data, unless the Regional Board determines a lesser amount of information is necessary:

     A.    Wells Constructed or Destroyed. The number of wells constructed or destroyed.

     B.     Abatement Actions. Descriptions of all well destructions undertaken by the director using his or her regulatory authority under nuisance abatement powers.

     C.     Inspection Waivers Granted. A description of each specific case where an inspection was waived and the circumstances that made the waiver necessary. (Prior code § 24A.33)

Chapter 8.28 WEED AND RUBBISH ABATEMENT
Article I. Abatement of Weeds and Rubbish
8.28.010 Intent and purpose.
     Pursuant to the authority of Government Code Section 39501 et seq., the city council finds and declares that it is necessary to establish a procedure for the requiring of and providing for the removal of weeds and rubbish from sidewalks, parking areas or streets, and from private property, and to provide for the cost of removal as a lien upon the subject property and for the enforcement of the lien by sale of the property. (Prior code § 9.1)

 

8.28.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Rubbish” means and includes all putrescible or nonputrescible solid and semisolid waste, whether combustible or noncombustible, including both garbage and rubbish.

     “Weeds” means and includes, but is not limited to, weeds, with mature wingy or downy seeds, which will attain growth as to become a fire menace when dry, or which are otherwise noxious or dangerous. (Prior code § 9.2)

 

8.28.030 Weeds and rubbish prohibited.
     It is unlawful for the owner, agent, lessee or other person having charge or control of any piece or parcel of land within the city to allow weeds or rubbish to grow or to remain thereon, or upon the street or sidewalk in front of such piece or parcel of land. (Prior code § 9.3)

 

8.28.040 Abatement procedure.
     In the event of a violation of Section 8.28.030, the fire chief of the city or his or her designated representative shall proceed as follows:

     A.    Notice to Remove. The fire chief is authorized to give notice to the owner, agent, lessee or other person having charge or control of private property, and order the removal or destruction of weeds or rubbish from the property or abutting public property within ten (10) days. Hereinafter this notice shall be referred to as “Notice to Remove” and the removal or destruction of weeds or rubbish shall be referred to as “weed or rubbish abatement”. The Notice to Remove shall be served by posting in a conspicuous place on or in front of the property or personal service on such owner, agent, lessee or other person having charge or control of the premises as well as any of the following methods: (1) by certified mail, return receipt requested; or (2) regular first class mail addressed to the owner, agent, lessee or other person having charge or control of the property, at his or her last known address. In the event the Notice to Remove is directed to one other than the owner of the property, a courtesy copy of the Notice to Remove shall be sent by regular first class mail to the owner at his or her last known address on file with the Lassen County assessor’s office.

     B.     Action Upon Noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, agent, lessee, or other person having charge or control, to properly perform weed or rubbish abatement on the property within ten (10) days of the Notice to Remove being served as required by this chapter, the fire chief is authorized to pay for the weed and rubbish abatement from the city code enforcement and abatement funds.

     C.     If the owner, agent, lessee or other person having control of the private real property in the city fails to perform weed or rubbish abatement in accordance with the Notice to Remove, within ten (10) days after service of the Notice to Remove it shall be the duty of the fire chief to abate the weeds and rubbish by destroying or causing to be destroyed, or removing or causing to be removed, the weeds and/or rubbish. The fire chief and/or contracting agents of the city are expressly authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of weed and rubbish abatement without prior consent of any owner, agent, lessee, or other person having charge or control or court permission and without a warrant, so long as the service requirements of this chapter are followed. It is unlawful for any person to interfere, hinder, or refuse to allow the fire chief and/or contracting agents of the city to enter upon private property for the purpose of weed and rubbish abatement in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any person owning, occupying, renting, managing, leasing, or controlling real property in the city shall have the right to destroy or remove weeds or rubbish or have the same destroyed or removed at his or her own expense at any time before the arrival of the fire chief or authorized representatives for such purpose.

     D.    The city finance director shall keep an account of the cost of weed and rubbish abatement to the city for each separate lot or parcel of land and the portions of adjoining public property to the same. The city finance director shall serve by first class mail, a bill for the weed and rubbish abatement on a lot or parcel of land or adjoining public property to each owner, agent, lessee or other person having control of the lot or parcel of land or adjoining public property. Each owner, agent, lessee or other person having control of the lot or parcel of land or adjoining public property shall have thirty (30) days from the date the bill was mailed, to pay the bill in full. The city finance director shall keep an account of the unpaid cost to the city for the weed and rubbish abatement for each separate lot or parcel of land and the portions of public property adjoining the same, and shall embody the account in a report and assessment list to the city administrator. The city administrator will present the report and assessment list to the city council. The report shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land and adjoining public property by description sufficiently reasonable to identify the same, together with the expense proposed to be assessed against it. The cost of the weed and rubbish abatement may include the actual cost to remove or destroy weeds and/or rubbish as well as incidental expenses, including, but not limited to, the expenses and costs to the city in the inspection of lots, preparations of notices, specifications and contracts, and in inspecting work, the cost of printing, servicing and mailing required under this chapter in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council, per each occurrence of abatement.

     E.     The city administrator shall post a copy of the report and assessment list on a bulletin board near the entrance to the City Hall, together with the notice of the filing thereof, and the time and place where and when it will be submitted to the city council for hearing and confirmation. The finance director shall mail to the persons in the manner prescribed in this section, a notice in the format substantially as follows:

 

ASSESSMENT FOR DESTRUCTION OR

REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND RUBBISH AND NOTICE OF HEARING THEREON.

 

        NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that pursuant to the provisions of Susanville Municipal Code, Title 8, Chapter 8.28, the fire chief has performed weed or rubbish abatement by destroying or removing weeds or rubbish from the real property owned, occupied, rented, managed or controlled by you and from the portions of streets, alleys and sidewalks adjoining the same, which real property is described as follows:

        (here insert description of real property sufficient for reasonable and ready identification)

        The cost of said abatement proposed to be assessed against the said real property is $_______________.

        FURTHER NOTICE IS HERBY GIVEN that on ___________, the ____ day of _____________, 20___, at the hour of _____ p.m. in the Council Chambers of City Hall, of the City of Susanville, located at 66 North Lassen Street, Susanville, Lassen County, California, the report of the Finance Director on the cost of the weed or rubbish abatement and the assessment list thereof will be presented to the City Council for consideration, correction and confirmation and that at said time and place any and all persons interested in or having any objections to said report or list of proposed assessments, or to any matter or thing contained therein may appear and be heard. The failure to make any objection to said report and list shall be deemed a waiver of the same.

        Upon confirmation of said assessment by the City Council, the amount thereof will be payable. In the event the same is not paid said assessment will be added to the tax bill for said property and thereafter shall become a lien on said property.

 

Dated: __________________

 

_______________________________

City Administrator of City of Susanville

 

(Ord. 19-1014 § 1, 2019)

 

8.28.050 Penalty for violation.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 06-928 § 1, 2006: prior code § 9.5)

 

8.28.060 Removal method.
     The methods of removing weeds, vines, shrubs, brush and/or debris from property as provided in this chapter shall not be an exclusive method, but shall be an alternative method, and such weeds, vines, shrubs, brush and/or debris may be removed from such property pursuant to the provisions of any law of the state or of any ordinance of the city applicable thereto. (Prior code § 9.6)

Chapter 8.32 ADMINISTRATIVE NUISANCE ABATEMENT
8.32.010 Purpose.
     This administrative nuisance abatement process is intended to enable the city to respond effectively to public nuisances in order to maintain and protect the public peace, safety, welfare and order and to provide security and protection to the community from harms and wrongdoings. This process makes available an alternative remedy to instituting a civil suit to enjoin public nuisances by authorizing the administrative body to impose orders and conditions to abate and halt public nuisances. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.020 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter provides for administrative abatement of public nuisances, which is in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which the city may pursue to address any public nuisance.

     B.     The use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city.

     C.     The city may proceed to abate a public nuisance under this chapter against any or all persons responsible for creating or fostering the creation of the public nuisance, without regard to whether or not the person owns the property upon which the public nuisance is occurring. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.030 Definitions.
     A.    “Hearing board” means the planning commission of the city of Susanville sitting as the hearing board of the city of Susanville, or its successor, or such other board or commission of the city that the city council may, by resolution, authorize to perform the functions of the hearing board under this chapter.

     B.     “Responsible party” means any individual who is the owner or occupant of real property, the holder or the agent of the holder of any permit, entitlement, or review, or the party or agent of a party to any agreement covered by this chapter; the owner or authorized agent of any business, company, or entity subject to this chapter; any person or the parent or legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years; who violates any ordinance, regulation, permit, entitlement, review, or agreement described. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.040 Public nuisance prohibited.
     No person may maintain or use property or allow their property to be maintained or used in a manner that creates or fosters the creation of a public nuisance. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.050 Public nuisance defined.
     For purposes of this chapter, a public nuisance means any of the following:

     A.    A condition of real property or a building, structure, improvement or other thing located on real property that violates any provision of this code, including, but not limited to:

     1.     Real property developed or used in a manner that violates the zoning and land use regulations adopted directly or by reference in this code;

     2.     A substandard building or a dangerous building or structure maintained in violation of the housing regulations or dangerous building regulations adopted by or pursuant to this code;

     3.     A building or structure constructed, maintained or used in violation of the building regulations or fire regulations adopted by or pursuant to this code;

     4.     Neglected vacant buildings as defined and regulated in Chapter 15.09 of this code; or

     5.     Dangerous buildings as defined and regulated in Chapter 15.10 of this code.

     B.     A condition of real property or a building, structure, improvement, or other thing on real property that endangers the public health, safety or welfare, including, but not limited to:

     1.     A tree that is subject to disease or insect infestation likely to spread or is structurally unsound by reason of old age, disease, fire or other cause;

     2.     A failing private sewage disposal system;

     3.     An unprotected excavation or an abandoned and uncovered well; or

     4.     A well with a casing not sealed as required by applicable regulations.

     C.     A condition of real property or a building, structure, improvement, or other thing on real property that is unsightly and, by reason thereof, contributes to a diminution in the value of surrounding properties when visible from a public right-of-way or alley, including, but not limited to:

     1.     An accumulation of lumber, unused equipment, or junk visible from a public right-of-way or surrounding properties;

     2.     An abandoned and dilapidated building or portion of a building; or

     3.     Dilapidated furniture in yards or on driveways, sidewalks, roofs or unenclosed balconies or porches.

     4.     The maintenance of property in the city in violation of Chapter 8.52 of this code.

     5.     The outside storage of abandoned vehicles and vehicle parts as defined in Chapter 10.22 of this code.

     D.    A condition of real property or a building, structure, improvement or other thing on real property that is an attractive nuisance (i.e., a dangerous or potentially dangerous condition of property likely to attract children and other curious people) including, but not limited to:

     1.     An unfenced or otherwise unenclosed outdoor swimming pool; or

     2.     Unused refrigerators, freezers or ice boxes stored, without the doors removed, outside a building or other enclosed structure.

     E.     A condition of real property, or of a building, structure, or improvement on real property, resulting directly or indirectly from the violation of:

     1.     Any regulatory or prohibitory provision of city, state or federal law or regulation applicable to the property or the occupancy of any structure; or

     2.     Any condition of approval or mitigation measure imposed upon the subdivision of land, any permit or any other entitlement for the use of land.

     F.     Real property that has been the site for nuisance activity including, but not limited to:

     1.     Disturbing the peace; or

     2.     Illegal drug activity; or

     3.     Public drunkenness; or

     4.     Drinking alcoholic beverages in public; or

     5.     Harassment of passersby; or

     6.     Illegal gambling; or

     7.     Prostitution; or

     8.     The sale of stolen goods; or

     9.     Acts of violence; or

     10.   Public urination; or

     11.   Acts of vandalism; or

     12.   Acts of lewd conduct; or

     13.   Unreasonably loud noise; or

     14.   Loitering; or

     15.   Any other condition of real property, or of any building, structure, or improvement on real property, declared to be a nuisance by any statute of the state of California, or recognized to be a public nuisance by the common law of this state.

     G.    Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit persons from participating in activity which the city may not proscribe under the United States Constitution or the California Constitution. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.060 Notification of nuisance.
     Whenever an enforcement official, as defined in Section 8.40.020 of this code, determines that a nuisance, as defined in this chapter, exists on any building, structure or property located within the city, he or she shall notify, in writing, the responsible party of property on which the nuisance is located of the existence of the alleged nuisance which shall be served by personal delivery, first class mail or by registered or certified mail. The notification shall specify the violation(s), direct that the nuisance be abated and establish a reasonable abatement period of not less than ten (10) days. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.070 Voluntary abatement of nuisances.
     The responsible party having charge or control of any building, structure or property alleged to be a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter may abate the nuisance at any time within the abatement period provided in Section 8.32.060. If the abatement requires alterations, repair, rehabilitation or demolition of a building or structure all required city permits or entitlements must be obtained prior to commencement of the work. The responsible party shall advise the enforcement official who issued the declaration of nuisance of the completed abatement. Once so advised, the enforcement official shall inspect the premises to insure that the nuisance has, in fact, been abated. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.080 Failure to voluntarily abate a declared nuisance.
     If an alleged nuisance is not properly abated within the period established under the provisions of Section 8.52.060, the responsible party may be issued an administrative citation as provided in Chapter 8.40 of this code. Alternatively the enforcement official may initiate abatement procedures by sending a notice of intention to abate public nuisance to the responsible party and follow the process in Sections 8.32.090 through 8.32.270. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.090 Notice of intention to abate public nuisance and public hearing thereon.
     The notice of intention to abate public nuisance shall demand that the responsible party remedy or abate such public nuisance within a reasonable period of time which shall not be less than ten (10) days. It shall also give notice of the time, date and place of a public hearing which shall be held by the hearing board to review the determination and abatement of the public nuisance. The public hearing shall be set for a date no less than ten (10) days after the abatement period expires. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.100 Right of entry procedures.
     A.    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution of the city of Susanville or the provisions of any secondary code adopted by any ordinance, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists a violation of any provision of such ordinance, resolution or code in any building, or upon any premises, or whenever any enforcement official of the city has reasonable cause to believe that any building or premises is unsafe, substandard, unsanitary, or dangerous as defined in any provision of any such ordinance, resolution or code, an enforcement official of the city may enter such building or premises at a reasonable time to inspect the same and to perform any duty imposed upon such official by any provision of such ordinance, resolution or code. However, except in emergency situations, when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has not been otherwise obtained, the enforcement official shall give notice as follows:

     1.     If the building or premises is occupied, the enforcement official shall first present to the occupant city-issued credentials that include the enforcement official’s name, position, title, and photograph. The enforcement official shall then request entry at a time convenient to the occupant within twenty-four (24) hours of the time of the request;

     2.     If the building or premises is unoccupied, the enforcement official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises, and if located, the enforcement official shall present credentials to the owner or other person and then request entry at a time convenient to such owner or other person, but within forty-eight (48) hours of the entry request;

     3.     If the owner or other person is located outside of the city, the enforcement official may notify that person by telephone or letter, and in doing so shall transmit sufficient information to identify the enforcement official’s capacity to the owner or other person and may request entry at a time convenient to such owner or other person, within five days of such telephone request, or the receipt of such letter.

     If entry is refused by the occupant, the owner, or other person having charge or control of the building or premises, or the enforcement official, after making a reasonable effort, cannot locate the owner, or other person having charge or control of the building or premises, so as to request entry, then the enforcement official may seek and obtain an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided by California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1822.50 through 1822.59, as may be amended from time to time, or the successor provisions thereto in order to secure entry to such building or premises.

     B.     Any enforcement official of the city or a duly authorized representative or agent of the city may enter upon a property to access the exterior of the building or structure for the purpose of posting or serving notice. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.110 Service of notices and order to abate.
     Service of notice of intention to abate public nuisance, written orders of the hearing board or other items as required under this chapter shall be made by posting a notice in a conspicuous place on or in front of the building, structure or property in question, as well as by any one of the following methods:

     A.    By personal service on the responsible party;

     B.     By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the last known address of the owner. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent to the property address. “Owner” as used herein means any person(s) shown as the property owner on the latest equalized property tax assessment rolls. If the property owner cannot be served by personal service or by mail, service by posting shall be sufficient;

     C.     By any other means which is authorized or required by applicable law for such nuisance abatement actions.

     The failure of any person to receive any notice required and properly served, mailed, posted or published under this chapter shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.120 Hearing board—Public hearing.
     At the time and place stated in the notice of intention to abate public nuisance, the hearing board shall receive, hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections, protests and testimony of the responsible party, as well as that of other witnesses, city personnel and interested persons relative to the alleged public nuisance and to any proposed abatement measures. The hearing board shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the responsible party has caused or maintained the violation(s). Courtroom rules of evidence shall not apply. Relevant hearsay evidence and written reports may be admitted whether or not the speaker or author is present to testify if the hearing board determines that the evidence is reliable. Admission of evidence and the conduct of the hearing shall be controlled by the hearing board in accordance with the fundamentals of due process. The hearing board may limit the total length of the hearing to one hour, and shall allow the appellant at least as much time to present its case as is allowed the city. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

     The failure of any person subject to a notice of intention to abate public nuisance pursuant to this chapter to appear at the nuisance abatement hearing shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.130 Decision of the hearing board.
     Following the public hearing, the hearing board shall consider all evidence and other matters noted during the hearing and shall determine whether the building, structure or property in question, or any part thereof, constitutes a public nuisance as alleged. If the hearing board finds that a public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the nuisance, the hearing board shall make a written nuisance abatement order (order), setting forth those findings and ordering the owner, lessee, agent, occupant or other person having charge or control of the building, structure or property to abate the nuisance by rehabilitation, repair or demolition in the manner and by the means that may be specifically set forth in the order. The order shall set forth the time within which the abatement work shall be completed, and it shall state that if the nuisance is not abated within such time period, it may be abated by the city. Where the implementation of the order requires a building or development permit or an amendment to an existing development permit, the required permits shall be obtained prior to commencing abatement. The order shall also state that all costs of the city’s abatement efforts, including the abatement work and administrative time to investigate and to hear and effect the abatement shall be charged against the responsible party as a personal debt or may be assessed upon the property on which the nuisance existed and will constitute a lien or special assessment upon the property until paid. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.140 Service of the nuisance abatement order—One-year jurisdictional period.
     A.    Within five days following the board’s decision, the responsible party shall be served with a copy of the written nuisance abatement order in the manner provided in Section 8.32.110.

     B.     The order shall be effective for a one-year period after issuance. During such period, the hearing board shall retain jurisdiction over the conditions of the building, structure or property which constituted the nuisance established by the order, as well as the abatement thereof, to ensure that the nuisance does not reoccur and that the building, structure or property is maintained in such a manner so as not to create a nuisance. If, during this one-year period, any enforcement official determines that the same or another nuisance, as defined by this chapter exists with respect to the building, structure or property, he or she may give notice to abate the nuisance as provided for in Section 8.32.060. If the responsible party does not abate the nuisance at any time within the abatement period, the city may proceed with the abatement itself under the provisions of Section 8.32.190 without further action of the hearing board. The city may also recover all of its abatement effort costs as provided for in this chapter or this code. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.150 Notice of unlawful detainer proceeding.
     An owner of real property that is the subject of a nuisance abatement order and who has received a copy of the nuisance abatement order shall notify the city attorney if the owner initiates or causes to be initiated unlawful detainer proceedings:

     A.    As a part of the owner’s efforts to comply with or address the nuisance abatement order; or

     B.     Related to the situations, conditions or behaviors described in the nuisance abatement order. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.160 Grievance with final order—Appeal.
     Whenever any person is aggrieved by any final order of the hearing board issued pursuant to Section 8.32.130, the person may appeal the order to the city council by filing a request for appeal of an order of abatement with the city clerk along with a deposit of two hundred dollars ($200.00). The appellant shall be responsible for all costs of such appeal which exceeds the two hundred dollars ($200.00) deposit. All costs and expenses incurred by the city for and during such appeal shall be an authorized incidental expense subject to this chapter. If the cost of the appeal is less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) the difference shall be refunded to the appellant.

     The appeal shall be heard by the city council at a regularly scheduled meeting within forty-five (45) days of the filing of the appeal. Notice shall be given to the appellant at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled meeting by first class mail sent to the address provided by the appellant on the appeal request form. The appeal hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as the hearing board hearing in Section 8.32.120. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.170 Right of judicial review.
     Any person aggrieved by a nuisance abatement order affirmed on appeal by the city council may obtain review of the nuisance abatement order in the Superior Court of the county of Lassen by filing with the court a petition for writ of mandate. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.180 Abatement by responsible party.
     The responsible party may, at his or her own expense, abate the nuisance as prescribed by the order of the hearing board prior to the expiration of the abatement period set forth in the order. If the nuisance has been inspected by an enforcement official and has been abated in accordance with the order, current proceedings shall be terminated, except that the hearing board’s one year jurisdictional period shall continue. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.190 Nuisance abatement work performed by or on behalf of the city.
     Where a responsible party has failed to abate a nuisance within the time prescribed by a nuisance abatement order approved by the hearing board and served on such responsible party in the manner provided for by this chapter, the enforcement official, with approval of the city administrator, shall cause the nuisance to be abated either by the use of city forces or by employing a private contractor to perform such work. However, the enforcement official shall not enter upon or cause any other person to enter upon the property which is the subject of a nuisance abatement order for the purpose of performing abatement work thereon without the prior written consent of the property owner unless and until a warrant or other order has been obtained by the city attorney on behalf of the city from a court of competent jurisdiction which authorizes an entry on such property for such purpose.

     When undertaking work necessary to abate a nuisance following the failure of the owner of the property on which such nuisance is located to abate the nuisance within the time prescribed by a nuisance abatement order, the person responsible for performing the work shall keep an accurate record of the nature of such work and all direct and indirect costs incurred in connection with the performance of such work. In those cases in which the city has employed a private contractor to perform nuisance abatement work, such indirect costs shall include the cost of preparing plans and specifications for the work, the cost of preparing, bidding and awarding a contract for performance of the work, and the cost of inspecting the work. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.200 Record of cost for abatement—Notice of cost hearing.
     The city finance manager, the enforcement official or such other city official as may be designated shall keep an account of all costs incurred by the city in abating nuisances on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done and shall render a written itemized report to the city council. Costs shall include the expense of abating such nuisance and shall be itemized showing the cost of abatement and the rehabilitation, repair, improvement, relocation, vacation, demolition or removal of said premises, building or structures, including any salvage value relating thereto and any incidental expenses; provided that before said report is submitted to said city council, a copy of the same shall be posted for at least ten (10) days upon such premises, together with a notice of the time when said report shall be heard by the city council for confirmation; a copy of said report and notice shall be served upon the owners of said property, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.32.110 of this chapter at least ten (10) days prior to submitting the same to the city council; proof of said posting and service shall be made by affidavit filed with the city clerk. The term “incidental expenses” shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in obtaining title reports, in the preparation and service of notices, preparation of specifications the preparation and award of contracts, all costs of inspecting any work done pursuant to this chapter, the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder, the costs of preparing materials for any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, penalties, permit fees, late charges, interest, conducting hearings, attorneys’ fees, and a reasonable additional sum to cover the cost of administrative overhead. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.210 Cost report—Hearing and proceedings.
     At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the cost report, the city council shall receive, hear and consider the report, together with any other relevant evidence, objections, protests or testimony. Thereupon, the council may make such revision, correction or modification to the report as it may deem just after which, by resolution, the details of the report, as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. Protests and objections shall relate to expenses for abatement and related administrative costs and not to the merits of underlying violations. The council resolution shall set forth the cost of the abatement, date of the order, a brief description of the abatement work performed by or on behalf of the city, describe the property upon which such work was performed by legal description, assessor’s parcel number, and where possible by a street address, contain the name and current address of the owner of such property and shall include a date set by which time the cost of abatement shall be due. In addition, the resolution shall provide for collection of the assessment in the event of nonpayment either by recordation of the council resolution in the manner provided for by Section 38773.1 of the California Government Code as a lien on the property, by including the assessment on the county tax rolls in the manner provided for by Section 38773.5 of the Government Code or as a personal debt against the responsible party. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.220 Service for resolution of assessment costs.
     Following adoption of a council resolution levying an assessment for city abatement costs, the resolution to be served on the responsible party in the following manner:

     A.    If the council resolution levying the assessment provides for collection of the assessment by recordation of the resolution against the property upon which city abatement work was performed, the enforcement official shall cause a copy of the resolution to be served on the owner of such property in the same manner as required by law for the service of a summons in a civil action, as set forth in Article 3, Chapter 4, Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (commencing with Section 415.10); provided, however, that in the event the owner of the property upon which the city abatement work was performed cannot be found after a diligent search for same, the enforcement official shall serve the council resolution by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on or next to such property for a period of ten (10) days, and by publishing a copy of the resolution in a newspaper of general circulation in the county of Lassen in the manner provided for by Section 6062 of the Government Code.

     B.     If the council resolution levying the assessment provides for collection of the assessment by inclusion of the assessment on the county tax rolls, the director shall cause a certified copy of the resolution to be served on the owner of the property by certified mail, if the property owner’s identity can be determined from the county assessor’s or county recorder’s records.  The notice shall be given at the time of imposing the assessment and shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments.  The tax collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice.  The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes and subject to any other provisions of Section 38773.5 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.230 Collections of assessment by recordation of council resolution levying assessment—Recordation of council resolution.
     Where the council has adopted a resolution levying an assessment for city abatement costs and has provided in such resolution for the collection of such abatement costs by recording the resolution against the property on which the city abatement work was performed, the director, promptly after completing service of the council resolution in the manner hereinbefore required by this chapter, shall attach an affidavit or declaration attesting to such service to a certified copy of the resolution, and shall cause such certified copy of the resolution, with the declaration or affidavit attached, to be recorded in the official records of the county of Lassen. After the date of such recordation, the assessment provided for by such resolution shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of Section 697.340 of the Code of Civil Procedure and may be extended as provided in Sections 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive, of the Code of Civil Procedure, all as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.240 Collection of assessment by recordation of council resolution levying assessment—Commencement of foreclosure action.
     When directed to do so by the city council, the city attorney shall commence an action in a court of appropriate jurisdiction to foreclose the assessment lien for city abatement work which was established by recordation of the council resolution levying the assessment for such abatement work in the manner provided by this chapter. In such action the city shall be entitled to recover any costs incurred for the purpose of processing, serving or recording such resolution. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.250 Collection of assessment by recordation of council resolution levying assessment—Release of assessment lien.
     At such time as the lien created by recordation of the council resolution levying an assessment for city abatement costs is discharged or satisfied, either through payment of the lien, or by sale of the property encumbered by the lien at the conclusion of a foreclosure action, the director shall promptly cause a release of the lien, in a form approved by the city attorney, to be recorded in the official records of the county of Lassen. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.260 Collection of assessment on county tax rolls—Requests for inclusion of assessment on county tax rolls.
     Where the city council has adopted a resolution levying an assessment for city abatement costs and has provided in such resolution for the collection of such assessment on the county tax rolls, the enforcement official, after serving the resolution in the manner required by this chapter, shall promptly transmit a certified copy of the resolution to the finance director who shall immediately forward same to the Lassen County auditor with a request that the assessment levied by such resolution be added to the county tax rolls in the manner provided for by Section 38773.5 of the Government Code. Thereafter all laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of property tax shall be applicable to such special assessment. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.270 Collection of assessment on county tax rolls—Payment of assessment.
     If the assessee should pay to the city the full amount of an assessment levied for city abatement costs, together with any interest or penalties thereon, after the date the assessment is added to the county tax rolls, the city finance manager shall promptly cause such assessment to be removed from the tax rolls. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.280 Summary nuisance abatement.
     Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, whenever the enforcement official determines that a public nuisance is so imminently dangerous to life or property that such condition must be immediately corrected, the enforcement official may institute the following procedures.

     A.    Notice. The enforcement official shall attempt to contact, through a personal interview or by telephone, the owner, lessee, agent or other person, if any, occupying or otherwise in real or apparent charge or control thereof. In the event contact is made, the enforcement official shall notify such person(s) of the danger involved and require that such condition be removed, repaired, isolated or otherwise abated, within a reasonable period of time under the circumstances, so as to prevent the immediate danger to life or property.

     B.     Abatement. In the event the enforcement official is unable to make contact as noted above, or if the appropriate person(s), after notification by the enforcement official, fail to abate the condition within the time frame specified by the enforcement official, then the enforcement official may, with the approval of the city administrator, take all steps deemed necessary to remove, repair, isolate or otherwise abate such condition immediately and without further notice to the extent necessary to prevent the immediate danger to life or property.

     C.     The costs may be recovered pursuant to this chapter or by any other means provided for by law. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.290 Administrative civil penalties.
     A.    The process for the assessment of administrative civil penalties established in this chapter is in addition to any other administrative or judicial remedy established by law that may be pursued to address violations of the Susanville Municipal Code. The hearing board may impose penalties upon persons responsible for creating, maintaining or fostering a public nuisance in an amount not to exceed a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day that the public nuisance occurs, except that the total administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), exclusive of administrative costs and interest.

     B.     In determining the amount of the penalty, the hearing board may take any or all of the following factors into consideration:

     1.     The period of time during which the public nuisance occurred;

     2.     The nature, frequency and recurrence of the public nuisance;

     3.     The ease with which the public nuisance could have been abated;

     4.     The good faith efforts made to deter the public nuisance or ameliorate its effects;

     5.     The economic impact of the penalty upon persons responsible for payment;

     6.     The impact of the public nuisance on the community; and/or

     7.     Such other factors as justice may require.

     C.     Penalties imposed by the hearing board may accrue from a date no earlier than the compliance date specified in the nuisance abatement cease and desist order and shall cease to accrue on the date the nuisance abatement order has been complied with as determined by the city attorney or the board.

     D.    Penalties assessed by the board shall be due by the date specified in the nuisance abatement order.

     E.     Penalties assessed by the board are a debt owed to the city and, in addition to all other means of enforcement, where the person against whom the penalties are assessed is an owner of the subject real property, may be enforced and collected through the placement of a lien against the subject real property.

     F.     Penalties shall continue to accrue on a daily basis until the nuisance abatement order has been complied with, subject to the maximum amount set forth in this section.

     G.    If a person subject to the nuisance abatement order gives written notice to the city attorney that the nuisance abatement order has been complied with and if the city attorney finds that compliance has been achieved, the date that the written notice was postmarked or personally delivered to the city attorney or the date of the city’s final inspection, whichever first occurred, shall be deemed to be the date of compliance with the nuisance abatement order. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.300 Violations.
     A.    Any responsible party who maintains any public nuisance defined in this chapter and who fails to comply with a nuisance abatement order served as provided in Section 8.32.130 may be charged as either an infraction or a misdemeanor.

     B.     Any responsible party who causes or maintains any public nuisance defined in Section 8.32.050 of this chapter, who allows such a nuisance to continue or who neglects to comply with a notice of intent to abate public nuisance is guilty of an infraction. Each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.

     C.     Any person who removes or causes the removal of any notice or order posted as required in this chapter for the purpose of interfering with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter may be charged with either an infraction or a misdemeanor.

     D.    Any person who obstructs, impedes or interferes with any representative of the city or with any person who owns, leases, occupies or has charge or control over any building, structure or property when any of the aforementioned individuals are lawfully engaged in proceedings involving the abatement of a nuisance under this chapter may be charged with either an infraction or a misdemeanor. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.310 Interest.
     Any person who fails to remit payment to the city of any penalty, cost or any other charge required to be paid to the city pursuant to a nuisance abatement order under this chapter on or before the date the penalty, cost or other charge is due shall, in addition to the amount of the penalty, cost, and charge, pay interest on the amounts due at the rate of ten percent per annum, pro-rata, from the date on which the amount due first became delinquent until the date that payment is received by the city. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.320 Report of compliance after nuisance abatement order.
     If the enforcement official determines that compliance with the nuisance abatement order has been achieved, the enforcement official shall file a report with the city clerk acting as secretary of the hearing board indicating that compliance has been achieved and the date of the city’s final inspection of the subject property. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

 

8.32.330 Compliance dispute.
     A.    If the enforcement official does not file a report pursuant to Section 8.32.320, a person subject to the nuisance abatement order who believes that compliance has been achieved may request a compliance hearing before the hearing board by filing a request for a hearing with the secretary of the board.

     B.     The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same manner as a hearing on an abatement order provided in Sections 8.32.080 through 8.32.130 of this chapter.

     C.     The hearing board shall determine if compliance with the nuisance abatement order has been achieved and, if so, when it was achieved. (Ord. 17-1011 § 3, 2017)

Chapter 8.36 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES
8.36.010 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter provides for administrative remedies, which are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the city to address any violation of this code.

     B.     Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.020 Director—Defined.
     For purposes of this chapter, “director” means the head of any city department which is charged with responsibility for enforcement of any provision of this code. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.030 Compliance order.
     A.    Whenever the director determines that a violation of any provision of this code within the director’s responsibility is occurring or exists, the director, after consultation with both the city attorney and city administrator, may issue a written compliance order to any person responsible for the violation.

     B.     A compliance order issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain the following information:

     1.     The date and location of the violation;

     2.     The section of this code violated and a description of the violation;

     3.     The actions required to correct the violation;

     4.     The time period after which administrative penalties will begin to accrue if compliance with the order has not been achieved;

     5.     Either a copy of this chapter or an explanation of the consequences of noncompliance with this chapter and a description of the hearing procedure and appeal process. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.040 Method of service.
     A.    All notices required by this chapter shall be served as provided in Section 8.32.080(A) of this code.

     B.     Where real property is involved, written notice shall be mailed to the property owner at the address as shown on the last county assessment roll as to that property.

     C.     Where personal service or service by mail upon the property owner is unsuccessful, a copy of the order shall be conspicuously posted at the property which is the subject of the order.

     D.    The failure of any person to receive any notice required under this chapter shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.050 Hearing.
     A.    If the director determines that all violations have been corrected within the time specified in the compliance order, no further action shall be taken.

     B.     If full compliance is not achieved within the time specified in the compliance order, the director shall advise the secretary to the appeals board to set a hearing before the board.

     C.     The secretary to the appeals hearing board shall cause a written notice of hearing to be served on the violator and, where real property is involved, a notice of hearing shall be served on the property owner at the address as it appears on the last county assessment roll available on the date the notice is prepared. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.060 Notice of hearing.
     A.    Every notice of hearing on a compliance order shall contain the date, time and place at which the hearing shall be conducted by the appeals hearing board.

     B.     Each hearing shall be set for a date not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of the notice of hearing unless the director determines that the matter is urgent or that good cause exists for an extension of time.

     C.     This hearing serves to provide the full opportunity of a person subject to a compliance order to object to the determination that a violation has occurred and/or that the violation has continued to exist. The failure of any person subject to a compliance order, pursuant to this chapter, to appear at the hearing shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.070 Hearing—Findings and order.
     A.    At the place and time set forth in the notice of hearing, the appeals hearing board shall conduct a hearing on the compliance order issued pursuant to Section 8.36.030.

     B.     The board shall consider any written or oral evidence consistent with its rules and procedures regarding the violation and compliance by the violator or by the real property owner.

     C.     Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall make findings and issue its determination regarding:

     1.     The existence of the violation;

     2.     The failure of the violator or owner to take required corrective action within the required time period.

     D.    The board shall issue written findings on each violation. The findings shall be supported by evidence received at the hearing.

     E.     If the board finds by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation has occurred and that the violation was not corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the board shall issue an administrative order.

     F.     If the board finds that no violation has occurred or that the violation was corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the board shall issue a finding of those facts. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.080 Administrative order.
     If the appeals hearing board determines that a violation occurred which was not corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the board shall issue an administrative order described in Section 8.36.070 which imposes any or all of the following:

     A.    An order to correct, including a schedule for correction where appropriate;

     B.     Administrative penalties as provided in Section 8.36.090;

     C.     Administrative costs as provided in Section 8.36.100. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.090 Administrative penalties.
     A.    The appeals hearing board may impose administrative penalties for the violation of any provision of this code in an amount not to exceed a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each ongoing violation, except that the total administrative penalty shall not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) exclusive of administrative costs, interest and restitution for compliance reinspections, for any related series of violations.

     B.     In determining the amount of the administrative penalty, the board may take any or all of the following factors into consideration:

     1.     The duration of the violation;

     2.     The frequency, recurrence and number of violations, related or unrelated, by the same violator;

     3.     The seriousness of the violation;

     4.     The good faith efforts of the violator to come into compliance;

     5.     The economic impact of the penalty on the violator;

     6.     The impact of the violation on the community;

     7.     Such other factors as justice may require.

     C.     Administrative penalties imposed by the board shall accrue from the date specified in the compliance order and shall cease to accrue on the date the violation is corrected as determined by the director or the board.

     D.    The board, in its discretion, may suspend the imposition of applicable penalties for any period of time during which:

     1.     The violator has filed for necessary permits; and

     2.     Such permits are required to achieve compliance; and

     3.     Such permit applications are actively pending before the city, state or other appropriate governmental agency.

     E.     Administrative penalties assessed by the board shall be due by the date specified in the administrative order.

     F.     Administrative penalties assessed by the board are a debt owed to the city and, in addition to all other means of enforcement, if the violation is located on real property, may be enforced by means of a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred.

     G.    If the violation is not corrected as specified in the board’s order to correct, administrative penalties shall continue to accrue on a daily basis until the violation is corrected, subject to the maximum amount set forth in subsection A.

     H.    If the violator gives written notice to the director that the violation has been corrected and if the director finds that compliance has been achieved, the director shall deem the date the written notice was postmarked or personally delivered to the director or the date of the final inspection, whichever first occurred, to be the date the violation was corrected. If no written notice is provided to the director, the violation will be deemed corrected on the date of the final inspection. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.100 Administrative costs.
     A.    The appeals hearing board shall assess administrative costs against the violator when it finds that a violation has occurred and that compliance has not been achieved within the time specified in the compliance order.

     B.     The administrative costs may include any and all costs incurred by the city in connection with the matter before the appeals hearing board including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, staffing costs incurred in preparation for the hearing and for the hearing itself, and costs for all reinspections necessary to enforce the compliance order. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.110 Failure to comply with administrative compliance order.
     Failure to pay the assessed administrative penalties and administrative costs specified in the administrative order of the appeals hearing board may be enforced as:

     A.    A personal obligation of the violator; and/or

     B.     If the violation is in connection with real property, a lien upon the real property. The lien shall remain in effect until all of the administrative penalties, interest and administrative costs are paid in full. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.120 Right of judicial review.
     Any person aggrieved by an administrative order of the appeals hearing board may obtain review of the administrative order in the Lassen County Superior Court by filing with the court a petition for writ of mandate. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.130 Recovery of administrative civil penalties.
     The city may collect the assessed administrative penalties and administrative costs by use of all available legal means, including recordation of a lien pursuant to Section 8.36.160. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.140 Report of compliance after administrative order.
     If the director determines that compliance has been achieved after a compliance order has been sustained by the appeals hearing board, the director shall file a report indicating that compliance has been achieved. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.150 Compliance dispute.
     A.    If the director does not file a report pursuant to Section 8.36.140, a violator who believes that compliance has been achieved may request a compliance hearing before the appeals hearing board by filing a request for a hearing with the secretary to the board.

     B.     The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same manner as a hearing on a compliance order provided in Sections 8.36.060 through 8.36.070 of this chapter.

     C.     The board shall determine if compliance has been achieved and, if so, when it was achieved. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.160 Lien procedure.
     A.    Whenever the amount of any administrative penalty and/or administrative cost imposed by the appeals hearing board pursuant to this chapter in connection with real property has not been satisfied in full within ninety (90) days and/or has not been successfully challenged by a timely writ of mandate, this obligation may constitute a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred.

     B.     The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded with the county recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of Sections 697.340 of the Code of Civil Procedure and may be extended as provided in Sections 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive, of the Code of Civil Procedure.

     C.     Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the judgment remaining unsatisfied pursuant to law.

     D.    Prior to recording any such lien, the director of finance shall prepare and file with the city clerk a report stating the amounts due and owing.

     E.     The city clerk shall fix a time, date and place for hearing such report and any protests or objections thereto by city council.

     F.     The director of finance shall cause written notice to be served on the property owner not less than ten (10) days prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall be served as provided in Section 8.32.080 of this code. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.170 Public hearing and protests.
     A.    Any person whose real property is subject to a lien pursuant to Section 8.36.160 may file a written protest with the city clerk and may request a hearing at the next available city council meeting.

     B.     Each written protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the protesting party is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection.

     C.     The city council, after the hearing, shall adopt a resolution confirming, discharging or modifying the amount of the lien. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.180 Recording of lien.
     Thirty (30) days following the adoption of a resolution by the city council imposing a lien the city clerk shall file the same as a judgment lien in the office of the county recorder of Lassen County, California. The lien may carry such additional administrative charges as set forth by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

 

8.36.190 Satisfaction of lien.
     Once payment in full is received by the city for outstanding penalties and costs, the director of finance shall either record a notice of satisfaction or provide the property owner or financial institution with a notice of satisfaction so they may record this notice with the office of the county recorder. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the city’s lien. (Ord. 10-971 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 8.40 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
8.40.010 Purpose.
     This chapter provides for administrative citations in addition to all other civil remedies and as an initial alternative to any criminal remedy which may be pursued by the city to address any violation of this code. The use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. The use of any other enforcement proceedings provided for by this code shall not be considered a prerequisite for the use of this chapter, nor shall the use of this chapter be considered a prerequisite for the use of any other enforcement proceedings.

     A.    The city council hereby finds that an appropriate method of enforcement is the imposition and collection of administrative fines as independently authorized by both California Constitution Article XI, Section 7, and municipal affairs provisions of Government Code Section 53069.4.

     B.     The city council further finds and determines that enforcement of the Susanville Municipal Code, other ordinances adopted by the city, conditions of approval of entitlements, permits, and CEQA reviews, and terms and conditions of city agreements made pursuant to the police power is a matter of public health, safety and welfare and serves important public purposes. The city of Susanville adopts this administrative citation program in order to achieve the following goals:

     1.     To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens;

     2.     To gain compliance with the Susanville Municipal Code, ordinances, agreements, and regulations of the city enacted pursuant to its police powers, and the conditions of approval of permits, entitlements, and CEQA reviews granted by the city pursuant to the city’s police powers in a timely and efficient manner;

     3.     To provide for an administrative process that has objective criteria for the imposition of administrative fines and provides for a fair process to appeal the imposition of administrative fines and penalties;

     4.     To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the Susanville Municipal Code, ordinances, agreements, or terms and conditions of entitlements or permits enacted or approved pursuant to the police power;

     5.     To avoid or minimize the expense and delay of enforcement in the civil or criminal justice system. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.020 Definitions.
     A.    “Enforcement official” means any official or employee of the city with the authority to enforce the Susanville Municipal Code. By way of example this means a police official, a fire official or the building official.

     B.     “Responsible party” means any individual who is the owner or occupant of real property, the holder or the agent of the holder of any permit, entitlement, or review, or the party or agent of a party to any agreement covered by this chapter; the owner or authorized agent of any business, company, or entity subject to this chapter; any person or the parent or legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years; who violates any ordinance, regulation, permit, entitlement, review, or agreement described. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.030 Administrative citation.
     A.    Any person who violates any provision of the Susanville Municipal Code or regulation of the city, any condition of approval of a permit or entitlement, any condition of an environmental review, or any term or condition of any agreement with the city made pursuant to the police power may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement official as provided in this chapter. A violation of the Susanville Municipal Code includes, but is not limited to, all violations of that code and all uncodified ordinances. A violation of a condition of approval of a permit or entitlement, includes, but is not limited to, a conditional use permit, minor conditional use permit, temporary use permit, architectural design and site plan review, sign permit, variance, specific plan, parcel map, subdivision map, building or grading permit, or any encroachment or right-of-way permit. A violation of a condition of approval of an environmental review includes, but is not limited to, any environmental impact report, mitigated negative declaration, negative declaration, or determination of categorical exemption. A violation of a term or condition of any agreement with the city made pursuant to the police power includes, but is not limited to, any development agreement, owner participation agreement, disposition and development agreement, road maintenance agreement, any easement, license, or other real property use agreement, or any agreement made with the city to implement any ordinance, plan, permit, entitlement, or review approved by the city.

     B.     Each and every day a violation exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. A separate citation may be issued for each day a violation occurs.

     C.     A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the enforcement official and shall be payable directly to the city of Susanville.

     D.    Fines shall be assessed in the amounts specified in Chapter 1.12 of this code.

     E.     Notice of Violation in Lieu of Administrative Citation. If the violation consists of a violation of building, electrical, plumbing or zoning regulations set forth in this code, or any violation of Title 15 or 17 of this code, the enforcement official shall defer issuance of an administrative citation until the responsible party for a violation has first been given notice of the violation and an opportunity to correct the violation, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. In cases involving a violation of building, electrical, plumbing, or zoning regulations set forth in this code, or any violation of Title 15 or 17 of this code, shall also include each owner of the property upon which the violation occurs.

     F.     Administrative Citations in Lieu of Criminal Citations. An administrative citation may be issued pursuant to this section in lieu of any criminal citation which could have been issued for the same violation. The issuance of the administrative citation shall not, however, prevent the issuance of a criminal citation or filing of a complaint for:

     1.     The same violation when any administrative fine imposed pursuant to this chapter has not been paid by the date payment is due; or

     2.     A subsequent violation of the same nature. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.040 Contents of administrative citation.
     Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

     A.    The date of the violation or, if the date of the violation is unknown, then the date the violation is identified;

     B.     The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred or is occurring;

     C.     The section of this code violated and a description of the violation;

     D.    The amount of the administrative fine for the code violation;

     E.     A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine shall be paid;

     F.     An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation described in the administrative citation;

     G.    A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place from which a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation may be obtained; and

     H.    The name and signature of the citing enforcement official. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.050 Service of administrative citations and other notices.
     The administrative citation and all notices authorized or required to be given by this chapter shall be deemed served when made in writing and either personally delivered to the responsible party for the violation or deposited in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to such responsible party at their last known address. However, if a citation or notice is required to be served on the owner of property, it shall be deemed served when made in writing and deposited in the United States mail, addressed to the owner at the owner’s address as it appears on the latest equalized or supplemental assessment roll of Lassen County. In addition, the administrative citation shall be posted on the real property that is the subject of the violation. Service of a citation or notice by mail in the manner provided for by this section shall be effective on the date of mailing, and the failure of any person to actually receive any citation or notice specified in this chapter shall not affect the validity of the citation or notice or of the proceedings conducted hereunder. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.060 Notice of violation—Generally.
     Except as provided in Section 8.40.070, when a violation consists of a violation of building, electrical, plumbing or zoning regulations set forth in this code, or any violation of Title 15 or 17 of this code, the enforcement official shall issue a written notice of violation to any responsible party for the violation prior to the issuance of an administrative citation for that violation. The notice of violation shall contain all of the following:

     A.    The date and location that the violation was observed;

     B.     The section of this code violated and a description of the violation;

     C.     The actions required to correct the violation;

     D.    A reasonable time period for the correction of the violation, not less than ten (10) days; and

     E.     Notice that if the violation is not corrected by the date specified in the notice of violation, an administrative citation may be issued and administrative fines may be imposed. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.070 Notice of violation—Exceptions.
     An administrative citation may be issued in lieu of a notice of violation only if:

     A.    The responsible party for the violation was issued an administrative or infraction citation for violation of the same provision of this code within the immediately preceding twelve (12) months;

     B.     The violation constitutes, in the opinion of the enforcement official, an immediate threat to the health or safety of any person or the public generally;

     C.     One or more other violations exist on the property, any one of which is not subject to Section 8.40.060; or

     D.    The person responsible for the violation currently owes the city unpaid administrative fines that are delinquent. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.080 Correction of violation.
     If the enforcement official determines that all violations listed in the notice of violation have been corrected within the time specified in the notice of violation, an administrative citation shall not be issued. If the enforcement official determines that all violations listed in the notice of violation have not been corrected within the time specified, an administrative citation may be issued for each uncorrected violation or the enforcement official may invoke any other remedy provided by law. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.090 Payment of the fine.
     A.    The fine shall be paid to the city within twenty-one (21) days from the date of the administrative citation.

     B.     Any administrative citation fine paid pursuant to subsection A shall be refunded in accordance with Section 8.40.100 if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation.

     C.     Payment of a fine under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation that is the subject of the administrative citation. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.100 Hearing request.
     A.    Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the code or that he or she is the responsible party by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city within twenty-one (21) days from the date of the administrative citation, together with an advance deposit of the fine or notice that a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver has been filed pursuant to Section 8.40.110.

     B.     A request for hearing form may be obtained from the city finance division.

     C.     The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.

     D.    If the enforcement official submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing official for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served on the person requesting the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.110 Advance deposit hardship waiver.
     A.    Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest that there was a violation of the code or that he or she is the responsible party and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine as required in Section 8.40.090(A) may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver.

     B.     The request shall be filed with the department of finance on an advance deposit hardship waiver application form, available from the department of finance, within fifteen (15) days of the date of the administrative citation.

     C.     The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fine as described in Section 8.40.090(A) shall be stayed unless or until the director of finance manager makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver.

     D.    The finance manager may, after consultation with and approval by the city administrator, waive the requirement of an advance deposit set forth in Section 8.40.100(A) and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the cited party submits to the finance manager a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the finance manager the person’s actual financial inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing.

     E.     If the finance manager determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the person shall remit the deposit to the city within ten (10) days of the date of that decision.

     F.     The finance manager shall issue a written determination listing the reasons for his or her determination to issue or not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the finance manager shall be final and shall be served upon the person who applied for the advance deposit hardship waiver. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.120 Hearing board.
     The “hearing board” for administrative citations shall be the same as defined in Section 8.32.030 of this code. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.130 Hearing procedure.
     A.    No hearing to contest an administrative citation before the hearing board officer shall be held unless the fine has been deposited in advance in accordance with Section 8.40.100 or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance with Section 8.40.110.

     B.     A hearing before the hearing board officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) days and not more than sixty (60) days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     At the hearing, the administrative citation and any written report submitted by the enforcement official shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in the citation. Both the party contesting the administrative citation and the enforcement official shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present additional evidence concerning the administrative citation. Such evidence may include the testimony of other witnesses, or the introduction of documents or other evidence. Such testimony, written documents, or other evidence sought to be introduced shall not be limited to any legal rules of evidence, save and except for the rule that it shall be relevant and material to the issues of whether the violation alleged in the citation occurred and whether the person cited committed, caused or was responsible for the violation. Admission of evidence and the conduct of the hearing shall be controlled by the hearing board in accordance with the fundamentals of due process. The hearing board may limit the total length of the hearing to one hour, and shall allow the appellant at least as much time to present its case as is allowed the city.

     D.    The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies.

     E.     The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.

     F.     The hearing board may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement official or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.140 Hearing board’s decision and city council review.
     A.    After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing board shall issue a written recommendation to the city council to uphold or cancel the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that recommendation. The city council shall make the final decision to uphold or cancel the administrative citation at the next regular meeting of that body in which the decision on the administrative citation can be legally calendared. That decision shall be final.

     B.     If the city council determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city.

     C.     If the city council determines that the administrative citation should be upheld and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver the due date for the payment of the fine shall be fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of city council’s decision to uphold.

     D.    If the city council determines that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the city, then the city shall within fifteen (15) calendar days refund the amount of the deposited fine.

     E.     The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the city council’s written decision. Service may be made personally at the conclusion of the city council meeting, or by mail, after the adjournment of the hearing. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.150 Delinquent administrative fines—Late payment charges and interest.
     A.    Late Payment Charges. The finance manager shall add a penalty of ten percent to the original amount of any delinquent administrative fine on the last day of each month after the due date thereof. However, the total amount of such penalties to be added shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the amount of the original administrative fine.

     B.     Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any recipient of an administrative citation who fails to remit an administrative fine by its due date shall pay interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per year, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the delinquent administrative fine, exclusive of penalties, from the first day of delinquency until paid. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.160 Right to judicial review.
     Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city council on an administrative citation may obtain review of the decision by filing a petition for review with the Lassen County Superior Court in accordance with the timelines and provisions as set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4(b). Said procedure shall be available for all judicial review under this chapter, notwithstanding that the term or condition being enforced pursuant to this chapter may not be a matter covered by Section 53069.4(a). Judicial review of a citation shall not be available without first participating in a hearing as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.170 Recovery of administrative citation fines and costs.
     The city may collect any past due administrative fine, penalty, and interest charge by use of all available legal means. The obligation for past due administrative fines, penalties, and interest imposed for any violation which arises from a condition or use of any real property, or structure thereon, which is owned by the person cited, which has not been fully satisfied within sixty (60) calendar days, and for which no appeal has been filed may also be assessed and made a lien against the real property upon which the violation occurred. Lien and special assessment procedures shall be the same as outlined in municipal code Sections 8.32.210 through 8.32.270. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

 

8.40.180 Procedural compliance.
     Failure to comply with any procedural requirement of this chapter, to receive any notice or decision specified in this chapter, or to receive any copy required to be provided by this chapter shall not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder unless the responsible party is denied constitutional due process thereby. (Ord. 17-1011 § 4, 2017)

Chapter 8.44 JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ADJUDICATORY ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
8.44.010 Statutory authority applicable.
     Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state of California shall be applicable to the city of Susanville, as to any decision (as defined by said Section 1094.6) made after the date the ordinance codified in this section becomes effective. (Ord. 10-971 § 5, 2010)

Chapter 8.48 SALE AND USE OF FIREWORKS
8.48.010 Definitions.
     “Dangerous fireworks” means the same as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 12505.

     “Fireworks” means the same as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 12511.

     “Safe and sane fireworks” means the same as defined in California Health and Safety Code Sections 12529 and 12562. (Ord. 13-990 § 1, 2013)

 

8.48.020 Sale of fireworks.
     The sale of fireworks within the city of Susanville corporate limits shall comply with the following restrictions:

     A.    Only safe and sane fireworks may be sold within the city.

     B.     Fireworks sales stands must be located on property zoned C-2, general commercial and shopping center zoning district.

     C.     The sale of fireworks may commence no earlier than noon of June 28th and must end by noon of July 6th. From June 29th to July 5th fireworks sale shall be limited to the hours of nine a.m. to nine p.m.

     D.    All fireworks vendors must obtain a fireworks permit from the city of Susanville fire department and must adhere to all requirements of the permit and the requirements of the California Health and Safety Code relating to the sale and storage of fireworks. The chief of the fire department may amend the requirements of the permit as necessary to insure public safety is maintained. Fireworks vendors must also obtain a temporary use permit as per Section 17.104.090 of this code.

     E.     The number of fireworks stands permits granted in any year shall be one stand per one thousand five hundred (1,500) persons of the household population of the city based on the latest department of finance estimates. Fractions of 0.50 or greater shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

     F.     In granting a fireworks permit, the fire department shall give preference to individuals or organizations that operated a fireworks stand, without violation of the permit requirements, during the prior year. Individuals or organizations wishing to receive permitting preference must notify the fire department of their intent to operate a stand no later than June 1st of each year. (Ord. 13-990 § 1, 2013)

 

8.48.030 Use or discharge of fireworks.
     A.    No fireworks of any kind may be used or discharged within the corporate limits of the city of Susanville between June 1st and October 31st of each year with the following exceptions;

     1.     Safe and sane fireworks may be used and discharged between the period of six a.m. to midnight on July 4th.

     2.     Public display fireworks by permit only.

     B.     Safe and sane fireworks may be used or discharged between November 1st and May 31st. The use and discharge of safe and sane fireworks in city parks requires a permit as stipulated in Municipal Code Section 12.32.070. (Ord. 13-990 § 1, 2013)

 

8.48.040 Enforcement and penalties.
     A.    Provisions of this code shall be enforced by the city of Susanville police department.

     B.     Violations of the city’s permit to sell fireworks shall be enforced under the provision of the California Health and Safety Code.

     C.     Violations of the use and discharge of fireworks are enforceable as an infraction under Section 1.12.010 of this code. (Ord. 13-990 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 8.50 VERY HIGH FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONE
8.50.010 Designation of area.
     The city of Susanville designates as very high fire hazard severity zones those areas recommended by the Director of the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection and as shown on the map titled “Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones in LRA – Susanville” dated November 17, 2008, and retained on file at the city of Susanville, 66 North Lassen Street, Susanville, CA. (Ord. 15-1004 § 1, 2015)

 

8.50.020 Requirements for properties within the very high fire hazard severity zone.
     Properties in the city of Susanville located within a very high fire hazard severity zone shall be subject to and adhere to the applicable regulations contained in California Government Code Section 51175 et seq. (Ord. 15-1004 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 8.52 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
8.52.010 Purpose and intent of chapter.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a just, equitable, and practical method, in addition to any other remedy available by law or equity, whereby lands or buildings which are dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unsanitary, cluttered with weeds and/or debris, abandoned vehicles, machinery or equipment, junk, trash, or are a menace, or hazard to life, limb, safety, health, morals, property values, aesthetic standards, or the general welfare of the city, may be required to be repaired, renovated, vacated, demolished, made safe, or cleaned up by removal of offensive conditions.

     Additionally the purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for the maintenance of property in the city. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon property or structures thereon than is imposed or required by existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private agreement or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the city is a party. (Ord. 17-1011 § 5, 2017)

 

8.52.020 Responsibilities for property maintenance.
     Every owner, lessee, occupant or person having charge or control of buildings, structures or property within the city is required to maintain the buildings, structures or property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this chapter, and the owner, lessee, occupant or person having charge or control of the building, structure or property remains liable for violations hereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding the same. The duty imposed by this section on an owner shall in no instance relieve those other persons referred to herein from the same duty. (Ord. 17-1011 § 5, 2017)

 

8.52.030 Classification of nuisances.
     The following acts and conditions, when performed or existing upon any lot or parcel of land within the city, are declared to be unlawful and are defined as and declared to be public nuisances which are injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, which have a tendency to degrade the appearance and property values of surrounding property and/or which cause damage to public rights-of-way:

     A.    Structures or buildings, both permanent and temporary, or other lot improvements including buildings or sheds exempt from obtaining a building permit, which are subject to any of the following conditions:

     1.     Faulty weather protection, including, but not limited to, the following:

     a.     Crumbling, cracked, damaged, missing, broken or loose exterior plaster, siding of any kind, roofs, foundations or floors,

     b.     Broken, damaged or missing windows or doors, and

     c.     Painted or unpainted surfaces suffering from dry rot, warping or termite infestation;

     2.     Building or structures which are under construction or rehabilitation and are not completed within a reasonable time or whose building permit for such construction or rehabilitation has expired;

     3.     Fences or walls which are in a hazardous condition, which are in disrepair or which hinder free access to public sidewalks or rights-of-way or are maintained in such a condition to have a tendency to degrade the appearance and property values of surrounding property. All fencing, including gates shall be maintained in sound condition free of damage, breaks, or missing structural members. Areas that are leaning, buckling, sagging, or deteriorating shall be repaired or replaced with material compatible with the undamaged portions of the fence. Where fencing has been painted and it shall be maintained and kept free of chipping, peeling, scaling or missing paint;

     4.     Substantial deterioration of porches, landings, patios, stairways or guardrails which, although not otherwise constituting an unsafe structure as defined in this code, are visible from public rights-of-way or neighboring properties and are injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or have a tendency to degrade the appearance and property values of surrounding property;

     5.     Broken or defective elements of a building, structure, parking lot or landscaped area which are injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or have a tendency to degrade the appearance and property values of surrounding property;

     6.     Litter, debris or abandoned personal property scattered in the interior of a vacant or unoccupied building or structure in such a manner as to create a fire hazard, health hazard or other condition which is injurious or potentially injurious to public health, safety and welfare.

     B.     Vegetation, trees, landscaping or other plant materials which are subject to any of the following conditions:

     1.     Overgrown or in such a condition that they are or are likely to:

     a.     Harbor rats, vermin or other vectors;

     b.     Provide a harboring place for vagrants or other persons;

     c.     Which encroaches into, over, or upon any public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, or sidewalks, so as to constitute either a danger to the public safety or property or any impediment to public travel;

     d.     Be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or have a tendency to depreciate the appearance and property values of surrounding properties;

     e.     Create a fire hazard as determined by the fire chief or duly authorized agent.

     2.     Dead, decayed, diseased, hazardous or in such a condition that they are or are likely to:

     a.     Be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or have a tendency to depreciate the appearance and property values of surrounding properties;

     b.     Create a fire hazard or health hazard.

     C.     The parking or storage of trailers, campers, boats, vessels, watercraft, recreational vehicles, wood splitters or other similar vehicles and equipment on residentially used property is prohibited as follows:

     1.     In the front yard area. For the purpose of this section, the “front yard area” shall mean any area of the lot or parcel that is not a paved driveway, that is between the front elevation of the residential building and the front property line of the lot or parcel and that extends the entire width of the lot or parcel.

     2.     On a paved driveway surface when such parking or storage unreasonably prevents routine and useful access to a required garage parking space or prevents the utilization of the paved driveway area for off-street parking. For purposes of this section, “paved driveway” shall mean a paved strip of land which meets all applicable zoning and building regulations of the city, which provides access from the street to a garage, carport or parking space and which has a single access point. The paved driveway may have two access points only if the driveway is semi-circular in nature. For purposes of this section, “parking space” shall mean a paved area within the front yard area which meets all applicable zoning and building regulations of the city and which is of sufficient size to be used for the express purpose of parking a vehicle.

     3.     On a paved driveway area when such parking or storage unreasonably obstructs the cross visibility of vehicle or pedestrian traffic and creates an unsafe condition or traffic hazard or when the vehicle or equipment projects over or onto the sidewalk or street.

     4.     When stored directly on the ground and not upon a currently registered and operable vehicle, trailer or similar device designed to transport such vehicle or equipment.

     5.     In an abandoned, inoperative, wrecked or dismantled condition.

     D.    Attractive nuisances, those objects which, by their nature and according to the law, may attract children or other curious individuals including, but not limited to, hazardous pools, ponds, iceboxes, refrigerators, neglected machinery, excavations, stagnant water or abandoned wells.

     E.     Storage or scattering over any portion of the property of any of the following:

     1.     Debris, rubbish, rubble, construction debris, litter or trash which is not stored in trash receptacles or which is scattered and blowing onto adjacent public or private property;

     2.     Abandoned, broken, wrecked, inoperable or discarded household or office furnishings, housewares, appliances, electronic equipment or devices, machines and tools or similar objects of equipment;

     3.     Abandoned, broken, wrecked, inoperable or discarded personal effects, including, but not limited to, books, magazines, newspapers, papers, knickknacks, ornamental objects, clothing or similar articles;

     4.     Outdoor storage of usable building materials for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, except where construction or remodeling is occurring under a valid permit or as may be permitted by the zoning classification of the property. The material shall be stored in a neat and orderly manner so as not to create a health or fire hazard;

     5.     Outdoor storage or scattering of cardboard, newspaper, magazines, scrap metal, tin, wire, aluminum, plastic or glass containers, except within approved refuse or recycling containers or as may be permitted by this code or the zoning classification of the property;

     6.     Abandoned, inoperative, wrecked or dismantled vehicles or parts thereof in violation of Chapter 10.22 of this code;

     7.     Outdoor storage or scattering of materials, equipment or other items on residentially used property which is not typically associated with such use, which is inconsistent with the zoning classification of the property and which creates a fire hazard or health hazard or which is otherwise injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare;

     8.     Excessive accumulation of animal waste or the presence of any animal carcass.

     F.     Packing boxes or similar storage containers which are stored in yards or unenclosed patios, porches, carports or storage units and which create a fire hazard or health hazard or which are otherwise injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare.

     G.    Excessive accumulation of grease, oil or other residues on paved or unpaved surface areas open to the public or when such material flows or seeps onto any public street, sidewalk or public property.

     H.    Storage or the parking of buses, tow trucks, dump trucks, grading equipment, tractors, commercial trailers or coaches or any other commercial vehicle over twenty-five (25) feet long, eight feet high or ninety (90) inches wide in a residential zone. Parking of vehicles less than twenty-five (25) feet in length shall be on a paved driveway if a paved driveway has been developed on the property or on an existing gravel driveway if the property was developed prior to the requirement for a paved driveway.

     I.      To allow or permit graffiti to remain on any building, fence, wall, structure, sign or vehicle when visible to the public street, highway, right-of-way or public place for more than one week. For the purpose of this section, “graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any surface in violation of this code or other state or local law.

     J.      Signs constructed, erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of Chapter 17.128 of this code or an applicable specific plan ordinance.

     K.    Any device, decoration, design, fence or structure which, by reason of its condition or its location, is injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or has a tendency to degrade the appearance and property values of surrounding property.

     L.     Animals, livestock, poultry, insects, or bees kept, bred, or maintained for any purpose and in violation of this code or any other code adopted by this city.

     M.    Maintenance of buildings, structures or premises in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare or in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by Cal. Civil Code Section 3480 or other applicable law. (Ord. 17-1011 § 5, 2017)

 

8.52.040 Declaration of nuisance.
     Whenever the city planner, city building official, city fire chief, city engineer or any enforcement official as designated by the city administrator to enforce the codes of the city determines that a nuisance, as defined by Section 8.52.030, exists on any building, structure or property located within the city, he or she may utilize any abatement methods authorized by this code, including, but not limited to, the process for abating public nuisances as contained in Chapter 8.32 of this code or the issuance of an administrative citation as provided for in Chapter 8.40. (Ord. 17-1011 § 5, 2017)

Chapter 8.53 SHOPPING CART MANAGEMENT, REMOVAL, IMPOUNDMENT, RETRIEVAL AND DISPOSAL, AND PREVENTION OF ABANDONED CARTS
8.53.010 Findings, purpose and applicability.
     Abandoned shopping carts constitute a nuisance, create potential hazards to the health and safety of the public, and interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The accumulation of abandoned shopping carts on public property creates conditions that may reduce property values and promote blight and deterioration.

     The intent of this chapter is to ensure that measures are taken by shopping cart owners to prevent the removal of shopping carts from a business premises, to make removal of shopping carts a violation of this code, and to facilitate the retrieval of abandoned shopping carts in a manner consistent with state law.

     This chapter shall apply to all owners of a business establishment and other commercial services within the city of Susanville that provide shopping carts for use by customers and members of the public. (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

 

8.53.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, certain words, phrases, terms and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section. Words, phrases, and terms that are used in this chapter, but not specifically defined, shall have the meaning set forth in the applicable local or state, if appropriate. Other such words, phrases and terms shall be accorded their ordinary meanings.

     “Abandoned cart prevention plan” or “ACPP” means a document submitted by the owner of the shopping cart pursuant to Section 8.53.050 of this chapter.

     “Abandoned shopping cart” means any shopping cart that has been removed from the premises of a business establishment and has been left unattended on either private or public property.

     “Agent” means the person or persons designated in the abandoned cart prevention plan who the owner of the shopping cart authorizes as the person(s) to perform or provide retrieval services on behalf of the owner. The agent may be the owner if so, designated in the city approved abandoned cart prevention plan.

     “Director” means the director of community development, or such other director or officer designated by the city administrator to administer this chapter.

     “Electronic theft deterrent system” means a mechanical system which automatically locks the wheels of a shopping cart when the shopping cart is pushed outside the premises. Typically, such systems include a brake on the shopping cart and some type of perimeter wire around the premises which triggers the brake on the shopping cart.

     “Existing business” means an establishment with a valid business license and which is open to the public on the date of approval of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     “Owner” means any person or entity, who in connection with the conduct of a business, owns, leases, possesses, or makes a shopping cart available to customers or the public. For purposes of this chapter, owner shall also include the owner’s designated agent.

     “Premises” means the entire area owned or utilized by the business establishment that provides shopping carts for use by customers, including any parking lot or other property provided by the owner for customer parking.

     “Shopping cart” means a basket mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind.

     “Tenant improvement” means a construction project which would require a building permit to modify the physical condition of an existing building or space. (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

 

8.53.030 Unauthorized removal prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person, either temporarily or permanently, to remove a shopping cart from a premises or be in possession of a shopping cart that has been removed from a premises which is properly marked in conformity with this chapter without the written consent of the owner. This section shall not apply to shopping carts removed as authorized by the owner for the purposes of repair, maintenance or disposal. (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

 

8.53.040 Abandoned cart prevention plan required.
     Owners of all businesses who provide shopping carts for customer use shall develop, implement and comply with the terms and conditions of an abandoned cart prevention plan or “ACPP,” as defined in this chapter, to prevent the unauthorized removal by any person of any shopping cart from the owner’s premises and, if removed, to retrieve the shopping cart within twenty-four (24) hours of the removal or notice of the removal. The ACPP shall be submitted to the director within sixty (60) calendar days of written notification by the director that such plan is required. A new owner of a business is required to submit an application to the director with either a new plan, or adoption of the plan submitted by the previous owner. (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

 

8.53.050 Abandoned cart prevention plan.
     The ACPP shall include the following elements:

     A.    Name of Business/Owner. The name of the owner and the business name, the physical address where the business is conducted, name, address and phone number(s) of the on-site and off­site owner if different.

     B.     Inventory of Carts. A complete list of all carts maintained on or in the premises.

     C.     Community Outreach. A description of a community outreach process under which the owner shall cause notice to be provided to customers that the removal of carts from the premises is prohibited and is a violation of state and local law. This notice may include, but is not limited to, flyers distributed at the premises, warnings on shopping bags, signs posted in prominent places near door and parking lot exits, direct mail, announcements using intercom systems at the premises, web site or other means demonstrated to be effective to the reasonable satisfaction of the director. Any and all posting of signs shall comply with the provisions of Susanville City Code.

     D.    Cart Identification. Signs and cart identification information which conform to this ordinance and state law.

     E.     Loss Prevention Measures. A description of the specific measures that the owner shall implement to prevent cart removal from the premises. These measures may include, but are not limited to, electronic or other disabling devices on the carts so they cannot be removed from the premises, effective management practices, use of courtesy clerks to accompany customers and return the carts to the store, use of security personnel to prevent removal, security deposit for use of cart, or other demonstrable measures acceptable to the director that are likely to prevent cart removal from the premises.

     F.     Employee Training. A description of an ongoing employee training program that shall be implemented by the owner and that shall be designed to educate new and existing employees on the ACPP and conditions contained therein no less frequently than annually.

     G.    Mandatory Cart Retrieval. A plan for retrieval of abandoned carts by the owner within twenty-four (24) hours of being notified. (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

 

8.53.060 Fees.
     Every owner who, pursuant to this chapter, is required to submit an ACPP, or who submits an application for a modification of an ACPP, shall submit with the plan or plan modification a fee for the director’s review of the plan or plan modification in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

 

8.53.070 Plan approval or denial and penalties.
     A.    Each owner shall submit an ACPP in compliance with Section 8.53.050 to the director. The director may approve or deny the plan and notify the owner of such decision within thirty (30) days of receipt. If approved, the ACPP shall be implemented by the owner no later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of approval.

     B.     The director may deny a plan based upon any of the following grounds:

     1.     Implementation of the plan violates any provision of the building, zoning, health, safety, fire, police or other provision of this code or any county, state or federal law which substantially affects public health, welfare, or safety;

     2.     The plan fails to include all of the information required by this chapter;

     3.     The plan is insufficient or inadequate to prevent removal of shopping carts from the premises;

     4.     The plan fails to address any special or unique conditions due to the geographical location of the premises as they relate to cart shopping retention and prevention efforts;

     5.     Implementation of the plan violates a term or condition of a plan or other requirement of this title;

     6.     The owner knowingly makes a false statement of fact or omits a fact required to be revealed in an application for the plan, or in any amendment or report or other information required to be made.

     C.     If the plan is rejected as incomplete or inadequate, the director shall indicate areas of incompleteness or inadequacy, and the owner shall have an additional thirty (30) calendar days in which to resubmit a complete and adequate plan.

     D.    An owner who fails to submit a complete plan to the satisfaction of the director or fails to implement approved plan measures or fails to comply with the approved plan measures, will be subject to enforcement of these requirements through any lawful means available to the city.

     E.     The director’s decision to deny a plan shall be final. (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

 

8.53.080 Plan modification.
     At any time after the director’s approval of any ACPP, the owner may submit to the director an application for a modification of the previously approved plan to address a change in circumstances, address an unanticipated physical or economic impact of the plan, or modify an inadequate or ineffective plan. (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

 

8.53.090 Abandoned cart prevention plan deemed ineffective—Electronic theft deterrent system required.
     An ACPP shall be deemed ineffective if, during any consecutive three-month period, more than one of an owner’s shopping carts are found abandoned in the public right-of-way and have not been timely retrieved in accordance with the ACPP. In such a case, the director shall provide the owner with written notification that its ACPP has been deemed ineffective. The owner shall then submit to the director a written plan to remedy the problem, which the owner shall then implement. If the ACPP is deemed ineffective a second time, the owner shall be required to install an electronic theft deterrent system, if not already present, within ninety (90) calendar days of notification by the director. If an electronic theft deterrent system has already been installed, the owner shall revise its ACPP to include, and shall implement, supplemental loss prevention measures to ensure that the shopping cart thefts and abandonment cease. (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

 

8.53.100 Electronic theft deterrent systems—Required.
     A.    New Commercial and Industrial Businesses. All new commercial and industrial businesses that employ shopping carts shall be required to implement a shopping cart electronic theft deterrent system at their business premises.

     B.     Existing Development. All existing commercial and industrial businesses that employ shopping carts shall be required to implement a shopping cart electronic theft deterrent system at their business premises when constructing any tenant improvement project that exceeds a cost of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

 

8.53.110 Electronic theft deterrent systems—Maintenance.
     Owners who are required to install electronic theft deterrent systems in accordance with this chapter shall maintain the systems in working order. (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

 

8.53.120 Business owner changes.
     In the event that the ownership of a business changes, the new owner will be subject to the terms of this chapter and will be required to comply with any and all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

 

8.53.130 Enforcement.
     A.    Every owner shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and every provision of the owner’s approved ACPP.

     B.     Any owner who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of the owner’s approved ACPP shall be subject to enforcement procedures for each violation through any lawful means available to the city, including, without limitation, institution of criminal enforcement or administrative penalties in accordance with Title 1 of the Susanville City Code. (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

 

8.53.140 Retrieval notification.
     The city shall notify the owner of an abandoned shopping cart as identified on the signage information permanently affixed to the shopping cart. The city notification shall be documented and provided either by telephone or by written notice. The notification shall require that the identified cart(s) be retrieved pursuant to the conditions for retrieval as set forth in the owner’s ACPP. (Ord. 20-1028 § 1, 2020)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04 OFFENSES GENERALLY
Chapter 9.05 GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 9.06 POLICE FEES FOR CALLBACKS TO NOISY ACTIVITIES
Chapter 9.08 CURFEW
Chapter 9.12 RESTRICTION OF ACCESS BY MINORS TO TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND THE PROHIBITION OF TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES AND SELF-SERVICE DISPLAYS

Chapter 9.04 OFFENSES GENERALLY
9.04.020 Radio and television receivers— Interference generally.
     No person shall maintain or operate any electrical device or apparatus which shall cause reasonable preventable interference with radio or television receivers within the city. No electric sign or other device using a so-called blinking device, whereby a make and break contact is maintained, shall be maintained unless equipped with condensers properly grounded so as to limit interference; nor shall electric pianos or other similar machines be operated unless similarly equipped or shielded. Violet ray, infra-red ray and X-ray machines causing interference shall not be used between six p.m. and eleven p.m. except in emergencies. (Prior code § 14.7)

 

9.04.030 Radio and television receivers—Interference from electrical lines, etc.
     Every person maintaining within the city lines whereby electricity is transmitted or which are used for the transmission of signals shall at all times maintain the lines and the equipment thereon in such a manner as not to cause any preventable interference with radio or television receivers within the city. (Prior code § 14.8)

 

9.04.040 Radio and television receivers— Unlawful to connect with closed circuit television system wires, cables, conductors, etc., and obtain electric or electronic impulses, signals, transmission, etc., therefrom without first obtaining permission
     It is unlawful for any person to do or cause to be done any of the following acts or things:

     A.    Connect with or make any connection to, any wire, line, cable, conductor, instrument or appliance of any closed circuit television system within the city without having first obtained from the owner or operator thereof permission so to do.

     B.     Make, install, place, arrange, construct, use or employ instrument, device, appliance, cable, conductor or wire in such proximity to any part of a closed circuit television system within the city that the electric or electronic energy impulses, transmissions or signals transmitted in or upon such closed circuit television system are or may be obtained, reproduced or induced in such instrument, device, appliance, cable, conductor or wire, without having first obtained from the owner or operator of such closed circuit television system permission so to do.

     C.     Use, employ or reproduce in any television set or similar device within the city any electric or electronic energy, impulse, transmission or signal obtained, reproduced or induced in the manner described in subsection B of this section, without having first obtained from the owner or operator of such closed circuit television system permission so to do.

     D.    As used in this section, the term “closed circuit television” shall mean any system or arrangement whereby a signal or impulse broadcast from a television broadcasting station is received at a given place or places and thence, in any manner, conducted or distributed to television receiving sets by means of wires, cables or conductors or any combination of wires, cables or conductors. (Prior code § 14.9)

 

9.04.050 Discharge of firearms, etc., prohibited within city limits.
     Other than in defense of person or property, it is unlawful for any person to fire, shoot or discharge within the corporate limits of the city, any firearms or any cannon, gun, pistol, revolver, automatic pistol, rifle, shotgun, BB gun, airgun, pellet gun, spring operated or gas operated gun, or any instrument or device of any kind, character or description which throws, discharges, propels, or hurls bullets or missiles of any kind to any distance from such instrument by means of elastic force, air pressure, vacuum, or explosive force, except in a gun testing site or in or upon a rifle or pistol range, which site or range has been approved and certified as approved by the chief of police. (Prior code § 14.9-1)

 

9.04.060 Noise.
     A.    Generally—Criteria for Judging. Except during permitted hours, as defined in the following subsections no person within the city shall make or cause the making of, or suffer or permit to be made, upon any premises, owned, occupied or controlled by such persons, any loud, unusual, penetrating or boisterous noise, disturbance, or commotion, which shall cause discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness.

     The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of this section exists shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

     1.     The volume of the noise.

     2.     The intensity of the noise.

     3.     Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.

     4.     Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural.

     5.     The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.

     6.     The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.

     7.     The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates.

     8.     The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates.

     9.     The time of the day or night the noise occurs.

     10.   The duration of the noise.

     11.   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.

     12.   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity.

     B.     Permitted Hours. The term “permitted hours” as used in the preceding subsection is defined to mean a single period of not more than two consecutive hours in any calendar day between the hours of seven a.m. and nine p.m.

     C.     Application of Provisions—Permits for Exceptions. The provisions of the preceding two subsections shall apply to all persons using public property, streets, places or ways for events utilizing sound amplifying equipment of any type or description, provided however, that a permit be issued authorizing noise prohibited by this section whenever it is found that the public interest will be served thereby. Applications for permits shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount of five dollars and shall set forth in detail facts showing that the public interest will be served by the issuance of such permit. Applications shall be made to the chief of police; provided however, with respect to work upon or involving the use of a public street, alley, building or other public place under the jurisdiction of the public works department, applications shall be made to the public works director. Any dissatisfied with the denial of a permit may appeal to the council.

     D.    Starting and Operating Motors. It is unlawful for any person within the city to start or operate, or cause to be started or operated, any gas, gasoline, kerosene, distillate, benzene, oil burning or other engine or motor within the city unless such engine or motor has a device thereunto attached, in good working order, which shall at all times be in constant operation, to prevent excess or unusual or annoying noise from the exhaust of such motor or engine.

     E.     Penalty for Violations. Any person violating the terms and provisions of subsection A, B, C or D of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 14.10)

 

9.04.070 Signs and advertising materials— Removal after discontinuance of business or sale.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning real property or premises within the city to leave or permit to be left in place, upon such real property or premises, any sign or other advertising material or equipment which advertises any business conducted upon such property or premises or services or products sold upon such property or premises or the price or prices of such products or services for a period of more than thirty (30) days after such business or the sale of such products has been closed or discontinued. (Prior code § 14.10)

 

9.04.080 Prohibition of jumping and diving from bridges.
     It is unlawful for any person to jump or dive off or from any bridge located within the city limits of the city. (Prior code § 14.13)

 

9.04.090 Recreation, parks and community services authority to issue citations.
     The city of Susanville police department officers and community service officers, parks officials and park rangers employed within the police and administrative services department have the duty to enforce the provisions of Chapter 9.04 Offenses Generally, Section 9.04.090 of this code where the official has maintenance responsibility, and are authorized to arrest persons without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation of said provisions in their presence. In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this section and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, said officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his or her promise to appear as prescribed by Chapter 5c, Title III, of Part 2 of 2 of the Penal Code of the State of California (commencing with Section 853.6).

     Any person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment not to exceed six months. This chapter may also be enforced via administrative or civil actions as authorized by the municipal code. (Ord. 14-996 § 3, 2014)

Chapter 9.05 GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENTS
9.05.010 Gambling establishments.
     No gambling establishment shall be operated within the city limits between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day. (Ord. 99-862 § 1, 1999)

 

9.05.020 Patron security and safety.
     The following rules shall apply to insure patron security and safety in and around the gambling establishment:

     A.    Adequate lighting of the entire exterior of the premises, to ensure the security and safety of its patrons, shall be in place at all times during hours of operation.

     B.     All exterior sidewalks, exterior pedestrian traffic areas, and exterior parking areas shall be improved to city standards and continuously maintained to city standards.

     C.     The owner of the gambling establishment premises, and the owner’s lessees, agents, representatives and assigns are jointly and severally liable for the safety and security of the patrons.

     D.    Adequate lighting of the entire interior of the premises, to ensure the security and safety of its patrons, shall be in place at all times during hours of operation.

     E.     Each gambling establishment shall provide adequate security personnel during the gambling establishment’s hours of operation. Prior to undertaking security employment at the gambling establishment, security personnel shall be properly trained for providing security during the hours of operation.

     F.     Each gambling establishment, except those operating on December 31, 1999, is required to obtain a use permit under the city’s zoning ordinance prior to operation, and the city shall have the power and authority to designate additional conditions of operation to the use permit, to insure the security and safety of the gambling establishment’s patrons. Any gambling establishment operating on December 31, 1999, shall be required to comply with the aforesaid use permit requirements in the event the gambling establishment enlarges its number of tables or moves its location to another site. (Ord. 99-862 § 1, 1999)

 

9.05.030 C-2 zones.
     Gambling establishments shall be established in C-2 zones within the city. (Ord. 99-862 § 1, 1999)

 

9.05.040 Notices—Wagering limits.
     A.    The gambling establishment shall clearly post legible notices within the gambling establishment, and at each table where gambling is taking place, house or table wagering limits. Such notices are to provide the patrons adequate notice of the rules relating to wagering.

     B.     The house or table wagering limit in each gambling establishment is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less. (Ord. 99-862 § 1, 1999)

 

9.05.050 Limits—Players and authorized tables.
     The following are the maximum number of players and authorized tables allowed in the gambling establishment:

     A.    No authorized table shall exceed six seats. Each gambling patron at a table shall occupy a seat.

     B.     One authorized table per two hundred fifty square feet of the gambling area shall be permitted; provided, however, no more than twenty (20) tables shall be allowed in a gambling establishment.

     C.     It is the city’s intent to limit the number of gambling establishments in the city. No more than fifty (50) gambling tables shall be established within the city limits.

     D.    Tournaments and other special events shall not entitle any gambling establishment to increase the number of authorized tables unless the city council of the city shall authorize a temporary expansion, which temporary expansion shall not be of a duration exceeding seventy-two (72) hours and which temporary expansion shall not result in an expansion of twenty-five (25) percent or more over that number of tables otherwise permitted in the gambling establishment. No more than two temporary expansion authorizations may be granted to a gambling establishment in a one-year period. (Ord. 99-862 § 1, 1999)

 

9.05.060 Fee collection rate.
     Upon issuance of the use permit for the gambling establishment, and annually on the anniversary of the use permit, the permittee shall pay to the city the sum set forth in the Susanville Municipal Code business license provisions, Chapter 5.04, Section 5.04.300. Failure to pay the fee shall be sufficient cause to revoke the use permit of the gambling establishment immediately and operations shall be suspended until the fees are paid and report is made. (Ord. 99-862 § 1, 1999)

 

9.05.070 Work permits.
     An employee of the gambling establishment is required by state law to apply for a work permit from the State Division of Gambling Control before such employee will be allowed to work in the gambling establishment. (Ord. 99-862 § 1, 1999)

 

9.05.080 Violations.
     Violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter 9.05 is declared to be a public nuisance and the city is authorized to take legal action to abate same. (Ord. 99-862 § 1, 1999)

Chapter 9.06 POLICE FEES FOR CALLBACKS TO NOISY ACTIVITIES
9.06.061 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the recovery of costs incurred by the city as a direct result of multiple responses by city police to noisy activities on private property. (Ord. 03-906 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.062 Definitions.
     Unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended, the words set forth below shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:

     A.    “Noisy activity” means any activity on private property that, due to unreasonable noise, interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of one or more neighboring properties.

     B.     “Person responsible for the noisy activity” includes all of the following:

     1.     The owner(s) of the property where the noisy activity takes place;

     2.     The tenant(s) of the property where the noisy activity takes place;

     3.     The organizer(s) of the noisy activity;

     4.     The parent(s) or guardian(s) of any minor child who is responsible for the noisy activity.

     C.     “Police service fee” means the actual costs incurred by the city on the following items:

     1.     The services of city police arising from a second or subsequent response to a noisy activity at a particular location within a twenty-four (24) hour period;

     2.     Injuries to city police arising from a second or subsequent response to a noisy activity at a particular location within a twenty-four (24) hour period;

     3.     Damage to public property arising from a second or subsequent response by city police to a noisy activity at a particular location within a twenty-four (24) hour period. (Ord. 03-906 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.063 Issuance of warning.
     City police initially responding to a noisy activity on private property may issue a written warning to the person(s) responsible for the noisy activity. Such warning shall contain the substance of the following statement: “If Susanville Police Department Personnel are required to return to the location specified on this notice within the next twelve (12) hour period because of a noisy activity, the person(s) responsible for such noisy activity shall be assessed a police services fee in accordance with Susanville Municipal Code Chapter 9.06.” (Ord. 03-906 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.064 Assessment of police services fee.
     A.    If city police are required to respond to a noisy activity at a particular location for a second or subsequent time within a twenty-four (24) hour period after a written warning has been issued pursuant to Section 9.06.063, then for each such response a police services fee shall be assessed against the person(s) responsible for the noisy activity. Each person responsible for the noisy activity shall be jointly and severally liable for the police services fee; provided, however, that if any such person is a minor, then the parents or legal guardians of such minor shall be jointly and severally liable in the minor’s place.

     B.     An itemized bill shall be sent to every person assessed a police services fee. In no event shall the amount of such bill exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per person per each noisy activity incident.

     C.     A police services fee shall be paid in full within fifteen (15) days of the billing date unless a written appeal is filed in accordance with Section 9.06.065. (Ord. 03-906 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.065 Appeals.
     Any person assessed a police services fee may, by filing a written request within fifteen (15) days of the billing date, appeal the amount of such fee to the city administrator. The city administrator shall conduct a hearing on timely-filed appeals, and may affirm or reduce the amount of the fee. No reduction shall be granted unless the appellant establishes either (1) an accounting error has been committed; or (2) there are mitigating circumstances warranting leniency. The decision of the city administrator shall be in writing and shall be final. The full amount of any police service fee assessment upheld by the city administrator shall be paid within fifteen (15) days of the city administrator’s decision. (Ord. 03-906 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.066 Nonpayment.
     If the full amount of a police services fee is not paid in full within the time allotted, then the city may collect the debt through any available legal remedy. (Ord. 03-906 § 1, 2003)

 

9.06.067 Effect of chapter.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to preclude city police from taking any action, including making arrests and issuing citations, necessary to abate any violation of law occurring as a noisy activity. (Ord. 03-906 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 9.08 CURFEW
9.08.010 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

     “Curfew hours” means the period from eleven p.m. any evening of the week, until six a.m. the following day.

     “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

     “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

     “Guardian” means:

     1.     A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or

     2.     A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

     “Minor” means any person under eighteen (18) years of age.

     “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person.

     “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

     “Responsible adult” means a person at least eighteen (18) years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

     “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 98-850 § 1; prior code § 14.1)

 

9.08.020 Curfew restrictions.
     A.    It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.

     B.     It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the minor was:

     1.     Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult;

     2.     On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, or the responsible adult, without any detour or stop;

     3.     In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

     4.     Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;

     5.     Involved in an emergency;

     6.     On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence;

     7.     Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a civic organization, the city, or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a civic organization, the city, or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor.

     8.     Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution;

     9.     Emancipated pursuant to law.

     C.     Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under subsection B of this section is present or applicable.

     D.    Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 98-850 § 1; prior code § 14.2-2)

 

9.08.030 Violation of regulations—Notifying probation officer.
     Whenever any minor is arrested for the violation of Section 9.08.020, the office of the probation office of the county shall be notified, and a copy of the arrest report, setting forth the circumstances of the arrest of such minor, shall be forwarded to such office of the probation officer of the county. (Prior code § 14.2-4)

 

9.08.040 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person violating the provisions of Section 9.08.020 shall be guilty of an infraction. Juvenile court law and procedure shall be followed in dealing with minors. (Ord. 98-850 § 1; prior code § 14.2-5)

Chapter 9.12 RESTRICTION OF ACCESS BY MINORS TO TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND THE PROHIBITION OF TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES AND SELF-SERVICE DISPLAYS
9.12.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Business” means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered.

     “City” means the city of Susanville.

     “Employee” means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.

     “Minor” means any individual who is less than eighteen (18) years old.

     “Nonprofit entity” means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational character-building, for the operations of which are committee to the promotion of the objects or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency is not a “nonprofit entity” within the meaning of this section.

     “Person” means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.

     “Self-service merchandising” means open display of tobacco products and point-of-sale tobacco-related promotional products that the public has access to without the intervention of an employee.

     “Tobacco product” means any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe, tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhaling or other manner of ingestion.

     “Tobacco retailer” means any person or governmental entity that operates a store, stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales of tobacco products are made to purchasers for consumption or use.

     “Tobacco vending machines” means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether by coin or paper currency, or other things representative of value, which dispenses or releases a tobacco product.

     “Vendor-assisted” means only a store employee has access to the tobacco product and assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not take possession of the product until it is purchased. (Prior code § 14.15)

 

9.12.020 Prohibitions.
     A.    It is unlawful to engage in the sale of tobacco products without posting a plainly visible sign at the point of purchase of tobacco products which has wording similar to: “THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW AND SUBJECT TO PENALTIES. PHOTO IDENTIFICATION IS REQUIRED OF PURCHASERS APPEARING TO BE 26 AND YOUNGER.” The letters of the sign shall be at least one-quarter inch high.

     B.     It is unlawful for any business, tobacco retailer, or owner, manager or operator of any establishment subject to this chapter to sell, offer to sell or permit to be sold any tobacco products to an individual without requesting and examining identification of customers appearing to be twenty-six (26) and younger for the purpose of establishing the purchaser’s age as eighteen (18) years or greater, unless the seller has some other reasonable basis for determining the buyer’s age.

     C.     It is unlawful for any person, business, tobacco retailer or other establishment to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for sale tobacco products by means of self-service merchandising or by means other than vendor assisted sales.

     D.    It is unlawful for any person, business, tobacco retailer or other establishment to locate, install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance or use on his, her or its premises any vending machine for the purpose of selling or distributing any tobacco product. Any tobacco vending machine in use on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be removed. (Prior code § 14.16)

 

9.12.030 Enforcement.
     A.    Enforcement of this chapter shall be by the city’s code enforcement officer or other employee or representative designated by the city council.

     B.     Any citizen may register a complaint under this chapter with the city’s code enforcement officer or other designated employee or representative designated by the city council.

     C.     Any regularly conducted city inspection may include a requirement for certification by the owner, manager, operator or other person having control of such establishment that all requirements of this chapter have been implemented.

     D.    The city’s code enforcement officer or other employee or representative designated by the city council may inspect for compliance with regulations of this chapter. (Prior code § 14.17)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 10.08 SPEED LIMITS
Chapter 10.12 WEIGHT LIMITS
Chapter 10.16 ONE-WAY STREETS
Chapter 10.20 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING GENERALLY
Chapter 10.22 ABANDONED VEHICLES
Chapter 10.24 PARKING FOR THE PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED
Chapter 10.28 PARKING DURING SNOW CONDITIONS ON STATE HIGHWAY
Chapter 10.32 PARKING DURING SNOW CONDITIONS ON CITY STREETS
Chapter 10.36 MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC CONTROL REGULATIONS

Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10.04.010 Definitions.
     Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used they shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

     Except as otherwise defined herein, the definition of any term used in this chapter is the definition of such term as it is defined and described in the Vehicle Code of the state and all amendments.

     “Holiday” means and includes the following days only: the first day of January, the twelfth day of February, the third Monday in February, the last Monday in May, the fourth day of July, the ninth day of September, the first Monday in September, the second Monday of October, the eleventh day of November, Thanksgiving Day, as proclaimed by the President of the United States, the twenty-fifth day of December; if any of the above days shall fall upon a Sunday then the next succeeding day shall be deemed a holiday within the meaning of this chapter.

     Truck. The term “truck” shall mean any commercial type vehicle of an overall length in excess of two hundred twelve (212) inches.

     Zone A. The following portion of the city described as follows shall be designated as Zone A: Beginning at a point which is the point of intersection of the southerly line of California State Highway Route number thirty-six with the westerly line of Pine Street; running thence northerly along the westerly line of Pine Street to the intersection thereof with the southerly line of Prattville Road; thence easterly, at right angles, to the easterly line of Pine Street; thence southerly along the easterly line of Pine Street to the intersection thereof with the southerly line of Nevada Street; thence easterly along the southerly line of Nevada Street, and the prolongation thereof to the intersection thereof with the easterly line of Weatherlow Street; thence southerly along the easterly line of Weatherlow Street to the intersection thereof with the northerly line of Main Street; thence easterly along the northerly line of Main Street to the intersection thereof with the easterly line of Mesa Street; thence southerly at right angles to the southerly line of Main Street; thence westerly along the southerly line of Main Street to the intersection thereof with the easterly line of Weatherlow Street; thence southerly along the easterly line of Weatherlow Street to the intersection thereof with the easterly prolongation of the northerly line of Mill Street; thence westerly along the easterly prolongation of the northerly line of Mill Street to the westerly line of Weatherlow Street; thence northerly along the westerly line of Weatherlow Street to the intersection thereof with the southerly line of Cottage Street; thence westerly along the southerly line of Cottage Street to the intersection thereof with the easterly line of Pine Street; thence southerly along the easterly line of Pine Street to the intersection thereof with the northerly line of Mill Street; thence westerly at right angles to the westerly line of Pine Street; thence northerly along the westerly line of Pine Street to the point of beginning. (Prior code § 13.1)

 

10.04.020 Enforcement of chapter.
     It is made the duty of the chief of police and the police officers and peace officers of the city to enforce the provisions of this title. (Prior code § 13.2)

 

10.04.030 Obedience to police.
     It is unlawful for any driver of a vehicle or any pedestrian, to disobey or to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of any police officer or of the chief of police or of any member of the California Highway Patrol or of any peace officer of the county of Lassen given under the provisions of this title. (Prior code § 13.3)

 

10.04.040 Direction of traffic at school crossings.
     It is unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of any person appointed by the chief of police to control traffic at school crossings, provided that such person giving any order, signal or direction at such school crossing shall at the time be wearing some insignia, indicating such appointment. It is unlawful for any minor to direct or attempt to direct traffic unless authorized to do so by order of the chief of police. (Prior code § 13.4)

 

10.04.050 Obedience to signs, signals, etc.
     It is unlawful for any driver of a vehicle, or for any pedestrian, to disobey the instructions of any mechanical or electrical traffic sign or marker upon any street in the city, which sign or marker has been placed or located in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, or for any pedestrian, to disobey the instructions of, or to disregard any of the signs, lanes, markers, or signals placed, erected, located or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Prior code § 13.5)

 

10.04.060 Authority of chief of police.
     The chief of police is authorized, by orders entitled “Police Department Order No. ______,” which orders shall be published in the manner and for the time prescribed for ordinances of the city, to determine and designate the location of intersection stops, intersection stop signs, right-of-way signs, parking time limit signs, pedestrian lane stop signs, electrical stop and go signs, school crossings, and school crossing signs or any one or more thereof.

     The chief of police is further authorized, by orders entitled “Police Department Order No. _____,” which orders shall be published in the manner and for the time prescribed for ordinances of the city, to establish zones adjacent to the curbs on the streets of the city in which zones the stopping and parking of vehicles is prohibited or limited. Such zones shall be designated as either:

     A.    No parking zones;

     B.     Loading zones;

     C.     Passenger zones;

     D.    Limited parking zones; or

     E.     Zones for the exclusive use of vehicles displaying the distinguishing license plates or placards described in Section 22511.7 of the California Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 13.6)

 

10.04.070 Duty of superintendent of streets.
     The superintendent of streets is authorized and directed to place, paint and maintain, or cause to be placed, painted or maintained, such signs, lanes, markers, painted curbings and electric stop and go signals, in the locations and at the places provided in such orders. (Prior code § 13.7)

 

10.04.080 Penalty for violations of provisions of chapter.
     Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this title, unless a different penalty is expressly provided, shall be punished as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code. (Prior code § 13.24)

 

10.04.090 Disposition of fines or bail forfeitures.
     All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this title shall be paid into the traffic safety fund established by Section 3.28.010 of this code. (Prior code § 13.12)

Chapter 10.08 SPEED LIMITS
10.08.010 Speed limit on Pine Street fifteen miles per hour.
     It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon Pine Street in the city, between the southerly line of Prattville Road and the westerly prolongation of the northerly line of block numbered 9 of the city, at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour. (Prior code § 13.22)

 

10.08.020 Speed limit for trucks on Cottage Street ten miles per hour.
     It is unlawful for any person to drive any motor truck or truck tractor having three or more axles at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour on Cottage Street. (Prior code § 13.22 1/2)

 

10.08.030 Speed limit on Hospital Lane, South Street and West Street twenty-five miles per hour.
     It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on Hospital Lane or upon South Street, between Richmond Road and West Street, or upon West Street, between Hospital Lane and South Street, in the city, at a speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour. (Prior code § 13.22 3/4)

 

10.08.040 Speed limit on Fourth Street near McKinley School.
     It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on Fourth Street within five hundred (500) feet of McKinley School (approximately between Fairfield Avenue and Hall Street) at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour while children are present. (Ord. 17-1010 § 1, 2017)

 

10.08.050 Speed limit on Numa Road.
     It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on Numa Road between Skyline Road and the northern most limits of the city north of Cameron Way at a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour. (Ord. 17-1009 § 1, 2017)

Chapter 10.12 WEIGHT LIMITS
10.12.010 Prohibition of vehicles exceeding certain weight on North Street bridge.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to drive, move, operate, place or park, or cause to be left standing any vehicle or trailer of a gross weight of more than ten (10) tons, on, across, over or upon that certain bridge upon North Street in the city which crosses that certain stream generally known as and referred to as Piute Creek.

     B.     Notwithstanding any other provision contained in any ordinance or code of this city a violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and such violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 13.12-1)

 

10.12.020 Prohibition of vehicles exceeding certain weight on Weatherlow Street bridge.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drive, move, operate or place, or park or cause to be left standing any vehicle or trailer of a gross weight of more than ten (10) tons, on, across, over or upon that certain bridge upon Weatherlow Street in the city which crosses that certain stream generally known as and referred to as Piute Creek.

     B.     Notwithstanding any other provision contained in any ordinance or code of this city a violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and such violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 13.12-2)

Chapter 10.16 ONE-WAY STREETS
10.16.010 One-way street generally.
     It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle or any other type of vehicle other than in a northerly direction in and upon the following streets within the city:

     A.    That portion of South Pine Street between Cottage Street and Mill Street excepting that portion thereof which is included in the California state highway system and excepting that portion thereof which constitutes the southerly exit from and entrance to Highway 36 from the southernmost block of South Pine Street.

     B.     East Alexander Avenue between Alexander Avenue and Cornell Street. (Prior code § 13.22(a))

 

10.16.020 Additional one-way streets—South Ash Street.
     It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle or any other type of vehicle other than in a southerly direction in and upon South Ash Street within the city. (Prior code § 13.22(b))

 

10.16.030 Additional one-way streets—North Alley.

  It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle other than in an easterly direction in or upon that certain alley in the city known as North Alley, between Lassen Street and Gay Street. (Prior code § 13.22(c))

Chapter 10.20 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING GENERALLY
10.20.010 Curb markings to indicate stopping, standing or parking regulations.
     A.    Red. No parking zones shall be indicated by painting the adjacent curb a red color and it is unlawful for any person to park, stand, or stop a vehicle in such zone, whether such vehicle is attended or unattended; except that a bus may stop in such zone if the same is, by authority of the city council, marked or signposted as a bus loading zone.

     B.     Yellow. Loading zones shall be indicated by painting the adjacent curb a yellow color and it unlawful for any person to park, stand, or stop a vehicle in such zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or freight or for a longer time than twenty (20) minutes.

     C.     White. Passenger zones shall be indicated by painting the adjacent curb a white color and it is unlawful for any person to park, stand, or stop and leave unattended a vehicle in such zone for any purpose other than to load or unload passengers or to deposit mail in an adjacent mailbox or for a longer time than ten (10) minutes.

     D.    Green. Limited parking zones shall be indicated by painting the adjacent curb a green color and it is unlawful for any person to park, stand, or stop a vehicle in such zone for a longer time than fifteen (15) minutes.

     E.     Blue. Zones described in subsection E of the second paragraph of Section 10.04.060 shall be indicated by painting the adjacent curb a blue color, and it is unlawful for any person to park, stand, or stop a vehicle, other than a vehicle described in Section 10.04.060(E), in such zone at any time. (Prior code § 13.13)

 

10.20.020 Parking between two a.m. and five a.m.
     It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle in Zone A on Main Street between the hours of two a.m. and five a.m. of any day, so that the streets may not be cleaned. (Prior code § 13.14)

 

10.20.030 Occupying more than one marked space.
     In any street in the city, upon which there have been marked or painted spaces for the parking of vehicles, it is unlawful for any person to park, stand or stop any vehicle in such a manner that such vehicle occupies or protrudes over a portion or portions of two such marked or painted spaces. (Prior code § 13.15)

 

10.20.040 Truck parking.
     It is unlawful for any person, at any time, to park, stand or stop any truck on Gay Street, between Nevada Street and Cottage Street, or upon Lassen Street, between Nevada Street and Cottage Street, or upon Roop Street, between Nevada Street and Cottage Street, or upon Union Street, between Nevada Street and Cottage Street, except for the purpose of loading and unloading freight or merchandise; provided, however, that such loading or unloading shall in no event consume more than twenty (20) minutes. (Prior code § 13.16)

 

10.20.050 Council resolution designating one and two-hour parking.
     The city council may, by resolution, enlarge or decrease the areas in which one and two-hour parking is prescribed by this article. (Prior code § 13.17)

 

10.20.060 Parking limitations in specified places.
     Between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m., Sundays and holidays excepted, it is unlawful for any person to park, stand or stop any vehicle upon Main Street between Roop Street and Grand Avenue; or upon Roop Street between Cottage Street and Nevada Street; or upon Gay Street between Cottage Street and Nevada Street; or upon Lassen Street between Cottage Street and Nevada Street; or on the south side of Main Street between Foss Street and Small Street; or upon Nevada Street between North Lassen Street and Maple Street; or upon the south side of Main Street between Small Street and South Ash Street; or upon either side of Ash Street between Main Street and First Street; or upon the easterly side of South Weatherlow Street between Main Street and the prolongation of the northerly line of Cottage, for a period of more than two hours. A violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than two dollars ($2.00). (Prior code § 13.18)

 

10.20.070 Limitations between November 1st and April 1st.
     From November 1st of each year to April 1st of the following year, both dates inclusive, it is unlawful for any person to park, stand or stop any vehicle upon Ash Street, between Fifth Street and the northerly city limits. (Prior code § 13.18 1/2)

 

10.20.080 Removal of vehicles—For parking longer than seventy-two hours or between designated hours of the day.
     Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of this city may remove or cause to be removed:

     A.    Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours.

     B.     Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal. (Prior code § 13.19)

 

10.20.090 Removal of vehicles—For parking on streets needed for designated uses—Posting of signs as to removal.
     Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal. (Prior code § 13.20)

 

10.20.095 Parking and/or standing prohibited along Susanville Rodeo cattle drive route.
     Any vehicle parked or left standing on the roadway along the following route between the hours of eight a.m. and two p.m. on the fourth Friday of each August commencing in the year 2000, shall be towed and removed therefrom as provided in Division 11, Chapter 10, Articles I and II of the California Vehicle Code, including but not limited to Sections 22651 and 22654 thereof:

     Commencing at the Susanville Ranch Park at Paiute Lane, and in a southerly direction on Paiute Lane to its intersection with Glenn Drive, then easterly on Glenn Drive to its intersection with Parkdale, then southerly on Parkdale to its intersection with Willow Street, then easterly on Willow Street to its intersection with Weatherlow Street, then southerly on Weatherlow Street to its intersection with Main Street, then easterly on Main Street to its intersection with Fair Drive, then northerly on Fair Drive to the Lassen County Fairgrounds entrance at Fair Drive and Russell Avenue. (Ord. 00-868 § 1, 2000)

 

10.20.100 Parking and/or standing along bicycle race route.
     Any vehicle parked or left standing on the roadway along the following route between the following hours on the following dates, shall be towed and removed therefrom as provided in Division 11, Chapter 10, Articles I and II of the California Vehicle Code, including but not limited to Sections 22651 and 22654 thereof:

     Saturday of the third weekend of each June, commencing June, 2000 from twelve-thirty p.m. to seven-thirty p.m.

     Commencing on North Street at its intersection with the westerly line of Ash Street, and then westerly on North Street to its intersection with the easterly line of Weatherlow Street.

     Sunday of the third weekend of each June, commencing June, 2000, from eleven a.m. to three p.m.

     Commencing at Adaline and North Streets intersection, the course will proceed east to Grand Avenue, right on Grand Avenue to First Street, left on First Street to Park Street, left on Park Street to North Street, left on North Street to Grand Avenue, right on Grand Avenue to Arnold Street, left on Arnold Street to Martha Street, left on Martha Street to North Street, and left on North Street to the point of beginning. North Street shall be closed from Weatherlow to Ash Street.

     Signs giving notice of the foregoing parking prohibitions, items and dates and towing penalty shall be posted along the bicycle race routes at least forty-eight (48) hours before commencement of the time frame during which parking and standing is prohibited. (Ord. 00-864 § 1, 2000; Ord. 99-857 § 1: prior code § 13.20(b))

 

10.20.110 Stopping, etc., in alleys.
     It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand or park a vehicle in North Alley in the city in that portion thereof between the westerly curb line of North Lassen Street and a point in North Alley which lies one hundred six (106) feet westerly from the westerly curb line of North Lassen Street and it is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand or park any vehicle in any other alley or portion thereof in the city for a period of time that is longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers or freight or merchandise and in no event for a period longer than three minutes for the loading or unloading of passengers or longer than twenty (20) minutes for the loading or unloading of freight or merchandise. (Prior code § 13.21)

 

10.20.120 Parking prohibited on portions of certain streets.
     It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle on the east side of Pine Street, between Main Street and North Street in the city; it is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle on Harris Drive between the southerly line of Prattville Road and a point on Harris Drive which is southerly three hundred (300) feet from the southerly line of Prattville Road; it is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle on the easterly side of Carrol Street between a point thereon which is the point of intersection of the easterly line of Carrol Street and the prolongation of the southerly line of the lands of Holybee which front on such street, and a point thereon two hundred fifty (250) feet southerly of the aforementioned point; it is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle on the southerly side of River Street between the easterly line of South McDow and the westerly line of South Fairfield Avenue. (Prior code § 13.22)

 

10.20.130 Loading zone time limit—Main Street and Riverside Drive.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to park, stand or stop any truck, truck tractor, truck trailer or any combination thereof or any vehicle of any kind or nature in or upon that certain lot or parcel of land in the city at the southwesterly corner of the intersection of Main Street and Riverside Drive, adjacent to the easterly side of the Paul Bunyan Lumber Company retail yard and westerly across Riverside Drive from the yard and offices of the California Department of Transportation, for a period of more than ten (10) hours or to unload, place, store or leave thereon any goods, wares, merchandise, commodities or materials of any kind or nature whatsoever; provided, however, that the time limit above provided may be extended by the chief of police of the city, by a permit in writing, for such additional time as the chief of police may, in his or her sole discretion, determine to be necessary and reasonable. (Prior code § 13.22-2)

 

10.20.140 No parking zone—North side of Main Street.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park, stand or stop any vehicle of any kind or nature on the north side of Main Street, from 12.2 meters east of Fairfield Avenue to twenty-two (22) meters west of Spring Street. The concrete curb shall be painted red to designate a no parking zone. (Prior code § 13.22-3)

 

10.20.150 Angle parking on certain streets within the city.
     As provided by Section 22503 of the California Vehicle Code, angle parking is hereby authorized on the following streets within the city:

     A.    Limoneira Avenue. East side of street between Sunkist Street and Riverside Drive.

     B.     Cottage Street. North side of street between Roop Street and Union Street.

     C.     North Gay Street. Both sides of street between Main Street and Nevada Street; west side of street between Nevada Street and North Street.

     D.    South Gay Street. Both sides of street between Main Street and Cottage Street; west side of street between Cottage Street and Court Street.

     E.     North Lassen Street. Both sides of street between Main Street and North Street.

     F.     South Lassen Street. Both sides of street between Main Street and Cottage Street; west side of street between Cottage Street and Court Street.

     G.    Nevada Street. Both sides of street between Roop Street and North Lassen Street; north side of street between North Lassen Street and North Gay Street; both sides of street between North Gay Street and North Weatherlow Street.

     H.    North Street. South side of street between Weatherlow Street and Grand Avenue.

     I.      North Roop Street. East side of street between North Alley and Nevada Street.

     J.      South Roop Street. Both sides of street between Main Street and Cottage Street; east side of street between Mill Street and Court Street.

     K.    North Union Street. Both sides of street between Main Street and North Street.

     L.     South Union Street. Both sides of street between Main Street and Cottage Street.

     M.    Upland Street. South side of street between Covina Street and Laverne Street.

     N.    Shasta Street. West side of Shasta Street between Orchard and Modoc Streets.

     Angle parking requires the right front wheel of a vehicle to be within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb.

     When there is snow and/or ice on the paved portion of the street, the Susanville chief of police may prohibit angle parking in any or all of the aforementioned areas. In that event, the city shall cause to be posted temporary signs notifying the public that angle parking is prohibited. (Ord. 05-918 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-905 § 1, 2004: prior code § 13.23)

 

10.20.160 Erection of signs by department of public works.
     Whenever the department of public works shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, snow removal or for other reasons, the department of public works shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the department of public works shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the department of public works shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. (Prior code § 13.50)

 

10.20.170 Unlawful to operate or park vehicle contrary to signs.
     When signs authorized by the provisions of this chapter are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Prior code § 13.51)

 

10.20.180 Motorcycle parking places established on Pancera Plaza/South Gay Street.
     A.    As used in this section, “motorcycle” shall have the same definition as that contained in Section 400 of the California Vehicle Code.

     B.     Two motorcycle parking spaces are established at 20 South Gay Street and shall be marked with signs posted and indicating that they are for motorcycle parking only.

     C.     Two motorcycle parking spaces are established at 63 South Gay Street and shall be marked with signs posted and indicating that they are for motorcycle parking only.

     D.    It is unlawful for any vehicle other than a motorcycle to be parked in a motorcycle parking space designated herein. Violation of this section is an infraction. (Ord. 05-918 § 2, 2005)

 

10.20.190 Limited parking zone—Westerly side of Ash Street and easterly side of Ash Street, at and near Ash Street intersection with North Street.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or the driver of any vehicle, to park, stand, or stop such vehicle or any vehicle between the hours of six a.m. and six p.m. Monday through Friday, except holidays, in the following locations:

     A.    On the westerly side of Ash Street, from a point commencing at the southwest corner of the intersection of Ash Street and North Street, to a point fifty-seven (57) feet southerly of said corner; and

     B.     On the westerly side of Ash Street, from a point commencing at the northwest corner of the intersection of Ash Street and North Street, to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet northerly of said corner; and

     C.     On the easterly side of Ash Street, from a point commencing at the southeast corner of the intersection of Ash Street and North Street, to a point one hundred fifty-seven (157) feet southerly of said corner; and

     D.    On the easterly side of Ash Street, from a point commencing at the northeast corner of the intersection of Ash Street and North Street, to a point one hundred twenty-three (123) feet northerly of said corner.

     Signs giving notice of the foregoing parking prohibitions shall be posted. (Ord. 05-921 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 10.22 ABANDONED VEHICLES
10.22.010 Scope of chapter.
     This chapter deals with the abatement and removal of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles on private or public property, not including highways, and adopts a vehicle abatement program pursuant to Vehicle Code Sections 22660 through 22668. The authority and procedure for abating and removing abandoned vehicles from highways is contained in the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.020 Findings and declarations.
     In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations:

     The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.030 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained or open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. “Highway” includes “street.”

     “Inoperative vehicle” means a vehicle that cannot or may not be operated for mechanical or statutory reasons, including, but not limited to, flat tires, engine failure, electrical malfunction, or non-display of current license plates, tabs or stickers as required by Article IX of Chapter 1 of Division 3 of the California Vehicle Code. An inoperative vehicle also includes, but is not limited to, a vehicle which cannot be legally driven on any public street or other area due to lack of front headlights and rear brake lights, windshield, wipers, front and rear bumper(s), or any other equipment required by the California Vehicle Code, any vehicle defined as a “non-repairable vehicle” or “total loss salvage vehicle” by the California Vehicle Code.

     “Owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

     “Owner of the vehicle” means the last registered owner and the last legal owner of record.

     “Public property” does not include “highway.”

     “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 17-1011 § 2, 2017)

 

10.22.040 Abandoned vehicles hearing board established—Membership.
     There is established an abandoned vehicle hearing board. The board shall consist of three members, namely the city administrator, the city community development director and the city building official. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.050 Exceptions.
     This chapter shall not apply to:

     A.    A vehicle or part thereof that is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property;

     B.     A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard; provided, however, that this exception shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code, and this chapter. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.060 Regulations supplemental to other state and local provisions.
     This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.070 Administration and enforcement.
     Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city police chief or by any employee of the city appointed by him or her and acting under his or her direction, provided that the city police chief after approval by the city council shall file a written confirmation of appointment with the city clerk. In the enforcement of this chapter, such persons charged with administration and enforcement may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 06-936 § 1, 2006; Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.080 Right to enter on private property.
     When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.090 Fixing administrative costs.
     The city council shall from time to time, determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof, under this chapter. (Ord. 06-936 § 1, 2006; Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.100 Abatement and removal—Authority.
     Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the police chief or designated representative shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.110 Abatement and removal—Notice of intention.
     A.    A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof, as a public nuisance, shall be mailed by the city police chief or designated representative via registered mail to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The form of the notice shall be in substantially the following form:

 

Notice to Landowner:

 

“NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE”

 

(Name and address of owner of the land)

 

        “As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Section 10.22.070 of the Susanville Municipal Code, has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle registered to __________________, license or vin number, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provision of Section 10.22.020 of the Susanville Municipal Code.”

 

        “You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the city and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.”

 

        “As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the city council of the city of within such 10-day period, the city police chief shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.”

 

NOTICE MAILED: __________________________

 

_________________________________

City Chief of Police, City of Susanville

 

Notice to Vehicle Owner:

 

“NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE”

 

(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle - notice should be given to both if different.)

 

        “As the last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle - make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 10.22.070 of the Susanville Municipal Code has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provision of Section 10.22.020 of the Susanville Municipal Code.”

 

        “You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by removing said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of the mailing of this notice.”

 

        “As the registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. If such request is not received by the city council of the City of within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.”

 

Notice Mailed __________________

 

______________________________

Chief of Police, City of Susanville

 

     B.     A notice of intention to abate shall not be required if:

     1.     The property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waive further interest in the vehicle or part thereof, or

     2.     All the following conditions are satisfied:

     a.     The vehicle or part thereof is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and is incapable of being towed;

     b.     The vehicle or part thereof is valued at less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) by the police chief of the city of or his or her designee;

     c.     The building department and/or the police chief has determined that the vehicle or part thereof is a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety;

     d.     The property owner has signed a release authorizing the removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof; and

     e.     The vehicle is located upon a parcel that is either zoned for agricultural use or is not improved with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units.

     C.     If a vehicle is removed pursuant to subsection (B)(2) of this section, prior to final disposition, the registered or legal owner shall be notified of the intent to dispose of the vehicle or parts thereof. If the vehicle or part thereof is not claimed and removed from the scrapyard, automobile dismantler’s yard or public disposal area within twelve (12) days after the notice to dispose of vehicle is mailed, final disposition may proceed. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.120 Abatement and removal—Request for public hearing.
     A.    Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the police chief or his or her designated representative within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the abandoned vehicle hearing board established pursuant to Section 10.22.040 on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.

     B.     If the owner of the land submits a sworn, written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land within such ten (10) day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his or her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the city police chief or his or her designated representative via registered mail at least ten (10) days before the hearing date to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such request for a hearing is not received within ten (10) days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing, upon the written order of the city police chief or his or her designated representative, a copy of which order shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.130 Abatement and removal—Conduct of public hearing—Decision.
     A.    All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the abandoned vehicle hearing board established pursuant to Section 10.22.040, which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include the testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The board shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial.

     B.     The abandoned vehicle hearing board may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the board may find that a vehicle, or parts thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and by resolution order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or parts thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site, and a copy shall be filed with the city clerk.

     C.     If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the board shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land.

     D.    If the owner of the land submits a sworn, written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the board but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.140 Abatement and removal—Appeal.
     A.    Any interested party may appeal the decision of the abandoned vehicle hearing board established pursuant to Section 10.22.040 by filing a written notice of the appeal with the board within ten (10) days after its decision.

     B.     Such appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order to take other action deemed appropriate.

     C.     The city clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 10.22.120.

     D.    In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.150 Abatement and removal—When.
     Ten (10) days after the adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, or ten (10) days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision of such notice is required by Section 10.22.130, or five days after such action of the city council authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 5004, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.160 Abatement and removal—Notice and transmittals to Department of Motor Vehicles.
     Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given by the city police chief to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.170 Abatement and removal—Assessment of costs to landowners.
     If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.22.130 are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other county taxes. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

 

10.22.180 Penalties.
     A.    It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof, which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property including highways within the city in excess of seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours, unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in conjunction with a business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard.

     B.     It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to fail or to refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, or to refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 06-926 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 10.24 PARKING FOR THE PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED
10.24.010 Purpose.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to ensure that adequate parking spaces for the physically handicapped are provided in off-street parking facilities and to enforce the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 19955, et seq., Government Code Section 4450, et seq., and Vehicle Code Section 22511.8. (Prior code § 13.60)

 

10.24.020 Definitions.
     “Building permit” as used in this chapter, includes any permit or license which may be required for the construction, alteration, modification, repair, or addition to an off-street parking facility.

     “Off-street parking facility” refers to any lot or area, not in a street, road, highway or alley, improved for the purpose of allowing members of the general public to park upon said lot or area, irrespective of whether or not a charge is levied for the privilege of parking thereon, and includes parking facilities which are provided for the benefit or convenience of patrons, guests or employees of an establishment, building, structure, facility, complex or improved area, as well as parking facilities which are operated independently of such establishments, buildings, structures, facilities, complexes or improved areas.

     “Parking space” refers to a place or stall in which a vehicle may be parked or stored.

     “Vehicle” is as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 670. (Prior code § 13.61)

 

10.24.030 Building permits and space designations.
     A.    No building permit for the construction, alteration, modification, repair of or addition to an off-street parking facility shall be issued unless the person, firm or corporation applying for such permit first agrees that such off-street parking facility will contain parking spaces which are set aside and identified for the use of individuals with physical disabilities and, where applicable, that are accessible and approximate to the facility of which such off-street parking facility is a part, the number of such specially designated spaces to be determined by the planning commission at the time the application for such building permit is made.

     B.     Each said specifically designated parking space provided pursuant to this section shall be identified as being for the exclusive use of the handicapped in either of the following ways:

     1.     By posting immediately adjacent to, and visible from, each stall or space, a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white or a blue background;

     2.     By outlining or painting the stall or space in blue and outlining on the ground in the stall or space in white or suitable contrasting color a profile view depicting a wheelchair with occupant.

     C.     If posted in accordance with subsection E or F of this section, the owner or person in lawful possession of a privately owned or operated off-street parking facility, after notifying the police department, may cause the removal of a vehicle from a stall or space designated pursuant to subsection B of this section for physically handicapped persons in the facility to the nearest public garage unless a distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to Vehicle Code Sections 22511.5 or 22511.9 is displayed on the vehicle.

     D.    The local authority owning or operating an off-street parking facility, after notifying the police department, may cause the removal of a vehicle from a stall or space designated pursuant to subsection B of this section for physically handicapped persons in the facility to the nearest public garage unless a distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to Vehicle Code Sections 22511.5 or 22511.9 is displayed on the vehicle.

     E.     The posting required for an off-street parking facility owned and operated either privately or by a local authority shall consist of a sign not less than seventeen (17) by twenty-two (22) inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height which clearly and conspicuously states the following: “Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for physically handicapped persons will be towed away at owner’s expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed at ________________ (address) by telephoning ________________ (telephone number of local law enforcement agency).”

 

     The signs shall be posted in either of the following locations:

     1.     Immediately adjacent to and visible from the stall or space.

     2.     In a conspicuous place at each entrance to the off-street parking facility.

     F.     If the parking facility is privately owned and public parking is prohibited by a sign meeting the requirements of paragraph 1 of subdivision (a) of Section 22658 of the Vehicle Code, the requirements of subsection C of this section may be met by the posting of a sign immediately adjacent to, and visible from each stall or space indicating that a vehicle not displaying the distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 or 22511.9 will be removed at the owner’s expense and containing the telephone number of the local traffic law enforcement agency.

     G.    The provisions of this section shall not be construed to abrogate any other requirements imposed by this code for the issuance of building permits. (Prior code § 13.62)

 

10.24.040 Prohibitions.
     A.    No person, firm or corporation shall remove, obliterate or otherwise in any manner alter or destroy specially designated parking spaces provided for the exclusive use of the physically handicapped in any off-street parking facility.

     B.     Any person, firm or corporation in possession or control of an off-street parking facility in which specially designated parking spaces for the exclusive use of the physically handicapped have been removed, obliterated or otherwise in any manner altered or destroyed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be given notice by the planning commission that such person, firm or corporation shall, within ninety (90) days of the date of said notice, provide an equal number of specially designated parking spaces for the exclusive use of the physically handicapped as were present in the said off-street parking facility prior to their removal, obliteration, alteration or destruction, each said specially designated parking space to be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.24.030.

     C.     Service of the notice referred to in subsection B of this section shall be deemed sufficient if said notice is personally served or is served by certified mail, return receipt requested. (Prior code § 13.63)

 

10.24.050 Use of specially designated parking spaces.
     No person, firm or corporation shall park, leave or stop any vehicle in a parking space specially designated for the exclusive use of the physically handicapped, whether such parking space be identified as provided in Section 10.24.030, or as otherwise provided by law, unless such vehicle is displaying one of the distinguishing license plates or placards issued to disabled persons pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22511.5, or to disabled veterans, as specified in California Vehicle Code Section 9105. (Prior code § 13.64)

 

10.24.060 Penalty for violations.
     A.    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and shall be subject to a fine pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code.

     B.     Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of subsection A of Section 10.24.030 shall additionally be required to take the corrective action described in subsections B through F of Section 10.24.030 upon notice as provided in subsections B and C of Section 10.24.040.

     C.     Each failure to take the corrective action described in subsections B through F of Section 10.24.030 after notice has been given pursuant to subsections B and C of Section 10.24.040 shall be deemed to be a separate violation of this chapter.

     D.    All remedies provided for in this section shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Prior code § 13.65)

Chapter 10.28 PARKING DURING SNOW CONDITIONS ON STATE HIGHWAY
10.28.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare by prohibiting the parking of vehicles on state roadways in certain areas of Susanville, to promote effective and speedy removal of snow by the city and the State Department of Transportation or other persons engaged, hired, contracted or otherwise authorized to remove snow from the roadways, and to prevent hazardous traffic conditions on the roadways. (Prior code § 13.80)

 

10.28.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     A.    Generally whenever any words or phrases are used in this chapter, they are to be used as defined in the California Vehicle Code, or by California case law.

     B.     “Street” means that portion of any street, avenue, highway or other public way in the city improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, and includes improved shoulders.

     C.     “Unattended vehicle” means a vehicle where the licensed driver responsible for the vehicle is not within an audible distance and immediately available for moving the vehicle. (Prior code § 13.81)

 

10.28.030 Declarations of snow conditions.
     Snow conditions exist whenever there is three inches of snow or ice on any part of the paved portion of any street, limited to Main Street (California State Highway 36) and Ash Street (California State Highway 139), and the provisions of this chapter shall apply and shall remain in effect until the director of public works of the city, or designee, declares a cessation of snow conditions. Whenever possible, the director of public works shall give notice of such snow conditions by press or radio. (Prior code § 13.82)

 

10.28.040 Parking prohibited.
     During the existence of snow conditions, vehicles shall not be left stopped, parked, standing or otherwise unattended on Main Street (State Highway 36) and on Ash Street (State Highway 139) within the city limits. This section shall not prohibit the stopping of passenger vehicles for periods of time sufficient to load or discharge passengers from such vehicles. Where snow conditions have existed, parking may be resumed on Main Street and Ash Street as soon as snow plowing has been completed on the full width of such streets. (Prior code § 13.83)

 

10.28.050 Unattended vehicles—Violation.
     During snow conditions, it is unlawful for any vehicle to be stopped, parked, standing or otherwise left unattended on Main Street (State Highway 36) and on Ash Street (State Highway 139); the same is declared to be an obstruction to the public streets and shall constitute a nuisance and is declared to be an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Prior code § 13.84)

 

10.28.060 Removal of unattended vehicles.
     In the event any vehicle is stopped, parked, standing or left unattended in violation of the provisions of this chapter, any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed any such vehicle and to have such vehicle towed or otherwise removed to any public or private garage or parking area until claimed by the owner thereof as hereafter provided. (Prior code § 13.85)

 

10.28.070 Notice to owner of removal.
     Within forty-eight (48) hours after the removal of such vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the police chief shall notify, in writing, the person known to be the owner of such vehicle by the registration thereof, of the following facts:

     A.    A general description of the vehicle, together with the license number;

     B.     The approximate time and the reason for removal and the place to which removed. (Prior code § 13.86)

 

10.28.080 Warning signs.
     A.    Signs giving notice of the provisions of this chapter shall be erected at each entrance to the city. Such signs shall be at least three feet square and shall be worded substantially as follows:

 

WARNING

 

No parking on Main Street (State Highway 36) or on Ash Street (State Highway 139) wherever there is three inches of snow or ice on any part of those streets.

 

Susanville Municipal Code,
Sections 10.28.010—10.28.090.

 

VEHICLES IN VIOLATION WILL BE TOWED AT OWNERS EXPENSE

 

     B.     No vehicles shall be removed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless the signs required by this section have been erected at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal. (Prior code § 13.87)

 

10.28.090 Additional warning signs.
     Additional signs, smaller in size but containing substantially the same wording, may be erected at such places within the city as the director of public works deems appropriate. (Prior code § 13.88)

Chapter 10.32 PARKING DURING SNOW CONDITIONS ON CITY STREETS
10.32.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare by prohibiting the parking of vehicles on city streets within the city, to promote effective and speedy removal of snow by the city and the State Department of Transportation or other persons engaged, hired, contracted or otherwise authorized to remove snow from the roadways, and to prevent hazardous traffic conditions on the roadways. (Prior code § 13.90)

 

10.32.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     A.    Generally, whenever any words or phrases are used in this chapter, they are to be used as defined in the California Vehicle Code, or by California case law.

     B.     “Street” means that portion of any street, avenue, highway or other public way in the city improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicle travel, and includes improved shoulders.

     C.     “Unattended vehicle” means a vehicle where the licensed driver responsible for the vehicle is not within an audible distance and immediately available for moving the vehicle. (Prior code § 13.91)

 

10.32.030 Declaration of snow conditions.
     Snow conditions exist whenever there is three inches of snow or ice on any part of the paved portion of any street within the city, and the provisions of this chapter shall apply and shall remain in effect until the director of public works of the city, or his designee, declares a cessation of snow conditions. Whenever possible, the director of public works shall give notice of such snow conditions by press or radio. (Prior code § 13.92)

 

10.32.040 Parking prohibited.
     During the existence of snow conditions, vehicles shall not be left stopped, parked, standing or otherwise unattended on any street within the city limits. This section shall not prohibit the stopping of passenger vehicles for periods of time sufficient to load or discharge passengers from such vehicles. Where snow conditions have existed, parking may be resumed on any street as soon as snow plowing has been completed on the full width of such streets. (Prior code § 13.93)

 

10.32.050 Unattended vehicles—Violation.
     During snow conditions, it is unlawful for any vehicle to be stopped, parked, standing or otherwise left unattended on any street; the same is hereby declared to be an obstruction to the public streets and shall constitute a nuisance and is declared to be an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Prior code § 13.94)

 

10.32.060 Removal of unattended vehicles.
     In the event any vehicle is stopped, parked, standing or left unattended in violation of the provisions of this chapter, any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed any such vehicle and to have such vehicle towed or otherwise removed to any public or private garage or parking area and to have such vehicle stored in such garage or parking area until claimed by the owner thereof as hereafter provided. The owner shall be responsible for the fees for moving and storing the vehicle. (Prior code § 13.95)

 

10.32.070 Notice to owner of removal.
     Within forty-eight (48) hours after the removal of such vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the police chief shall notify, in writing, the person known to be the owner of such vehicle by the registration thereof, of the following facts:

     A.    A general description of the vehicle, together with the license number;

     B.     The approximate time and the reason for removal and the place to which removed. (Prior code § 13.96)

 

10.32.080 Warning signs.
     A.    Signs giving notice of the provisions of this chapter shall be erected at each entrance to the city. Such signs shall be at least three feet square and shall be worded substantially as follows:

 

WARNING

 

No parking on any street or highway within the City of Susanville wherever there is three inches of snow or ice on any part of those streets.

 

Susanville Municipal Code,
Sections 10.32.010—10.32.090.

 

VEHICLES IN VIOLATION WILL BE TOWED AT OWNERS EXPENSE.

 

     B.     No vehicles shall be removed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless the signs required by this section have been erected at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal. (Prior code § 13.97)

 

10.32.090 Additional warning signs.
     Additional signs, smaller in size but containing substantially the same wording, may be erected at such places within the city as the director of public works deems appropriate. (Prior code § 13.98)

Chapter 10.36 MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC CONTROL REGULATIONS
10.36.010 Pedestrians shall use crosswalks on certain portion of Main Street.
     It is unlawful for any pedestrian to completely or partially cross or attempt to cross Main Street within Zone A (as described in Section 10.04.010) in the city except in regularly established and marked crosswalks. (Prior code § 13.5-1)

 

10.36.020 “U” turns.
     The driver of a vehicle shall not, at the intersection of Main Street with Roop Street, the intersection of Main Street with Lassen Street, the intersection of Main Street with Gay Street, the intersection of Main Street with Union Street, the intersection of Main Street with Weatherlow Street or the intersection of Lassen Street with Cottage Street, turn such vehicle in a complete reverse turn so as to proceed in the opposite direction. (Prior code § 13.11)

 

10.36.030 Operation of motor vehicle within city park unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle within the boundaries of any city park or recreation facility without the permission of the director of parks and recreation or the chief of police. (Prior code § 13.30)

 

10.36.040 Loaded logging trucks allowed only on certain streets.
     It is unlawful for a logging truck loaded with one or more logs to be driven or otherwise moved upon any street within the city except on the following streets: South Street, from the west city limits to Richmond Road; Richmond Road; South Weatherlow Street; Riverside Drive; Cottage Street; Modoc Street; state highways; Alexander Avenue between Modoc Street and Riverside Drive. (Prior code § 13.40)

Title 11 (RESERVED)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Note
Chapter 12.04 STREET AND SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS GENERALLY
Chapter 12.08 PERMANENT ENCROACHMENTS
Chapter 12.12 SIDEWALK SNOW REMOVAL
Chapter 12.16 CLOSURE OF STREETS FOR SNOW SLEDDING
Chapter 12.20 CURB AND GUTTER INSTALLATION
Chapter 12.24 GRAFFITI REMOVAL AND PREVENTION PROGRAM
Chapter 12.28 MURALS
Chapter 12.32 PARKS
Chapter 12.36 TREES
Chapter 12.40 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING WITHIN THE INCORPORATED LIMITS OF THE CITY OF SUSANVILLE

Note
*      As to trustee on bonds issued under Streets and Highway Code, see Section 2.12.020 of this code. As to “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund,” see Section 3.24.010.

Chapter 12.04 STREET AND SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS GENERALLY
12.04.010 Obstructions—Generally.
     Except as provided in those limited circumstances provided for in Chapter 12.08, it is unlawful for any person to place, keep, have, erect or install on any street, sidewalk or alley of the city any fixture, appliance or obstruction of any nature whatsoever, except poles carrying wires for the transmission of electrical power or for the transmission of telephone or telegraph messages and except standards or posts upon which are placed receptacles or boxes for the deposit of materials received or sent through the United States mail; provided however, that on that portion of Main Street and its sidewalks of the city lying between Pine Street and Weatherlow Street, it is unlawful for any person to place, keep, maintain, have, erect or install any pole, post, fixture or obstruction of any nature whatsoever, and further provided, that this section shall not be construed to apply to cases where permits for temporary obstructions of sidewalks, streets or alleys are lawfully granted by the superintendent of streets. (Prior code § 17.1)

 

12.04.020 Obstructions—Construction or repair of buildings—Temporary permit to create obstruction.
     During the time that any property owner is causing to be made or making any repairs or alterations on his or her building in the city or is causing to be constructed or constructing a new building in the city, he or she shall be entitled to apply to the superintendent of streets and upon proper showing of the necessity thereof, shall be entitled to receive from the superintendent of streets a temporary permit allowing the property owner the use of the sidewalk directly in front, at the side of, or at the back of his or her property at one-third of the width thereof, for such time as to the superintendent of streets shall deem necessary and upon expiration of the permit before the improvement or work has been completed the property owner shall be entitled to have the permit renewed for such time as shall be necessary, provided that in all cases of renewals it shall be the duty of the property owner to establish to the satisfaction of the street superintendent that the property owner has prosecuted his or her work diligently and without unnecessary delays. However, the permission to use a portion of the sidewalks granted in this section is subject to the following restrictions: Anyone receiving such permit shall be liable for all damage caused by the use of the sidewalk, either to person or property. For the purpose of this section uses of the sidewalk hereinabove authorized shall be deemed not to be obstructions of the sidewalk. Anyone feeling aggrieved at the action of the street superintendent in connection with any of the matters set out in this section may appeal directly to the city council. (Prior code § 17.2)

 

12.04.030 Obstructions—Construction or repair of streets and sidewalks.
     For actual construction and repair of streets and sidewalks the street superintendent is authorized to issue such permits as he or she shall deem necessary and which are not in conflict with the state laws relating thereto. Anyone feeling aggrieved at the action of the street superintendent in connection with any of the matters set out in this section may appeal directly to the city council. (Prior code § 17.2)

 

12.04.040 Sign restrictions on public ways.
     No sign advertising a business or businesses conducted in or upon any premises which front upon any street or way within the city shall protrude upon or over the public way adjacent to such premises unless:

     A.    Such sign is wholly supported by a building or other structure located entirely upon such premises;

     B.     Such sign is at least twelve (12) feet above the adjacent public way and extends no closer than two feet to the curbline of such public way;

     C.     A permit therefor has been issued by the director of public works pursuant to an application therefor made upon a form prescribed by the director of public works; and

     D.    Such sign conforms to all other ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. (Prior code § 17.5(a))

 

12.04.050 Excavations—permit required.
     It is unlawful for any person to dig up, excavate or in any manner obstruct any public street, highway, square, avenue or alley in the city without having first obtained a permit therefor from the street superintendent of the city. (Prior code § 17.6)

 

12.04.060 Excavations—Application for permit.
     The permit required by Section 12.04.050 of this code may be granted by the street superintendent upon a written application made by or on behalf of the person desiring to dig up, excavate or obstruct such street, highway, square, avenue or alley, which written application must show the nature, extent and purpose of such digging up, excavation or obstruction. (Prior code § 17.7)

 

12.04.070 Excavations—Work to be diligently prosecuted—Refilling.
     No excavation or obstruction shall be allowed to remain in the streets, highways, squares, avenues or alleys a longer time than is reasonably necessary for the accomplishment of the purpose shown in the application. All excavations must be promptly refilled as soon as the work is accomplished, in a workmanlike manner. The street, highway, square, avenue, or alley must be placed in as good repair and condition as it was prior to such excavation. Such refilling shall be done in such manner as may be prescribed by the street superintendent. (Prior code § 17.8)

 

12.04.080 Excavations—Authority of street superintendent.
     The street superintendent shall have full power and authority to supervise and direct such excavation and the refilling and repair and replacement of such portions of such street, highway, square, avenue or alley. (Prior code § 17.9)

Chapter 12.08 PERMANENT ENCROACHMENTS
12.08.010 Purposes.
     In order to promote the historical significance of certain areas of the city, permanent encroachments identified in Section 4505 of the Uniform Building Code may be constructed provided the following criteria are met; pillars attached to the marquee shall also be allowed provided the following criteria are met:

     A.    The property on which the marquee with pillars may be constructed must lie entirely within the area bounded by Pine Street, North Street, Weatherlow Street and Cottage Street;

     B.     Property fronting on Main Street must obtain the necessary permits and approval from California Department of Transportation (Cal-Trans) in addition to the city’s requirements;

     C.     A written construction and encroachment permit shall be obtained from the city engineer/public works department for the subject marquee with pillars, after review and approval of the planning commission;

     D.    The construction portion of the permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. (Prior code § 17.30)

 

12.08.020 Permits.
     A.    Application. The city engineer shall prescribe and provide a regular form of application for the use of any applicant for the permit required by this chapter. The application form shall contain space for the name, address and principal places of business of the applicant, together with such detail as in the judgment of the city engineer is necessary to establish the exact location, dimensions, engineering specifications, design and purpose of the proposed marquee and pillars. An indemnity and hold harmless agreement, duly acknowledged by a notary public, designating the legal description and street location shall be executed by the applicant and submitted with the application. Upon issuance of the permit, the agreement shall be recorded in the official records of Lassen County, state of California. The agreement shall bind the heirs, successors and assigns to the applicant.

     B.     Permit Application Exhibits. The applicant shall enclose with, attach or add to the application for a permit a map, plat, sketch, diagram or similar exhibit, and of a size and in such quantity as the city engineer may prescribe, on which shall be plainly shown any and all information necessary to locate, delineate, illustrate or identify the proposed marquee and pillars and the right of applicant to so use or encroach thereon.

     C.     Consent of Public Bodies—Evidence to be Filed. The applicant shall also enclose with, attach or add to the application the written order or consent to any work thereunder, required by law of the Public Utilities Commission, California Department of Transportation (Cal-Trans), sanitary districts, water districts or any other public body having jurisdiction. A permit shall not be issued until and unless such order or consent is first obtained and evidence thereof filed with the city engineer. The permittee shall keep himself or herself adequately informed of all state and federal laws and local ordinances and regulations which in any manner affect the permit. The applicant shall at all times comply with all such laws, ordinances, regulations, decisions, court and similar authoritative orders.

     D.    Liability for Damages. Permittee shall be responsible for all liability imposed by law for personal injury or property damage proximately caused by work permitted and done by permittee, permittee’s agents, employees and assigns, under the permit, or proximately caused by failure by permittee, permittee’s agents, employees or assigns, to perform obligations under the permit in respect to maintenance. If any claim of such liability is made against the city, its officers or employees, then in such event the permittee, permittee’s agents, employees and assigns, shall defend, indemnify and hold the city, its officers or employees, and each of them, harmless from such claim insofar as permitted by law. The permit, upon approval, shall not be issued until permittee has provided to the city a certificate of insurance for general liability coverage for property damage and personal injury, in the sum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), on which the city is named as additional insured. The coverage shall be maintained in full force and effect by permittee and any successor permittee during the entire life of the permit. The city council shall periodically review the liability limits required in this chapter and increase same in order to protect the public interest and general welfare. Failure to procure or maintain such insurance shall be grounds for revocation and cancellation of the permit and city may restore the right-of-way to its former condition, all at the expense of the permittee.

     E.     Fees. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall deposit with the city cash or check in a sufficient sum to cover the fee for issuance of the permit, charges for field investigation, and the fee for necessary inspection. The schedule of fees will be those established and adopted by the council from time to time by resolution.

     F.     Term of Permit—Beginning of Work. The permittee shall bring the work or use authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, within ninety (90) days from date of issuance, unless a different period is stated in the permit. If the work or use is not begun within ninety (90) days, or within the time stated in the permit, then the permit shall become void.

     G.    Location of Permit. A permit may be kept at the place of business of the permittee or otherwise safeguarded during the term of validity, but shall be available to an authorized representative of the city engineer or law enforcement officer within a reasonable time after demand therefor is made.

     H.    Changes in Permit. No changes may be made in the location, dimension or character of the encroachment as granted by the permit except upon written authorization of the city engineer.

     I.      No permit allowed by this chapter shall be issued by the city engineer until the planning commission has reviewed the application, exhibits and given written approval of the project. In case the applicant or any other person is not satisfied with the action of the planning commission on any use permit or variance application, he or she may, within five days, appeal in writing to the city council. Upon receipt of such appeal, the city council shall set the matter for public hearing, notice thereof to be given as provided by law. Notice shall also be given as provided by law. Notice shall also be given to the planning commission, which shall submit a report to the city council setting forth the reasons for the action taken by the commission. Such report shall be submitted in writing or by representation at the hearing. The city council shall render its decision not more than forty-five (45) days after the close of the hearing. (Prior code § 17.31)

 

12.08.030 Bond.
     A.    Surety Bond Required. Upon approval and prior to issuance of the permit, the applicant must file with the city engineer a bond equal to the cost plus twenty (20) percent of the work required to be done in order to comply with all the terms and conditions of such permit.

     B.     Cash in lieu of Surety Bond. In lieu of a surety bond required by subsection A of this section, the applicant may deposit cash in the amount named in subsection A of this section to secure the performance of the terms and conditions of the permit and the compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     Bond for Continuing Use. An applicant for a permit for an encroachment which is to continue or remain within, under or upon the right-of-way of a public way shall file with the clerk or cash deposit or surety bond equal to the cost plus twenty (20) percent in making the right-of-way safe and convenient for travel to the general public, including but not limited to repairs, replacement and upkeep of any encroachment allowed by the permit.

     D.    Additional Bond or Cash Deposit. The city engineer may require an additional bond or cash deposit required by subsections A through D of this section at any time when in his or her opinion the amount of the bond or cash deposit previously made is insufficient. The additional bond or cash deposit shall be provided within ten (10) working days.

     E.     Requirements of Bond Provisions. The aforesaid bonds shall be executed by the applicant or contract doing work as principal and by a surety company authorized to do business in the state as surety. The bond shall name the city as obligee and shall be conditioned as follows:

     1.     That each and all of the terms and conditions of the permit shall be fully performed and complied with to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

     2.     That each and all of the provisions of this chapter are complied with.

     An extension of time for performance of work may be granted by the city engineer, but no such extension of time shall be valid unless written and no such extension shall release any surety company upon any bond. In the event an extension is granted, permittee shall provide to the city proof that the bonding requirements have been met for the extension period.

     F.     Bond Payable to the City. Any bond or cash deposit required by the city engineer pursuant to this chapter shall be payable to the city. Upon satisfactory completion of all work authorized in the permit according to the terms of the permit and this chapter, the bond or cash deposit shall be released. (Prior code § 17.32)

 

12.08.040 Erection and maintenance of safety provisions.
     A.    Duties of Permittee—Safeguards. The permittee in the conduct of the work, use or maintenance, of an encroachment authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall provide, erect and/or maintain such lights, barriers, warning signs, patrols, watchmen and other safeguards as are necessary to protect the traveling public. Any omission on the part of the city engineer to specify in the permit what lights, barriers or other protective measures or devices shall not excuse the permittee from complying with all requirements of law and appropriate regulations and ordinances for adequately protecting the safety of those using public streets. If, at any time, the city engineer finds that suitable safeguards are not being provided, the city may provide, erect, maintain, relocate or remove such safeguards as are deemed necessary or may cancel the permit and restore the right-of-way to its former conditions, all at the expense of the permittee.

     B.     Duties of Permittee—Excavations and Obstruction. A permittee making any excavation or erecting or leaving any obstruction within, under or upon the right-of-way, or causing the same to be made, erected or left, shall place and maintain lights at each end of the excavation or obstruction, at not more than fifty (50) foot intervals along the excavation or obstruction, from one-half hour before sunset of each day to one-half hour after sunrise of the next day, until the excavation is entirely refilled or the obstruction removed and the right-of-way made safe for use. In addition, reflectorized warning signs conforming to the requirements of the California Division of Highways shall be placed two hundred (200) feet and four hundred (400) feet from each excavation or obstruction, in such a position as to adequately warn public traffic. (Prior code § 17.33)

 

12.08.050 Notification.
     A.    Beginning of Work. Before beginning any work on the marquee and pillar permanent encroachment project authorized by a permit, the permittee shall notify the city engineer.

     B.     Completion of Work. The permittee shall upon completion of all work authorized in the permit, notify the city engineer. No work shall be deemed to be completed until notification of completion is given pursuant to this section and the work is approved in writing by the city engineer. (Prior code § 17.34)

 

12.08.060 Care of drainage.
     If the work, use or encroachment authorized in the permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall interfere with established drainage, the permittee shall provide for proper drainage as directed by the city engineer. (Prior code § 17.35)

 

12.08.070 Interference with use.
     All work or use shall be planned and executed in a manner that will least interfere with the safe and convenient travel of the general public at the place where the work or use is authorized. Free and unobstructed access shall be provided to all mailboxes, fire hydrants, water gates, valves, manholes, drainage structure and/or other public service structures and property as may be required for emergency use. Such public service structures or property shall not be removed or relocated without proper accordance with the properly constituted authorities charged with their control and maintenance. The work area shall be confined so as not to obstruct roadways and walks unnecessarily. Temporary roadways, driveways and walks for vehicles and pedestrians shall be constructed where required. (Prior code § 17.36)

 

12.08.080 Restoring of street—Maintenance of encroachment.
     Upon completion of the work, acts or things for which the permit was issued, or when required by the city engineer, the permittee shall replace, repair or restore the public street and right-of-way at the place of work to the same condition existing prior thereto unless otherwise provided in the permit. The permittee shall remove all obstructions, impediments, material or rubbish caused or placed upon the right-of-way of the public street under the permit, and shall do any other work or perform any act necessary to restore the public street, right-of-way, and encroachments authorized under the permit, to a safe and usable condition.

     After completion of all work, the permittee shall exercise reasonable care in inspecting and maintaining encroachment authorized by the permit and the area affected by the encroachment. The permittee shall at all times repair and make good any injury or damage to any portion of the street or right-of-way which occurs as the result of work done under the permit, including any and all injury or damage to the street or right-of-way, which would not have occurred had such work not been done. By the acceptance of the permit the permittee agrees to comply with the above. The permittee shall, upon notice from the city engineer, immediately repair any injury, damage or nuisance, in any portion of the right-of-way, or the encroachment authorized by the permit. In the event that the permittee fails to act promptly or should the exigencies of the injury or damages require repairs or replacement to be made before the permittee can be notified or can respond to notification, the city may, at its option, make the necessary repairs or replacements or perform the necessary work and the permittee or his successors, heirs and assigns shall be charged with all expenses incurred in the performance of such work. (Prior code § 17.37)

 

12.08.090 Standards, supervision and inspection.
     All work done under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall conform to specifications established by the city engineer, or in the absence of established specifications to recognized standards of construction and approved practices in connection with the work to be done. All work shall be done subject to the supervision of, and to the satisfaction of, the city engineer. (Prior code § 17.38)

 

12.08.100 Storage of material.
     No material shall be stored within the traveled way or sidewalk, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. Excess earth materials from trenching or other operations shall be removed from the pavement, traveled way, or shoulder as the trench is backfilled or other work carried forward unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. (Prior code § 17.39)

 

12.08.110 Small pipes.
     Utility services and other small diameter pipes or rigid conduits shall be jacked or otherwise forced underneath a paved surface. The paved surface of a road shall not be cut, trenched or otherwise disturbed unless specifically authorized in the permit. No tunneling will be permitted except as specifically set forth in the permit. (Prior code § 17.40)

 

12.08.120 Minimum cover.
     The minimum cover over any and all pipes or conduits larger than two and one-half inches installed within the right-of-way shall be three feet over each, unless otherwise specified in the permit. Within the public street, the minimum cover of three feet shall be measured from the surface, existing or planned. The city engineer is authorized to permit installation of pipes or conduits where three feet of cover cannot be provided because of topography, structures or other engineering necessity. (Prior code § 17.41)

 

12.08.130 Backfilling.
     Backfilling of an excavation shall be in accordance with specifications established by the city engineer or as otherwise required by him or her, both as to material and method; and backfill shall not be placed in an excavation without compaction of the material used therein, the degree and method thereof to be to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Prior code § 17.42)

 

12.08.140 Poles and transmission line carriers.
     Clearances and types in the construction of poles and transmission line carriers shall be in accordance with rules, regulations and orders of the Public Utilities Commission and other public agencies having jurisdiction.

     No guy wires are to be attached to trees without specific authorization to do so in the permit, and in no event shall guy wires be so attached as to girdle the tree or interfere with its growth. Guy wires shall not be below the minimum elevation above the ground, prescribed in the rules, orders and regulations of the Public Utilities Commission.

     When a pole, brace, stub or similar timber is removed and not replaced, the entire length thereof shall be removed from the ground and the hole backfilled and compacted. (Prior code § 17.43)

 

12.08.150 Aids to visibility.
     When the location or position of a pole or other obstruction makes accentuation of its visibility to vehicular traffic necessary, the city engineer may require that the pole or other obstruction be painted or equipped with reflectors or other aids to visibility prescribed or authorized by the Public Utilities Commission or the Department of Public Works of the state of California at the expense of the permittee. (Prior code § 17.44)

Chapter 12.12 SIDEWALK SNOW REMOVAL
12.12.010 Snow removal—Duty of property owner.
     Every person owning any real estate fronting on that portion of Main Street lying between Roop Street and Weatherlow Street shall be, and is required to immediately remove therefrom, at an hour not later than ten a.m., any snow which may fall on the sidewalk area immediately in front of such property owner’s property. (Prior code § 17.14)

 

12.12.020 Snow removal—Removal by city.
     In case any property owner shall fail to remove the snow immediately on notice from the chief of police, then the chief of police may cause such snow to be removed and the expense thereof shall be a charge against the property. (Prior code § 17.15)

Chapter 12.16 CLOSURE OF STREETS FOR SNOW SLEDDING
12.16.010 Power of superintendent of streets.
     The superintendent of streets is authorized, when in his or her opinion there is sufficient depth and quality of snow upon Mill Street and North Railroad Avenue in the city for purposes of sledding, to close that portion of Mill Street lying between the easterly line of Pine Street and the westerly line of Lassen Street and that portion of North Railroad Avenue lying between the westerly line of Prospect Avenue and a line parallel to and one hundred (100) feet easterly from the easterly line of Richmond Road to vehicular traffic for the purpose of providing safe sledding areas for children. (Prior code § 17.01)

 

12.16.020 Method of closing.
     The closure of such portions of such streets, provided in the next preceding section, shall be effected by erecting or placing barricades at all intersections with and entrances to such portions of such streets and shall be effective when such barricades are erected or placed. Barricades erected or placed pursuant hereto shall clearly indicate that vehicular traffic is prohibited beyond such barricades. (Prior code § 17.02)

 

12.16.030 Motor vehicles prohibited on closed streets—Removal of barricades prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to drive, operate or park any motor vehicle in, upon or across any part of the portions of Mill Street and North Railroad Avenue described in Section 12.16.010 while any or all of the barricades mentioned in Section 12.16.030 are in place and it shall be unlawful for any person to move, alter, remove or relocate any barricade, or portion thereof, erected or placed pursuant to Section 12.16.030 except upon the direct order or authorization of the superintendent of streets. (Prior code § 17.03)

 

12.16.040 Sledding permitted on closed streets.
     During the times that the portions of Mill Street and North Railroad Avenue described in this chapter are closed to vehicular traffic as provided in this chapter, it shall be lawful to use, ride and operate sleds and sledding equipment, except bobsleds, in and upon such portions of such streets. (Prior code § 17.04)

Chapter 12.20 CURB AND GUTTER INSTALLATION
12.20.010 Required when making improvements to existing structures.
     It shall be unlawful for any person having charge or control of any lot or premises, improved or unimproved, within the city, either as owner, agent, lessee, tenant or otherwise, to make improvements thereon, or to make improvements to any building or structure existing thereon or to make improvements thereon in addition to buildings or structures existing thereon of a value of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more, cumulative over three years, without simultaneously constructing and installing curbs, gutters, and driveways upon that portion of the public way abutting upon such premises and lying between the property line and the curbline of such public way or streets as such curbline is established by existing curbs or by the superintendent of streets of the city. If curb and gutter exists upon that portion of the public way abutting upon such lot or premises then sidewalks must be installed.

     It shall be unlawful for any person having charge or control of any lot or premises, improved or unimproved, within the city, either as owner, agent, lessee, tenant or otherwise, to make improvements thereon, or to make improvements to any building or structure existing thereon or to make improvements thereon in addition to buildings or structures existing thereon of a value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more, cumulative over three years, without simultaneously constructing and installing curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and driveways upon that portion of the public way abutting upon such premises and lying between the property line and the curbline of such public way or streets as such curbline is established by existing curbs or by the superintendent of streets of the city. (Ord. 10-972 § 1, 2010; prior code § 6.12)

 

12.20.020 Conformity with certain requirements.
     Curbs, gutters and driveways constructed in accordance with the requirements of Section 12.20.010 shall, in all portions of the city zoned “C” (commercial), extend from the property line to the curbline and shall contain such “knockout blocks” for tree planting as may be directed by the city superintendent of streets and shall in all respects conform to the requirements of the most recently adopted “City Standard Construction Details and Standards for Public Works Construction within the City of Susanville for Construction Projects” as amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. Curbs, gutters, driveways, and sidewalks installed in accordance with the provisions of Section 12.20.010 shall, in all portions of the city, except those portions zoned “C” commercial, be of such width and in such location as prescribed by the superintendent of streets of the city and shall in all respects conform to the requirements of the most recently adopted “City Standard Construction Details and Standards for Public Works Construction within the City of Susanville for Construction Projects” as amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 10-972 § 2, 2010; prior code § 6.13)

 

12.20.030 Reconstruction of nonconforming curbs, gutters, etc., existing upon adjoining portions of public way.
     Sections 12.20.010 and 12.20.020 of this chapter shall apply as to any lot or premises within the city where there are in existence upon adjoining portions of the public way curbs, gutters, sidewalks, or driveways or any one or more of them which do not conform in all respects to the requirements of the most recently adopted “City Standard Construction Details and Standards for Public Works Construction within the City of Susanville for Construction Projects” as amended from time to time by resolution of the city council or where existing, curb, gutter, sidewalk, and driveways are substantially damaged, crumbled, or otherwise in poor condition. In such cases it is unlawful for the person or persons having charge or control of such lot or premises, whether as owner, agent, lessee, tenant, or otherwise, or to make improvements thereon to any building or structure existing thereon or to make improvements thereon in addition to buildings or structures existing thereon of a value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more unless simultaneously such person shall reconstruct such nonconforming curbs, gutters, sidewalks and driveways, or such of them as do not conform to the most recently adopted “City Standard Construction Details and Standards for Public Works Construction within the City of Susanville for Construction Projects” as amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 10-972 § 3, 2010; prior code § 6.14)

 

12.20.031 Maintenance and repair of sidewalks.
     A.    The owners of lots or portions of lots underlying, adjacent to, or fronting on any portion of a sidewalk area along a street pavement line, including parking strips, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and persons in possession of such lots by virtue of any permit or right shall repair and maintain such sidewalk areas. In the event that the city repairs and/or maintains such sidewalk areas, the property owner and/or person in possession shall pay the costs and expenses therefore, as well as the costs of inspection and administration whenever the city awards a contract for such repair and maintenance, including the costs of collection of assessments for the costs of maintenance and repair, or the handling of any lien placed on the property due to failure of the property owner and/or person in possession to promptly pay such assessments.

     B.     For the purposes of this part, repair and maintenance of sidewalk area shall include, but not be limited to, maintenance and repair of surfaces including grinding, removal and replacement of sidewalks, repair and maintenance of curb and gutters, removal and filling or replacement of parking strips, removal of weeds and/or debris, tree root pruning, and installing root barriers, trimming of shrubs and/or ground cover and trimming shrubs within the area adjacent to the street pavement line including parking strips and curbs, so that the sidewalk area will remain in a condition that is not dangerous to property or to persons using the sidewalk in a reasonable manner and will be in a condition which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of said sidewalk area.

     C.     Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5614 of the California Streets and Highways Code, the director of public works may in his or her discretion, and for sufficient cause, extend the period within which required repair and maintenance of sidewalk areas must commence by a period of not to exceed ninety (90) days from the time the notice referred to in said Section 5614 is given. (Ord. 05-914 § 1, 2005)

 

12.20.032 Liability for injuries to the public.
     The property owner and persons in possession of such lots by virtue of any permit or right, required by Section 12.20.031 to maintain and repair the sidewalk area shall owe a duty to members of the public to keep and maintain the sidewalk area in a safe and non-dangerous condition. If, as a result of the failure of any property owner, and persons in possession of such lots by virtue of any permit or right, to maintain the sidewalk area in a non-dangerous condition as required by Section 12.20.031, any person suffers injury or damage to person or property, the property owner and persons in possession of such lots by virtue of any permit or right, shall be liable to such person for the resulting damages or injury. (Ord. 05-914 § 1, 2005)

 

12.20.040 Deferment.
     When it is determined by the city superintendent of streets that it would be inappropriate or impractical to install curb, gutter, sidewalk, or driveway improvements or any one or more of them as required by Section 12.20.010, the construction of said improvements may be deferred until a later time as provided for by this section.

     A deferment of the curb, gutter, sidewalk or driveway, or one or more of them, may be granted on the basis of a construction difficulty that would make the installation of such improvements inappropriate or impractical as determined by the city superintendent of streets. A deferment granted on the basis of a construction difficulty will remain valid until the construction difficulty that has been used as the basis for the deferment is alleviated.

     Upon notification from the city that the deferment is no longer in effect because the construction difficulty has been alleviated, the property owner of record will have twelve (12) months from the date of the notification to install curb, gutter, sidewalk, and/or driveway.

     Partial installation of curb, gutter, sidewalk or driveway, or one or more them, may be required in addition to deferment of the remainder of curb, gutter, sidewalk and/or driveway. These situations will be examined on a case by case basis and details of such partial installation will be a component of the deferment agreement; which agreement, when executed, will be recorded to provide notice to future owners. (Ord. 10-972 § 6, 2010; prior code § 6.15)

 

12.20.050 Issuance of building permit conditioned on compliance with chapter and deposit of sum of money equal to cost of construction or reconstruction.
     The building inspector or the building official of the city shall not issue a building permit for any of the improvements, additions or structures or remodeling mentioned in this chapter unless the person applying for such building permit has received an encroachment permit from the city of Susanville public works department and deposited with the public works department a sum of money or a bond in form satisfactory to the superintendent of streets equal to the cost, as determined by the superintendent of streets, of constructing or reconstructing such curb, gutters, sidewalks, and driveways. (Ord. 10-972 § 7, 2010; prior code § 6.16)

 

12.20.060 Notice to owner, etc., of violations—Cost when work done by city to be lien on property generally.
     Whenever any person having charge or control of any lot or premises, either as owner or agent, lessee, tenant or otherwise fails or refuses to do any of the things provided and required by this chapter it shall be the duty of the city superintendent of streets to give written notice of such failure to comply with this chapter by posting a notice on such lot or premises and also by leaving a copy of such notice with any occupant of such lot or premises. Written notice shall also be given to the owner of the lot by depositing the notice in the post office of Susanville, California, with postage fully prepaid, addressed to such owner at the address shown upon the last equalized assessment roll of the county or the last known address of such owner. If the owner is a nonresident, and owner’s address is not known, the notice shall be addressed to him or her at Susanville, California. The notice shall briefly describe the work to be done and shall refer to this chapter and shall contain a notification that unless the work is done within thirty (30) days from the date of posting of the notice on the lot, the city superintendent of streets will do or cause to be done the work and that the costs and expenses of such work will be charged to and made a lien upon such lot or premises. (Ord. 10-972 § 8, 2010; prior code § 6.17)

 

12.20.070 Violations deemed misdemeanors.
     A wilful violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. Any wilful or intentional misrepresentation of any fact made for the purpose of influencing the action of the building official of the city or the city council or any other public officer or body shall be a violation of this chapter. (Prior code § 6.18)

 

12.20.080 Enforcement of chapter.
     It shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets to enforce this chapter. The building inspector or building official shall cooperate with the superintendent of streets and provide information as may be required in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. The building inspector or building official shall determine to costs of improvements when the building permit is requested. The primary duty of enforcing this chapter is placed upon the superintendent of streets of the city. (Ord. 10-972 § 10, 2010; prior code § 6.19)

 

12.20.090 Procedure for work to be done by city upon failure of owner to comply with notice—Notice of cost of work.
     If the work described in the notice is not commenced and prosecuted to completion within the time required by the notice the superintendent of streets shall, as soon as time and weather permit, do or cause to be done the work mentioned and described in the notice. Upon the completion of the work, the superintendent of streets shall cause notice of the cost of the work to be given in the manner specified in this chapter for the giving of the notice provided in Section 12.20.060, which notice shall specify the day, hour and place when the legislative body will hear and pass upon a report by the superintendent of streets of the cost of the work, together with any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of such work and any other interested persons. (Prior code § 6.20)

 

12.20.100 Procedure for work to be done by city upon failure of owner to comply with notice—Report to council.
     Upon the completion of the work, the superintendent of streets shall prepare and file with the city council a report specifying the work which has been done, the cost of the work, a description of the real property in front of which the work has been done and the assessment against each lot or parcel of land proposed to be levied to pay the cost thereof. (Prior code § 6.21)

 

12.20.110 Procedure for work to be done by city upon failure of owner to comply with notice—Hearing— Modification and confirmation of report—Decisions of council to be final.
     Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing the city council shall hear and pass upon the report of the superintendent of streets, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the work and any other interested person. The city council may make such revision, correction or modifications in the report as it may deem just, after which by motion or resolution the report as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The decisions of the city council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 6.22)

 

12.20.120 Procedure for work to be done by city upon failure of owner to comply with notice—Assessment of cost against property—Certificate to be filed in county recorder’s office—Foreclosure or unpaid lien.
     The cost of the repair may be assessed by the city council against the parcel of property fronting upon the sidewalk area upon which such work was done and such cost so assessed, if not paid within five days after its confirmation by the city council, shall constitute a special assessment against that parcel of property, and shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof which lien shall continue until the assessment is paid, or is discharged of record. The superintendent of streets shall file in the office of the county recorder a certificate substantially in the form provided in Section 5626 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state, except for the provisions therein as to interest. If any such lien is not paid, the city may file and maintain an action to foreclose such lien. (Prior code § 6.23)

 

12.20.130 Exemption.
     Alleys within the city shall be exempt from the requirements of Sections 12.20.020, 12.20.030, and 12.20.150. Streets within the city that are non-conventional city streets as defined in Section 12.20.150 shall be exempt from the requirements of Sections 12.20.010, 12.20.020 and 12.20.030. (Ord. 10-972 § 15, 2010; prior code § 6.23-1)

 

12.20.140 Partial installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks or driveways.
     The partial installation of curb, gutter, sidewalk, or driveway or one or more of them may be considered where there exist large lots or street fronts wherein strict conformance with Section 12.20.010 or 12.20.030 would require the installation of more than seventy-five (75) linear feet of curb, gutter, sidewalk and driveways or any one or more of them. In such cases, the city superintendent of streets may reduce the amount of curb, gutter, sidewalk and/or driveways or one or more of them, after considering the overall cost of improvements. The building official will determine the cost of improvements when the building permit is requested. (Ord. 10-972 § 16, 2010)

 

12.20.150 Definitions.
     Improvement. “Improvement,” for the purpose of this chapter, is defined as any work that is done on a lot or premises that is not the curb, gutter, sidewalk or driveway approach within the public right-of-way.

     Non-conventional City Street. “Non-conventional city street,” for the purpose of this chapter, is generally defined as a roadway, within the city, where it would not be appropriate to install curb, gutter, sidewalk and driveways. As examples: (1) a street that has been constructed on an elevated roadbed such that the elevation of the edge of the roadway is higher than abutting properties may be considered a non-conventional street; (2) a street that has adjacent to it a paved pedestrian/bicycle path that is a minimum of eight feet wide may also be considered a non-conventional city street. The city superintendent of streets shall make the determination as to which streets in the city are non-conventional city streets.

 

     Construction Difficulty. “Construction difficulty,” for the purpose of this chapter, is defined as an existing site condition such that the topography, terrain, off-site drainage patterns, or any other physical construction related issues would, in the opinion of the city superintendent of streets, make the installation of curb, gutter, sidewalk, driveway or any one or more to them, impractical or inappropriate. (Ord. 10-972 § 17, 2010)

Chapter 12.24 GRAFFITI REMOVAL AND PREVENTION PROGRAM
Article I. Violation—Removal
12.24.010 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program for removal of graffiti from walls and structures on both public and private property and to provide regulations designed to prevent and control the further spread of graffiti in the city. The increase of graffiti on both public and private buildings, structures and places is creating a condition of blight within the city which results in a deterioration of property and business values for adjacent and surrounding properties, all to the detriment of the city. The city council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance which must be abated so as to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the city and to prevent the further spread of graffiti. (Prior code § 14-B.1)

 

12.24.020 Graffiti defined.
     For the purpose of this chapter, “graffiti” means the unauthorized spraying of paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public and private buildings, structures and places. (Prior code § 14-B.2)

 

12.24.030 Graffiti prohibited.
     A.    No person shall place graffiti or other writing upon any public or privately owned permanent building, structure or place located on publicly or privately owned real property within the city.

     B.     No person owning or otherwise in control of any real property within the city shall permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or remain on any permanent structure located on such property when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property, for a period in excess of that described in this chapter for notice and removal of graffiti.

     C.     Violation of this chapter is an infraction. (Prior code § 14-B.3)

 

12.24.040 Notice to abate.
     Whenever the city administrator or designee determines that graffiti exists on any permanent structure in the city which is visible from the street or other public or private property, he or she shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice to remove the graffiti or the property will be subject to abatement by the city. (Prior code § 14-B.4)

 

12.24.050 Service of notice.
     The notice to abate graffiti shall be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises as such owner’s name and address appears on the last equalized property tax assessment rolls. In addition, if there is a commercial tenant using the premises, the notice shall also be served on said tenant. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent in care of the property address. The notice required by this chapter may be served in any one of the following manners:

     A.    By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property;

     B.     By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the last known address of said owner. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address. In addition, where the property is occupied, a copy of the notice shall be delivered to the occupant. (Prior code § 14-B.5)

 

12.24.060 Removal of graffiti.
     A.    Property Owner’s Consent to Remove. Whenever the city administrator or designee determines that graffiti exists on any permanent structure in the city which is visible from the street or other public or private property, and a notice to abate has been served as provided in Section 12.24.050, and the graffiti has not been abated within ten (10) days from the date of service, the city administrator or his or her designee is authorized to provide for and use public funds, if necessary, to remove graffiti upon the following conditions:

     1.     Public Property. Whenever the city administrator or his or her designee determines that graffiti exists upon property owned by the city, it shall be removed as soon as possible. When the property is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of the graffiti is authorized after securing written consent of the public agency having jurisdiction over the property.

     2.     Private Property. Where the subject property is privately owned, the removal of graffiti is authorized after the city administrator, or his or her designee, secures the written consent of the owner of the property and the owner executes a release and waiver approved as to form by the city attorney.

     3.     The graffiti shall be removed as authorized herein, but the removal shall not involve the painting or repair of a more extensive area that is necessary for such removal.

     B.     Removal by City Without Consent of Property Owner. The city administrator may initiate proceedings to abate any graffiti maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter only after the following has occurred:

     1.     A notice to abate has been issued and served; and

     2.     The property owner has failed to either remove the graffiti or consent to its removal by the city within the time period specified in the notice to abate. (Prior code § 14-B.6)

 

12.24.070 Hearing prior to abatement, notice of hearing.
     A.    Prior to the city abating graffiti on private property without the consent of the owner, a hearing before the city administrator or his or her designee shall be held, at which time the property owner shall be given an opportunity to be heard regarding the proposed abatement. A notice of the time and place of the hearing before the city administrator or his or her designee shall be sent to the property owner not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Service shall be as set forth in Section 12.24.050, and copy therefor shall be conspicuously posted on the affected premises on the date the notice is so served. Said notice shall be posted and served at least ten (10) days before the time fixed for such hearing; proof of such posting and service of notice shall be made by declaration under penalty of perjury filed with the hearing officer.

     B.     The failure of any person to receive the notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this chapter. (Prior code § 14-B.7)

 

12.24.080 Conduct of hearing.
     The hearing to determine whether a nuisance exists shall be conducted by the city administrator or his or her duly authorized representative as hearing officer. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall receive and consider all relevant evidence. Any interested person shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard in conjunction therewith. Based upon the written evidence so presented, the hearing officer shall determine whether a nuisance within the meaning of this chapter exists. (Prior code § 14-B.8)

 

12.24.090 Order of abatement.
     Within ten (10) days after the hearing, the city administrator or his or her designee, shall give written notice of the decision to the owner and to any other person requesting the same. If a nuisance is determined to exist, the notice shall contain an order of abatement directed to the owner of the affected property or the person in control and/or charge of the property, and shall set forth the nature of the graffiti, its location on the premises and the time and manner for its abatement. The city administrator may impose such conditions as are reasonably necessary to abate the graffiti. The decision of the city administrator may be appealed to the city council by the filing of a written request for appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the city administrator’s notice of decision to the owner. (Prior code § 14-B.9)

 

12.24.100 Abatement.
     If the city administrator’s decision is not appealed and the nuisance is not abated within the time set by the order of abatement, the city administrator or his or her designee is authorized to enter upon the premises and to abate the graffiti nuisance through utilization of labor, equipment and materials as directed by the city administrator. The graffiti shall be removed as authorized herein, but the removal shall not involve the painting or repair of a more extensive area than is necessary for such removal. The city administrator shall then prepare a statement of the fact of such abatement and of the expense incurred in abatement and shall file the statement with the city clerk. Such statement shall identify the premises and state the cost of the action taken. If the premises include more than one lot, each separate lot, or all of the lots may be set forth in the same statement. (Prior code § 14-B.10)

 

12.24.110 Assessment of cost.
     Upon completion of the work required to abate the graffiti, the cost to the city to perform such work shall be assessed against the property owner pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Uniform Housing Code adopted by the city of Susanville. (Prior code § 14-B.11)

 

12.24.120 Parental responsibility.
     Pursuant to Section 1714.1(b) of the California Civil Code, every parent or other legal guardian having custody or control of a minor who defaces property by inscribing graffiti thereon shall be jointly and severally liable with such minor for any resulting damages incurred by the property owner, or any other person, in an amount not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each such act of defacement and for all attorney’s fees and court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution for damages. (Prior code § 14-B.12)

 

12.24.130 Remedies cumulative.
     The remedies provided in this chapter are in addition to other remedies and penalties available under this code and the laws of the state of California. (Prior code § 14-B.13)

 

Article II. Aerosol Paint Containers
12.24.140 Aerosol paint containers.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, except a parent or legal guardian, to sell or give or in any way furnish to another person, who is in fact under the age of eighteen (18) years, any aerosol container of paint that is capable of defacing property without first obtaining bona fide evidence of majority and identity.

     For purposes of this subdivision, “bona fide evidence of majority and identity” is any document evidencing the age and identity of an individual which has been issued by a federal, state, or local governmental entity, and includes, but is not limited to a motor vehicle operator’s license, a registration certificate issued under the federal Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces.

     This subsection shall not apply to the furnishing by a minor’s parent, guardian, instructor, or employer, of six ounces or less of an aerosol container of paint to a minor for that minor’s use or possession under the supervision of the minor’s said parent, guardian, instructor, or employer.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase an aerosol container of paint that is capable of defacing property.

     C.     Every retailer selling or offering for sale in the city aerosol containers of paint capable of defacing property shall post in a conspicuous place a sign in letters at least three-eights of an inch high stating:

 

Any person who maliciously defaces real or personal property with paint is guilty of vandalism which is punishable by a fine, imprisonment, or both.

 

     D.    It is unlawful for any person to carry on his or her person and in plain view to the public an aerosol container of paint while in any posted public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, beach or recreational area, other than a highway, street, alley or way, unless he or she has first received valid authorization from the governmental entity which has jurisdiction over the public area.

     As used in this subsection “posted” means a sign place in a reasonable location or locations stating it is an infraction to possess a spray can of paint in such public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, beach or recreational area without valid authorization.

     E.     It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess an aerosol container of paint for the purpose of defacing property while on any public highway, street, alley, or way, or other public place, regardless of whether that person is or is not in any automobile, vehicle, or other conveyance. (Prior code § 14-B.30)

Chapter 12.28 MURALS
Article I. Intent and Definitions
12.28.010 Intent.
     It is the intent of the city council, for purposes of promoting the local economy, tourism, and for further purposes of beautifying the city, to adopt the ordinance codified in this chapter regarding murals, their location and design. It is the further intent of the city council that, where feasible, funding assistance may be provided by the city to the establishment, execution, painting, maintenance, and repair of murals and public art. The source of such funding is not restricted, but could come from a portion of transient occupancy taxes. (Prior code § 6-B.1)

 

12.28.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Artist” means one who demonstrates professional competence in the visual arts discipline of painting and who is approved by the design review committee.

     “Historic uptown Susanville area” means: beginning at the intersection of the northerly boundaries of properties facing the northerly edge of North Street and the westerly edge of North Pine Street; thence easterly along said line to the easterly line of each property facing onto the easterly line of North Weatherlow Street, thence southerly along the easterly line of each property facing onto the easterly line of Weatherlow (both North and South), to the intersection with the southerly line of the property lying at a point extended to the northerly edge of Mill Street, thence in a westerly direction along said extended and northerly line of Mill Street to its intersection with the westerly line of South Gay Street, thence southerly to the intersection with the northerly line of Court Street to its intersection with the easterly line of South Pine Street; then northerly along said South Pine Street to its intersection with the northerly line of the extended line from the northerly edge of the alleyway lying between Main and Cottage Streets; thence westerly along said line to the easterly line of the alleyway lying behind the Elks Hall, thence northerly along said easterly line of the alleyway, and extending past said alleyway in a northerly direction along the westerly line of the boundaries of the properties facing onto North Pine Street, to the point of beginning.

     “Maintenance of a mural” means power spray the murals with water every one to three years as needed. Revarnish every five to ten (10) years as needed. The revarnishing can be spot revarnishing. Repaint if deemed necessary by the design review committee.

     “Mural” means a permanent picture painted directly on a wall or on panels attached to walls. A mural shall be historic in subject matter. If the mural is to be painted on a city easement on a private building, the artist shall first make arrangements with the city to sell his or her work to the city and/or the Lassen County arts council and to transfer royalty rights thereon to the city and/or the Lassen County arts council pursuant to Civil Code Section 980 et seq. and any replacement thereof.

     “Mural project” means to provide public murals to strengthen Susanville’s historical identity, to expand the visual aesthetics of Susanville, and to provide travelers and tourists a destination site or a reason to stop in Susanville.

     “Ownership of mural” means a joint venture between the city and the Lassen County arts council. The city shall have ownership of the mural and the Lassen County arts council shall administrate the project.

     “Paint to be used in murals” means paint specific for outdoor murals, similar or equal to Nova paint.

     Public Mural Easement on Private Building: This easement shall be of the surface of the building where the mural will be painted only. It shall not be construed to create any liability on the part of the city for the structural integrity, maintenance, repair or replacement of the building. (Prior code § 6-B.2)

 

Article II. Location of Murals
12.28.030 Areas established.
     Murals shall be located in two “areas” of Susanville. Area One shall be located within the historic uptown Susanville area only; Area Two shall be located within the remaining area of the city. The intent of the city council regarding establishment of the two areas is to encourage concentration of murals in the historic uptown area of Susanville; however, this intent should not be used as the sole rationale to deny murals in Area Two. (Prior code § 6-B.20)

 

12.28.040 Granting of public easement— Recordation.
     An area on which a mural is to be painted may be the subject of a public easement granted by the landowner to the city for the purpose of painting, repairing, maintaining, and replacing said mural. Said easement must be in writing, but recording of same shall not take place until after the approval of a city design review committee for the particular mural is issued. (Prior code § 6-B.22)

 

12.28.050 Design review committee approval required—Permit issuance.
     Prior to painting, installation and execution of a mural, it shall first be approved by the design review committee. Upon approval, the design review committee shall issue a permit. The decision of the design review committee may be appealed pursuant to the provisions cited below. (Prior code § 6-B.24)

 

12.28.060 Mural design amendment—Design review committee approval required.
     Prior to amending a mural design (whether painted or not yet painted) that has been approved by the design review committee, the amendment or amendments shall first be approved by the design review committee. Upon approval, the permit for the mural shall be amended. The decision of the design review committee may be appealed pursuant to the provisions cited below. (Prior code § 6-B.26)

 

12.28.070 Time limit on mural painting— Conditional extension.
     Once the design review committee permit is obtained, the mural shall be painted in a timely fashion. Completion must occur no later than one year from the time the permit is issued; provided, however, an extension of six months may be granted by the design review committee if it appears that the mural will be painted, but that unavoidable difficulties have caused the delay. Once the one year expires, or one year and six months in the case of an extension on a permit, the permit for that particular mural will be automatically revoked and application for approval of the design review committee must be obtained again, as though no mural permit had been obtained. (Prior code § 6-B.28)

 

12.28.080 Location of murals.
     It is the intent of the city council that murals be located on the side of historic buildings; however, the city recognizes that there may be circumstances when a mural location might be sought elsewhere. The city council authorizes the design review committee to consider murals on locations other than historic buildings; however, consideration should first be given to placement on historic buildings before any other location is chosen. (Prior code § 6-B.29)

 

Article III. Design of Murals
12.28.090 Paint and materials.
     The paint and materials used in murals painted on buildings shall be specific for outdoor murals and similar or equal to Nova paint. (Prior code § 6-B.30)

 

12.28.100 Theme.
     Murals shall be a historic theme, reflecting the history and background of the Susanville and Lassen County area. (Prior code § 6-B.32)

 

12.28.110 Public mural easement—Building owner insurance requirements.
     Where murals are installed on a public mural easement on a building, the owner of said building shall carry property damage and liability insurance on said building in an amount approved by the design review committee, and where required, the owner of said building shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance naming the city as additional insured thereunder. (Prior code § 6-B.34)

 

12.28.120 Artists project description and credentials—Submission—Approval.
     Artists who paint the murals shall be, where possible, those qualified by having worked with murals before. Their project description and their credentials in this regard shall be submitted first through the Lassen County arts council for screening; upon screen approval, the project description and credentials shall be submitted to the design review committee at the time the application for mural painting is made. (Prior code § 6-B.36)

 

Article IV. Design Review Committee
12.28.130 Appointment authority— Responsibilities.
     The mayor with the approval of the city council shall appoint a committee to evaluate, critique, consider and approve the design, painting and location of murals. It is the intent of the city council that this committee also be given the responsibility as the review committee of the following matters covered elsewhere in the Susanville Municipal Code: including but not limited to, architectural review, landscaping, community character, signs. (Prior code § 6-B.40)

 

12.28.140 Membership—Term—Vacancies.
     The committee shall be known as the design review committee and shall consist of seven persons. Each person’s term shall last for a period of three years from the date of appointment; vacancies shall be filled by majority vote of the city council. The members of the committee shall be subject to the terms of the Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950 et seq.) (Prior code § 6-B.42)

 

12.28.150 Meetings.
     The design review committee shall meet the second Monday of each and every month, at the hour of four p.m., at City Hall, 66 North Lassen Street, Susanville, California, commencing with the second Monday in May, 1991. The design review committee may meet as often as required should more frequent meetings appear necessary. (Prior code § 6-B.44)

 

12.28.160 Establishment of guidelines.
     The city council may by resolution adopt additional rules and regulations establishing guidelines for the design review committee and setting forth criteria and standards for mural design, painting, execution and location. (Prior code § 6-B.46)

 

Article V. Fees for Mural Permit
12.28.170 Application fee and/or permit issuance.
     In the event the city council determines it appropriate, it may set a fee by resolution for the application fee and/or the permit issuance. (Prior code § 6-B.50)

 

Article VI. Appeals
12.28.180 Written appeal—Time limit.
     An appeal from the decision of the design review committee granting or denying a permit shall be made in writing to the city council no later than five days following the decision of the design review committee. (Prior code § 6-B.60)

 

12.28.190 Delivery to city clerk—Contents.
     The written appeal shall be delivered within said five-day period to the city clerk or her designee, and shall state the reasons for the appeal. The appeal shall be limited to those reasons and issues discussed at the design review committee level. (Prior code § 6-B.62)

 

12.28.200 Report to city council.
     The design review committee may submit a report to the city council in writing setting forth the reasons for its decision. (Prior code § 6-B.64)

 

12.28.210 City council notification— Hearing—Decision.
     Notice shall be given to the city council of said appeal and the city council shall set a hearing of the appeal; the hearing may be continued from time to time where necessary or expedient; the city council shall render a decision on the appeal no later than forty-five (45) days after the appeal is submitted. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Prior code § 6-B.66)

 

Article VII. Enforcement—Penalties
12.28.220 Violation—Penalty.
     It is unlawful for any person to mar, deface, damage, or destruct in any manner, any mural erected in the city. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor, and punishable as set forth in the Susanville Municipal Code. (Prior code § 6-B.70)

Chapter 12.32 PARKS
Article I. Purpose and Definitions
12.32.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations for the use of city parks and the city swimming pool. (Prior code § 14A.1)

 

12.32.020 Definitions.
     “Park” means Memorial Park, Riverside Park, Inspiration Point, Little League Park, Roosevelt Pool, the Recreation Office/Roop’s Fort Complex, Susan River Parkway and Skyline Park.

     “Park attendant” means an employee of the city who performs duties or tasks within a park.

     “Permit” means a written license issued by the city authorizing a special event or activity at a park.

     “Solicit” means the act of seeking any form of contribution, or selling of goods or services by sample, or taking orders for future delivery with or without accepting advance payment for the goods.

     “Special event” means any group of people participating in an organized activity (other than public employees acting within the course and scope of their employment) on or within a city park. It does not include minor assemblages such as family picnics or other minor use of the park not requiring the protections and security set forth in Section 12.32.150.

     Vehicle, Motorized. “Motorized vehicle” means any conveyance with a motor including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, campers, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, snowmobiles.

     Vehicles, All Other (Nonmotorized). “All other (nonmotorized) vehicles” mean, excepting baby carriages or strollers, any conveyance, including, but not limited to: tricycles, bicycles, sleds, sleighs, skateboards, pushcarts or horsedrawn conveyances. (Prior code § 14A.2)

 

Article II. Prohibited Activities in Park
12.32.030 Structures, plants, trees, rubbish.
     Unless authorized by permit, it is unlawful to do the following in any park:

     A.    Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants or other wood or materials, or make any excavation;

     B.     Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public service utility into, upon, or across such park, except on special written permit;

     C.     Attach anything, whether rope, cable or otherwise, to any tree, fence, railing, bridge, bench or other structure;

     D.    Place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountains, pond, stream or other body of water in the park any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may result in pollution of said water;

     E.     Fail to deposit refuse and rubbish in receptacles provided. In the event receptacles are not available, all refuse and rubbish shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence;

     F.     It is unlawful for any person to engage in any activity other than tennis at the Loumena Tennis Courts, Memorial Park. Prohibited activities shall include, but not be limited to: bicycling, skateboarding, skating, games other than tennis, and loitering. Signs giving notice of the foregoing prohibitions, items and dates shall be posted at the entrances to the tennis courts at least forty-eight (48) hours before commencement of the time when said activities become prohibited. (Prior code § 14A.5)

 

12.32.040 Animals.
     It is unlawful to do the following in any park:

     A.    Tie or hitch any animal to any tree or plant;

     B.     Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails. Horses shall not be permitted to graze or go unattended. (Prior code § 14A.6)

 

12.32.050 Motorized vehicles.
     It is unlawful to do the following in any park, unless otherwise authorized by permit:

     A.    Drive any motorized vehicle on any area except the designated park roads or parking areas, or such areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary areas;

     B.     Park or leave standing a motorized vehicle anywhere other than on a designated parking area;

     C.     Wash or repair any motorized vehicle. (Prior code § 14A.7)

 

12.32.060 Nonmotorized vehicles.
     It is unlawful to do the following in any park:

     A.    Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack;

     B.     Ride a nonmotorized vehicle without reasonable regard for the safety of others;

     C.     Wash or repair any nonmotorized vehicle. (Prior code § 14A.8)

 

12.32.070 Explosives and fireworks.
     It is unlawful to do the following, unless otherwise authorized by permit:

     Possess or set off any fireworks; provided, however, “safe and sane” (as defined by state regulations) fireworks may be used without a permit on the Fourth of July only. (Prior code § 14A.9)

 

12.32.080 Advertising, assemblages, entertainment.
     It is unlawful to do any of the following unless authorized by permit:

     A.    Display any advertising signs or other advertising matter; excepting a sign attached to a vehicle to identify the vehicle, or a sign otherwise lawfully on a vehicle whose purpose is public transportation;

     B.     Operate for advertising purposes any musical instrument, soundtrack, or drum;

     C.     Hold assemblages that are generally open to the public and advertised as such;

     D.    Conduct exhibitions;

     E.     Hold a parade;

     F.     Hold a special event. (Prior code § 14A.10)

 

12.32.090 Solicitations.
     Unless authorized by permit, it is unlawful to solicit in any park. (Prior code § 14A.11)

 

12.32.100 Ignitable and combustible materials.
     It is unlawful to do any of the following unless authorized by permit:

     Build, maintain or use a fire except in places provided for such purpose. Any fire shall be continuously under the care and direction of a competent adult person from the time it is started until it is extinguished. (Prior code § 14A.12)

 

12.32.105 Prohibition of smoking in parks.
     A.    Smoking is prohibited in city parks, consisting of Memorial Park (including skate park, community center, Roop’s Fort, and the Museum), Riverside Park, Skyline Park, Inspiration Point, Little League Park (Pat Murphy Fields) and any new parks so designated by the city council.

     B.     No person shall dispose of any tobacco product, or any part of a tobacco product, in any park, except in a designated waste disposal container.

     C.     Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth in this subsection:

     “Parks” mean and include all parks owned or controlled by the city. The term also includes all parking lots, off-street parking areas, bike paths, and alleys which are used or intended to be used in connection with a park. The term does not include golf courses or the sidewalks along the perimeter of parks.

     “Smoking” means possessing (and “smoke” means to possess) any object containing a lighted tobacco product or any other lighted weed or plant or the lighting of any object containing a tobacco product or any other weed or plant.

     “Tobacco product” means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis or any other preparation of tobacco. (Ord. 11-983 § 2, 2012)

 

12.32.110 Glass beverage containers.
     It is unlawful to bring glass beverage container(s) into any city park. (Prior code § 14A.13)

 

12.32.120 Alcoholic beverages.
     The city council intends to discourage and prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages in all parks except Riverside Park. It is unlawful to bring any alcoholic beverages into the following parks without permit: Memorial Park, Inspiration Point, Little League Park, Roosevelt Swimming Pool, the recreation office/Roop’s Fort Complex, Susan River Parkway and Skyline Park. Any sale of alcoholic beverages in any park, including Riverside Park, shall require a permit. (Prior code § 14A.14)

 

12.32.130 Miscellaneous conduct.
     Unless authorized by a permit, it is unlawful to do the following:

     A.    Camp or stay overnight;

     B.     Enter an area posted as “closed to the public”;

     C.     Fail or refuse to produce and exhibit any permit he or she claims to have, upon request of any peace officer or authorized city employee. (Prior code § 14A.15)

 

12.32.140 Closing hours.
     Unless authorized by permit issued by the city of Susanville, it is unlawful for any person to be present in any park during the hours the park is closed. All park areas except Memorial Park are closed from eleven p.m. until six a.m. of the following day. Memorial Park is closed from one hour after sundown until six a.m. of the following day; provided, however, city-authorized baseball games at Memorial Ballfield and special events scheduled by permit through the city of Susanville will be allowed to occur at such times the city gives written authorization. Closing hours will be posted at all parks. (Ord. 05-916 § 1, 2005; Ord. 01-879 § 1, 2001; prior code § 14A.16)

 

12.32.142 Noise and audio devices.
     Unless otherwise authorized by permit duly issued by the city, no person using parks, including the skateboard park identified in Article V of this chapter, shall make or cause to be made any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise amplification which can be heard from outside a range of fifty (50) or more feet. Except for radios and similar devices operated at levels that cannot be heard outside a range of fifty (50) or more feet, no person shall operate or possess any public address system, amplified musical instrument, or other noise-producing or transmitting device without written permission from the city. Violation of this section is unlawful and punishable as an infraction. (Ord. 05-916 § 1, 2005)

 

Article III. Permits and Appeals
12.32.150 Permits.
     Permits for special events in a park or for special events in a park at which alcoholic beverages will be sold or for special events in a park at which an admission fee shall be charged by the permittee shall be obtained by application to the city administrator, or designee, as follows:

     A.    Standards for issuance of any permit authorized by this chapter shall include the following:

     1.     That the proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public’s enjoyment of the park;

     2.     That the proposed activity or use will not be unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare;

     3.     That the proposed activity or use reasonably anticipated will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct;

     4.     That the proposed activity or use will not entail extraordinary or burdensome expense either through police operation or otherwise by the city; in the event that it will create extraordinary or burdensome expense, the applicant will be required to pay for those costs by depositing a certain sum prior to issuance of the permit;

     5.     That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use on the date and hour requested in the application;

     6.     That the applicant provide to the city a certificate of insurance in an amount and coverage required by the city administrator prior to the issuance of the permit.

     B.     A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall submit a completed application to the city administrator, or designee, which includes:

     1.     Name and address of the applicant;

     2.     Name and address of the persons, business or corporation sponsoring the activity;

     3.     Day and hours for which the permit is desired;

     4.     Designation of applicable park or portion thereof;

     5.     Liability insurance coverage available to the applicant for the proposed activity or use intended;

     6.     Department of alcohol and beverage control written authorization;

     7.     Any other information reasonably necessary to make a determination whether a permit should be issued.

     C.     The decision on the permit shall be made no later than five working days after submission to the city administrator. The decision of the city administrator to grant or deny the permit is final.

     D.    The city administrator shall promptly provide a copy of the application for permit to the parks and recreation department upon receipt thereof. Once a permit is issued by the city administrator, a copy thereof shall be promptly delivered to the parks and recreation department and the police department.

     E.     Denial of the permit shall be in writing, and mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the permit application.

     F.     Granting of the permit shall be in writing, and mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the permit application.

     G.    The city administrator shall be authorized to revoke a permit for good cause. Any revocation shall be appealable as set forth in Section 12.32.160. Good cause shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     1.     Failure to comply with the conditions of the permit;

     2.     Failure to comply with state and local laws and regulations. (Prior code § 14A.20)

 

12.32.160 Appeal procedure.
     In the event the city administrator revokes the permit, the notification shall include the reason for revocation. Within ten (10) days after mailing of the city administrator’s written decision to the applicant, any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city council by serving written notice thereof on the city clerk within ten (10) days after mailing of the city administrator’s written decision to the applicant.

     The city council shall hear the appeal at its next scheduled meeting.

     The city council may continue the hearing if that is deemed necessary; however, the decision of the city council is final. (Prior code § 14A.21)

 

Article IV. Drug Free Zones
12.32.170 Public parks as drug free zones.
     Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11380.5, the city council designates the following public parks within the city as drug free zones:

     Memorial Park, Riverside Park, Inspiration Point, Little League Park, Roosevelt Swimming Pool and recreation office/Roop’s Fort Complex.

     Notice of this section shall be posted at each park, and the notice shall provide as follows:

 

        THIS PUBLIC PARK, _______________ [name of park] IS A “DRUG FREE ZONE,” AND HAS BEEN SO DESIGNATED BY THE CITY OF SUSANVILLE, PURSUANT TO CALIFORNIA HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE SECTION 11380.5. (Susanville Municipal Code Sec. 12.32.170).

 

(Prior code § 14A.40)

 

Article V. Skate Park Rules and Regulations
12.32.200 Skate park facility defined.
     There is located within the city Memorial Park a skate park facility, designed and maintained for the purpose of recreational skateboard and skate use. The skate park facility is not supervised on a regular basis. (Ord. 00-865 § 1, 2000)

 

12.32.210 Safety apparel required.
     Any person riding skates or a skateboard at the skate park facility shall wear a helmet, elbow pads, wrist supports and knee pads. A violation of this section is unlawful and is punishable as an infraction. Any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this section, who is injured while using the skate park facility, shall be deemed negligent per se. (Ord. 00-865 § 1, 2000)

 

12.32.220 Posting of warning signs.
     Signs shall be posted at the skatepark facility by the city that afford reasonable notice that any person skating or riding a skateboard at the skate park facility must wear a helmet, elbow pads, wrist supports and knee pads, and that any person failing to do so will be subject to citation. The warning sign shall also include the following:

“WARNING: Skating and skateboarding are hazardous recreational activities. Use of this facility may result in death, paralysis, brain damage, concussion, broken bones or other serious injury. Any use is at your own risk. The City of Susanville does not assume any responsibility for injuries. DO NOT USE FACILITY IF A HAZARDOUS CONDITION EXISTS. Report any hazardous/dangerous condition to the City of Susanville, 66 North Lassen, Susanville, CA.”

(Ord. 00-865 § 1, 2000)

 

12.32.230 Use of skate park facility limited to in-line skates, roller skates, and skateboards.
     Use of any device or apparatus other than in-line skates, roller skates or skateboards at the skate park facility is prohibited. A violation of this section is unlawful and punishable as an infraction. Any person who uses any device or apparatus other than in-line skates, roller skates, or skateboards at the skate park facility and who is injured while doing so, or who causes injury to another while doing so, shall be deemed negligent per se. (Ord. 00-865 § 1, 2000)

 

12.32.240 Use of additional obstacles or other materials.
     The use of additional obstacles or other materials including, but not limited to, ramps and/or jumps on the skate park facility is prohibited and unlawful and punishable as an infraction. (Ord. 00-865 § 1, 2000)

 

12.32.250 Glass, food and beverages prohibited.
     Glass, food and/or drink on the skate park facility is prohibited and unlawful and punishable as an infraction. (Ord. 00-865 § 1, 2000)

 

12.32.260 Activities prohibited.
     Within the skate park facility it is unlawful for any person to:

     A.    Place or utilize additional obstacles;

     B.     Use the skate park facility when the surface of the amenities is wet or unsafe;

     C.     Enter the skate park facility unless actively skateboarding or in-line skating;

     D.    Use, consume, or have within his or her custody or control, food, beverages, alcohol, tobacco products, or illegal drugs;

     E.     Be under the influence of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs;

     F.     Engage in graffiti, tagging or other defacing of city property or the property of others; or

     G.    Engage in the use of earphones or headphones while skating or skateboarding.

     Violation of this section is unlawful and punishable as an infraction. (Ord. 05-916 § 1, 2005; Ord. 00-865 § 1, 2000)

 

Article VI. Camping and Storage of Personal Property in Parks and Public Places
12.32.300 Purpose.
     The public streets, public and publicly owned property that is designated for public or government use and areas within the city of Susanville should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. The purpose of this article is to maintain public streets and areas within the city of Susanville in a clean and accessible condition. (Ord. 14-996 § 2, 2014)

 

12.32.310 Definitions.
     Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this article.

     “Camp” means to pitch or occupy camp facilities; to live temporarily in a camp facility or outdoors; to use camp paraphernalia.

     “Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, temporary and/or permanent shelters.

     “Camping paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.

     “Park” means the same as defined in Section 12.32.020 of this chapter.

     “Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.

     “Street” means the same as defined in Title 12 of this code. (Ord. 14-996 § 2, 2014)

 

12.32.320 Unlawful camping.
     It is unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the city council:

     A.    Any park;

     B.     Any street;

     C.     Within one hundred (100) feet of the Susanville police department, Susanville fire department and Susanville public works department;

     D.    Within seventy-five (75) feet of the highest watermark of any waterway within the city of Susanville. (Ord. 20-1030 § 1, 2020)

 

12.32.330 Storage of personal property in public places.
     It is unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the city council:

     A.    Any park;

     B.     Any street;

     c.     Within one hundred (100) feet of the Susanville police department, Susanville fire department and Susanville public works department;

     D.    Within seventy-five (75) feet of the highest watermark of any waterway within the city of Susanville. (Ord. 20-1030 § 1, 2020)

 

12.32.340 Penalty.
     Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor pursuant to Susanville Municipal Code Section 1.12.010. (Ord. 20-1030 § 1, 2020)

Chapter 12.36 TREES
Article I. Definitions and Legislative Intent
12.36.010 Intent.
     Trees are declared to be a beneficial resource. They not only enhance air quality and reduce energy consumption, but they contribute in a major fashion to the aesthetic value of the city. It is the policy of the city to, by this chapter, provide for removal and planting of trees in an organized fashion, and to protect trees from unnecessary or unwarranted destruction whenever possible. It is the intent of the city to protect its existing trees defined in this chapter, and to promote the planting, maintenance, care and cultivation of trees within the city limits. To that end, it shall be unlawful to cut down, damage, poison, or in any other manner, destroy or cause to be destroyed any trees defined in this chapter except in accordance with the provisions set forth herein. (Prior code § 17A.1)

 

12.36.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

     Care and Trimming. Care and trimming shall be performed in a reasonably prudent manner, with reasonable care to protect the tree.

     “City administrator” means the city administrator of the city of Susanville, or his or her other designee appointed in writing.

     “Registered tree” means a list, maintained by the city, of trees on private property that have been voluntarily registered by the owner of the tree. Registered trees can include trees of special historical interest, specimen trees based on size, age, or unique character, or any tree an owner wishes to receive future protection. A registered tree must be at least four inches in diameter at diameter breast height (d.b.h., which is four and one-half feet) above the ground.

     “Species list” means the official list of acceptable trees for new plantings based on trees adapted to grow in the city.

     “Street tree” means any tree four inches or greater in diameter at diameter breast height (d.b.h. is four and one-half feet above the ground) that exists within the public right-of-way, excepting alleys.

     “Tree” means any woody perennial plant characterized by having one or more stems or trunks.

     “Tree commission” means a commission of five members appointed by the mayor, approved by the council. At least two of the members should have technical expertise, such as a nursery or landscape person. The commission will meet as needed, to review permits and other activities requiring technical expertise. The duties of the commission shall include: review statistics of the permit process, including tree removal and plantings; update species list; recommend permit fee changes; do field inspections when possible to assist city staff; review appeals under this chapter. The mayor, with the council’s approval, may designate another existing commission of the city to assume the duties and responsibilities of the tree commission. (Prior code § 17A.2)

 

Article II. Street Trees on Public Rights-of-Way
12.36.030 Protection of street trees.
     All street trees shall be protected from destruction or deterioration by owners adjoining or underlying public rights-of-way. Such damage that would lead to the destruction or deterioration of street trees includes, but is not limited to: physical damage to any tree parts, including roots, trunk, branches or foliage; dumping or application of chemicals toxic to trees; excessive soil compaction; excessive changes in grade. Any work which might cause such damage must first be approved by permit from the city. (Prior code § 17A.3)

 

12.36.040 Removal of street trees.
     It is unlawful to remove or cut down any street tree without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the city administrator. (Prior code § 17A.4)

 

12.36.050 Planting of street trees.
     A list of approved species for street trees for planting shall be kept and maintained by the city, and no other street trees shall be planted than those on the list. (Prior code § 17A.5)

 

12.36.060 Care and trimming of street trees.
     Street trees shall be cared for and trimmed by the private property owner of the abutting or underlying real property. The city is not responsible for any maintenance, planting, or replacement of street trees. This section does not amend presently existing practice in Susanville but its purpose is to state in this chapter the present and past practice existing in the city. (Prior code § 17A.6)

 

12.36.070 Failure of property owner to comply with Sections 12.36.030, 12.36.040 and 12.36.050.
     In the event an abutting or underlying private property owner fails to comply with Section 12.36.040, 12.36.050 or 12.36.060 hereof, the city shall notify the property owner in writing, by personal delivery or certified mail return receipt requested, that compliance with Sections 12.36.040, 12.36.050 or 12.36.060 is required, and shall identify the work to be performed. (Prior code § 17A.7)

 

12.36.080 Penalty.
     Any person, firm, or corporation violating any portion of this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Prior code § 17A.8)

 

Article III. Registered Trees on Private Property
12.36.090 Registered trees.
     Any landowner may voluntarily register any species of tree that exists on his or her property, provided the tree is a minimum of four inches or greater in diameter at diameter breast height (d.b.h. is four and one-half feet above the ground). The tree shall be identified by species, location on property, approximate height and age, and significance. Trees so registered shall be subject to the same regulations as “street trees” with regard to protection, removal, care and trimming, and permit process. The city shall cause to be recorded in the official records of Lassen County the registration of any such tree on an appropriate form to be signed by the registrant and notarized. (Prior code § 17A.9)

 

Article IV. Tree Permit Process
12.36.100 Tree permit for street trees.
     Any person may obtain a permit by making written application to the city and paying a fee necessary to cover the cost of processing the application as set by resolution of the city council. Where a permit application is required by this article, it shall include a site plan to show the following information at a scale sufficient to enable the determination of matters required under these regulations:

     A.    The shape and dimension of the lot or parcel, together with the existing and proposed location of structures and improvements, if any.

     B.     Locations of all existing registered or street trees, identified by common or botanical name. Registered or street trees proposed to remain, to be transplanted, or to be removed, shall be identified. (Prior code § 17A.10)

 

12.36.110 Tree permit for the planting and protection of trees in new developments, and construction projects.
     There shall be no less than one street tree from the approved species list planted at each new residential unit. In the event the development is commercial, the landscaping requirement conditions established by the planning commission and/or planning department shall require incorporation of a sufficient number of healthy trees, each at least one and one-fourth inches in diameter at six inches above the ground and at least eight feet in height with the crown in good balance with the trunk. The trees must be in a healthy condition at the time of final inspection. It shall further be the policy of the city that any commercial or residential development or subdivision shall be required to preserve and protect existing trees on the property, and those required to remain shall be clearly designated as a condition of development. Further, removal of any tree greater than four inches or greater in diameter at diameter breast height (d.b.h. is four and one-half feet above the ground) in the area of the new development shall require a permit under the procedures of Section 12.36.100 and include the following additional information:

     A.    Locations and dimensions of all setbacks and easements required by the zoning ordinance of the city.

     B.     Statements as to grade changes proposed for the lot or parcel if such grade changes will affect the trees within the lot or parcel, whether street trees, registered trees, or otherwise, and how such grade changes will affect the trees.

     C.     Any proposed street tree, or registered tree replacement program.

     D.    All trees to be retained shall be so identified by some method, such as painting, flagging, etc., prior to field inspection. Where protective barriers are necessary to prevent damage to a tree that is not to be removed, such barriers shall be erected before work starts.

     E.     In the event there are no trees located on the site to be developed which are required to be protected under the provisions of this article, the applicant shall so state in his application for a “no tree” verification. If such statement is substantiated by an inspection of the site by the city, the applicant shall be relieved of the necessity to supply information and no fee shall be assessed.

     F.     Any and all such permits issued by the city shall be declared null and void if commencement of work so permitted is not started within a reasonable time, not to exceed six months. Permits not used within this period will require a new application. For purposes of this chapter, a permit shall be deemed used when the work authorized by the permit is completed. (Prior code § 17A.11)

 

12.36.120 Permit procedure for tree removal.
     The tree removal application shall be field checked and a field inspection report made prior to issuance of a permit. The city administrator may request a recommendation concerning the application from any or all appropriate city departments or the tree commission. (Prior code § 17A.12)

 

12.36.130 Preapplication inspection services.
     When necessary, the city administrator shall be available for preapplication inspection of the site involved. (Prior code § 17A.13)

 

12.36.140 Criteria for issuance of permit.
     Upon receiving the field inspection report and any requested recommendation concerning the application for the permits designated herein, the city administrator shall issue or deny a permit after application is filed for the removal or relocation of street trees or registered trees using the following criteria:

     A.    Criteria for Removal.

     1.     The tree is located in an area where a structure or improvements will be placed according to an approved plan, it unreasonably restricts the economic enjoyment of property, and the tree cannot be relocated on the site because of age, type or size of the tree; or

     2.     The tree is diseased, injured, in danger of falling too close to existing or proposed structures, interferes with existing utility service, creates unsafe vision clearance or conflicts with other ordinances or regulations;

     3.     Sufficient trees exist on the site to meet the intent of this chapter as determined by the city administrator.

     B.     Basis for Denial.

     1.     The city administrator, upon a determination that an application is to be denied, shall state the basis for such denial specifically and shall notify the applicant of the criteria upon which said denial is predicted. (Prior code § 17A.14)

 

12.36.150 Permit—When not required.
     No tree permit shall be required for the cutting down, destruction, or removal of:

     A.    Any tree grown for commercial harvesting and sale on real property zoned to permit such commercial harvesting and sale as the primary use of the property.

     B.     Any tree grown as part of a commercial orchard;

     C.     Any tree determined by the city administrator, to be in such a hazardous or dangerous condition as to require immediate removal in order to protect the public safety, health or welfare. (Prior code § 17A.15)

 

12.36.160 Relocation or replacement conditions.
     As a condition of the granting of a permit, the applicant shall be required to relocate or replace each tree on a one-to-one ratio. This requirement may be varied by the city administrator upon a showing that such requirements will create hardship in the use of the site. Each replacement shall have at least equal shade potential and other characteristics comparable to that of the trees removed and shall be a minimum of one and one-fourth inches in diameter six inches above the ground and at least eight feet in height with the crown in good balance with the trunk and shall be from the list of approved species kept on file by the city. (Prior code § 17A.16)

 

12.36.170 Removal of street tree from utility easement.
     Where a tree is proposed for removal from a utility easement, the applicant shall be required to relocate or replace each tree on a one-to-one ratio in accordance with the conditions for replacement set forth herein. The city administrator shall designate the location of the replacement or relocation of trees removed from a utility easement and shall base that designation on a determination of the location which will best serve to less than adverse impact of the factors set forth herein. (Prior code § 17A.17)

 

12.36.180 Trimming of tree or registered trees by public utility corporations.
     Any public utility corporation maintaining overhead wires may be given a permit by the city, valid from one year from date of issuance, to allow such public utility corporation to trim or brace any street or registered tree. Permission to trim or brace trees by the public utility corporation shall be granted where it can be shown that the trees or portion thereof will interfere with the safety of the overhead wires including, but not limited to the transmission of electrical current or telephone messages. (Prior code § 17A.18)

 

12.36.190 Removal of diseased trees.
     Any tree that is found to be infected with Dutch Elm Disease (Ceratocystis ulmi) or other disease determined by the city to be hazardous to the health of other trees in the city, shall be destroyed to prevent transmission of the disease.  The method of destruction of an infected tree shall be prescribed by the Lassen County agricultural commissioner and may include burning or burial at a site designated by the commissioner.  Any appliances or tools, including axes, knives, saws, chainsaws, pruning tools, wood chopping equipment, wedges and other tools or appliances used on infected trees shall be disinfected in a manner prescribed by the commissioner before they are allowed to be moved from the infected area.  Use of infected tree wood for fire wood shall be prohibited. Transportation of infected tree wood to a designated destruction area shall occur in closed conveyances or compartments only. (Prior code § 17A.19)

 

12.36.200 Removal of dead trees.
     Any street tree that is found to be dead shall require a permit for removal and shall be removed in accordance with the conditions described on the permit. (Prior code § 17A.20)

 

Article V. Emergencies
12.36.210 Emergencies.
     In case of emergencies, such as earthquake, windstorm, flood, freeze, or other disasters, the requirements of these regulations may be waived by the city administrator, upon a finding that such waiver is necessary so that public or private work to restore order in the city will not be impeded. (Prior code § 17A.22)

 

Article VI. Appeals
12.36.220 Appeal.
     Any person adversely affected by a decision of the city administrator in the enforcement or interpretation of any of the terms of provisions of this chapter may appeal such decisions to the tree commission. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice with the city administrator, with a copy to the city clerk, within ten (10) days after the written decision of the city administrator is mailed to the applicant. The decision of the tree commission may be appealed to the city council for the final determination. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk in writing within five days after the decision of the tree commission. The city council shall thereafter set a date to consider the appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Prior code § 17A.25)

Chapter 12.40 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING WITHIN THE INCORPORATED LIMITS OF THE CITY OF SUSANVILLE
12.40.010 No smoking areas and events.
     “No Smoking” areas and events located within the city of Susanville are designated below:

     A.    Workplaces, pursuant to California Labor Code Sections 96, 98.6, and 6404.5.

     B.     City parks pursuant to City of Susanville Municipal Code Section 12.32.105.

     C.     The following community events:

     1.     Safe and Sane Halloween Event. Smoking is prohibited between the hours of three p.m. and five p.m. during the Safe and Sane Halloween celebration on Main Street between Weatherlow and Roop Streets and the first block of Roop, Lassen, Gay, Union and Weatherlow Streets on both the north and south sides of Main Street, regardless of the date it is held.

     2.     Magical Country Christmas Event. Smoking is prohibited between the hours of five p.m. and seven p.m. during the Magical Country Christmas event celebration on Main Street between Weatherlow and N. Pine Streets and the first block of Roop, Lassen, Gay, Union and Weatherlow Streets on both the north and south sides of Main Street, and the Elks Lodge property located at the head of Main Street, regardless of the date it is held. (Ord. 13-992 § 2, 2013; Ord. 12-984 § 2, 2012)

 

12.40.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth in this section.

     A.    The words “Main Street” mean the street, the sidewalk, any parking lot or store between Weatherlow and Roop Streets, the Uptown Park to be constructed on Main Street.

     B.     “Smoking” means possessing a lighted pipe, lighted cigar, lighted cigarette, or e-cigarette of any kind, or the lighting of a pipe, cigar, cigarette, or e-cigarette of any kind, including, but not limited to, those containing tobacco, fluids or any other weed or plant. (Ord. 14-999 § 2, 2014; Ord. 13-992 § 2, 2013; Ord. 12-984 § 2, 2012)

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 13.04 SUSANVILLE MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
Chapter 13.08 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
Chapter 13.12 GEOTHERMAL SERVICE SYSTEM
Chapter 13.16 NATURAL GAS SERVICE SYSTEM
Chapter 13.20 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT

Chapter 13.04 SUSANVILLE MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
13.04.010 Generally.
     A.    The Susanville Municipal Airport is operated by the city for the use and benefit of the public under the authority granted under laws of the state of California and under the terms of the city’s assurance agreements with the federal government.

     B.     The airport shall be open for public use subject to such restrictions as may be necessary due to inclement weather, the conditions of the landing area, the presentation of aviation-related events and such other events as may be determined by the city administrator, and subject to such fees and charges as may be established without discrimination for each class of user.

     C.     The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create the obligation and the implied consent of the user to obey all of the regulations presented in this chapter. (Prior code § 3.1)

 

13.04.020 Purpose.
     It is declared that the purpose of this chapter is to further the public interest, welfare and safety by providing for the protection and promotion of safety in the operation of aircraft over and on the Susanville Municipal Airport. (Prior code § 3.2)

 

13.04.030 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

     “Aircraft” means a device that is used, or intended to be used, for flight in the air, under control of a pilot. It includes airplanes, helicopters, gliders and lighter-than-air devices, such as blimps and balloons.

     “Aircraft parking/tie-down area” means a hard surfaced area that is equipped with devices to secure aircraft to the ground.

     “Airport manager” means the city employee person designated by the city council to manage the airport or a designee.

     “Airport operator” means the person under a contract with the city to operate the airport pursuant to the terms of that contract.

     “Apron” means a hard surfaced area adjacent to hangars, repair shops, taxiways, runways or the like, used to load, unload, service or handle aircraft.

     “Designated fuel pumping area” means that area surrounding the fuel pumps, as marked on the asphalted surface.

     “Pilot” means an individual solely responsible for the control and operation of an aircraft.

     “Terminal operations/passenger area” means that area immediately north of the terminal building and south of the primary taxiway.

     “Ultralight aircraft” means a powered or unpowered vehicle as described in Part 103 of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Regulations. (Prior code § 3.3)

 

13.04.040 Application and authority.
     A.    The airport manager shall have the authority and the duty to prescribe reasonable regulations relating to the use of the Susanville Municipal Airport. Any such regulations shall first be submitted to the Susanville airport commission for its recommendations and thereafter, such regulations shall be submitted to the city council for approval before taking effect. All regulations so prescribed and approved shall be filed in the office of the airport manager, made available for public inspection and publicly posted at the airport. During an emergency, the airport manager may grant a variation to these rules for the duration of the emergency.

     B.     Application. The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all aircraft to all aircraft operating on or over the Susanville Municipal Airport.

     C.     Authority. The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to supplement federal and state laws when not expressly inconsistent therewith concerning the conduct of aircraft on or over the airport and the regulations provided in Federal Aviation Administration regulations are adopted as part of this chapter. (Prior code § 3.4)

 

13.04.050 Pilot qualifications and aircraft certification.
     No person not properly certified by the Federal Aviation Administration, and no aircraft not similarly certified, except ultralight aircraft unless ultralights require Federal Aviation Administration certification, shall operate on or over the airport; provided, that this restriction shall not apply to public aircraft belonging to the government of the United States or to a state, territory, possession or any political subdivision, nor to any aircraft of a foreign country operated under permission of the federal government. (Prior code § 3.5)

 

13.04.060 Airport operations.
     A.    The rules and regulations promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration and the California Aeronautics Commission, presently in effect and all additions or amendments thereto, are referred to, adopted and made a part of these regulations in every respect as if they were fully set forth in this chapter.

     B.     The operation of the Susanville Municipal Airport shall be under the direction of the airport manager, who shall be responsible to the city administrator of the city. The airport manager shall enforce all regulations of the airport including, but not limited to, the storage and movement of all aircraft and surface vehicles.

     C.     The airport operator shall be in charge of all fuel dispensed from city-owned fueling facilities and shall be responsible for reporting to the fire department any violation of fire and safety regulations governing the transportation, storage and use of fuel, and other inflammable substances brought on the airport that may be in violation of the Uniform Fire Code and related codes adopted by the city.

     D.    Persons shall fuel aircraft on the airport in areas approved for such operation by the city fire department according to the rules established by the city fire chief as issued from time to time and posted in a conspicuous place at the airport.

     E.     The airport operator shall be responsible for renting city-owned vacant hangars, shall oversee the manner in which the hangar space is utilized in accordance with the hangar/storage license, shall manage the aircraft tie downs for most efficient and safe utilization of available areas, and shall assume managerial responsibility for the collection of all city hangar and tie down rents.

     F.     Any aircraft awaiting takeoff from the Susanville Municipal Airport shall be parked in such a position as to have a direct view of aircraft approaching for landing, and takeoff shall not commence until the pilot has ascertained that no aircraft is on final approach for landing on the runway, and that the runway to be used for takeoff is itself clear of landing or taxiing aircraft.

     G.    No person operating an aircraft shall land or takeoff from the Susanville Municipal Airport except on the runway designated for takeoff and landing.

     H.    No aircraft after takeoff shall deviate from a straight course until after passing the boundaries of the airport and reaching an altitude of four thousand six hundred (4,600) feet mean sea level (MSL).

     I.      The aprons at the Susanville Municipal Airport shall be used only for loading, unloading, servicing, and authorized refueling of aircraft.

     J.      Unattended aircraft shall be parked only in areas designated as tie down areas, or in hangars; provided further, no aircraft shall be parked in a tie down area unless it is position over and attached to a tie down facility.

     K.    Emergencies requiring police, fire, or medical aid shall be reported by calling the emergency service number, 911.

     L.     The terminal operations/passenger area shall remain clear except for the registration, loading, and unloading of aircraft.

     M.    All accidents involving personal injury or property damage in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) occurring on the Susanville Municipal Airport shall be reported in writing to the office of the airport manager within twenty-four (24) hours.

     N.    Failure to pay duly established fees incurred for the parking of aircraft on the airport shall constitute a lien upon the aircraft. The city may hold such aircraft until the fees are paid or may dispose of the aircraft, as provided by law, in the event the fees are not paid.

     O.    The registered owners/operators of all aircraft permanently based on the airport and parked in the city-owned hangers, tie down areas, or private hangars on city property, shall register their full names and mailing addresses with the airport manager or a designated representative on the aircraft registration form provided by the city.

     P.     The owner/manager of each privately owned hangar or tie down facility on the airport shall, not later than the tenth of each month, furnish the airport manager with a roster of aircraft and their registered owners/operators current as of the last day of the preceding month. Included with the roster of aircraft shall be a fee in an amount set by the city council for each aircraft except one aircraft owned by the owner/manager. The report shall be submitted on a form provided by the city.

     Q.    The registered owner/operator of each aircraft parked on the airport shall be responsible for properly securing the aircraft to protect the aircraft from wind damage.

     R.     Traffic Patterns. All aircraft, except in an emergency, shall conform to the following traffic patterns:

     1.     The established traffic patterns are at an altitude of five thousand (5,000) feet MSL as published in the airport/facility directory, and are depicted in the segmented circle located on the south side of runway 11-29.

     2.     Straight-in approaches shall not be made without prior radio notification to local air traffic on Susanville Unicom (122.8); or in case of an emergency on Susanville Unicom (122.8).

     3.     Aircraft entering or leaving the traffic pattern shall exercise extreme caution and shall not cause other aircraft already in the pattern to deviate from their courses.

     4.     Such charts and visual diagrams as are necessary to display the authorized traffic patterns shall be adopted by resolution and by reference made a part of this chapter.

     S.     Communication with Susanville Unicom. Pilots of aircraft equipped with a communication radio shall observe the following procedures:

     1.     All traffic inbound to the airport shall continuously monitor 122.8 Megahertz and, when approximately ten (10) miles from the airport, call Susanville Unicom for airport advisory on surface weather conditions and airfield conditions;

     2.     In the event Susanville Unicom does not reply, the inbound pilot shall broadcast “in the blind” to the Susanville traffic, stating position and intentions;

     3.     Departing pilots shall monitor 122.8 Megahertz, broadcasting their positions and intentions to Susanville traffic.

     T.     Annual Report of Airport Operator. Subject to the express or implied terms of any contract between the city and any person for the operation of the municipal airport which is in effect upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the operator of the airport shall annually, on the first day of July of each year, render to the city council an activity report which report shall show:

     1.     The number of aircraft tie downs available at the airport;

     2.     The number of aircraft based upon the airport;

     3.     The number of hangars situated in and upon the airport;

     4.     The number of gallons of aviation fuel sold at the airport during the preceding twelve (12) month period; and

     5.     The number of takeoffs and landings made at the airport during the preceding twelve (12) month period. (Prior code § 3.6)

 

13.04.070 Vehicle regulations.
     A.    No person shall operate any surface vehicle upon the runways, taxiways, terminal operations/passenger area, designated fuel pump area, or area between the fuel pumps and the airport operator’s office and residence, without the authorization of the airport manager or a designee, provided that owners/drivers of surface vehicles may drive to their parked aircraft keeping clear of and yielding right-of-way to all aircraft.

     B.     Drivers shall close the gates, if operational, behind themselves upon entering or leaving the airport, between the hours of five p.m. and eight a.m. (Prior code § 3.7)

 

13.04.080 Commercial and business activities.
     A.    No person shall use the airport for commercial activities without a written contractual agreement with the city. Commercial activities shall include, but are not limited to, carrying passengers for hire, flight instruction, aircraft rental, sales of goods and services, agricultural operations, and aircraft maintenance and repairs.

     B.     Any person using the airport as a base for agricultural and aerial application which involves the loading, the unloading, and the storage of chemicals shall first obtain a permit from the city. The permit shall specify the areas which may be used, applicable restrictions, the amount of such operating fees that may be required and the time period for which the permit is valid. (Prior code § 3.8)

 

13.04.090 Liability of the city.
     The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned upon the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user. Users shall release, hold harmless, and indemnify the city, its officers, and employees from any liability or loss resulting from such use, as well as against claims of third persons so using the airport. The exercise of the privilege of use shall constitute an acknowledgment that the city maintains the airport in a governmental capacity. (Prior code § 3.9)

 

13.04.100 Comprehensive insurance requirement.
     Any person operating an aircraft on the Susanville Municipal Airport shall maintain comprehensive public liability and property damage insurance on the aircraft in such amounts as may be determined by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 3.10)

 

13.04.110 Penalties.
     A.    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 36900 and the penalties provided in the Government Code, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine as provided in Section 36900 of the Government Code.

     B.     Cumulative Remedy. The remedies prescribed in this chapter are intended to be in addition to any other procedures or penalties prescribed by law. (Prior code § 3.11)

 

13.04.120 Enforcement.
     It shall be the duty of the airport manager, or the city administrator or a representative, of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all other state and federal laws and regulations applicable to the Susanville Municipal Airport. (Prior code § 3.12)

 

13.04.130 Airport safety rules and regulations.
     Safety rules and regulations, as established by the appropriate federal and state entities, are referred to and made a part of this chapter. Such additional safety rules and regulations as may be required by the city shall be adopted by resolution and by reference made a part of this chapter. (Prior code § 3.13)

 

13.04.140 Charge for private airplanes based on municipal airport.
     The city council shall, by resolution, set fees for airplanes based at the municipal airport. These fees shall be posted at the airport. (Prior code § 3.14)

Chapter 13.08 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
13.08.010 Water division created.
     There is created and established, a water division within the public works department of the city. The administration and operation of this division shall be in accordance with city ordinances, all policies and procedures adopted by resolution of the city council and all applicable state and federal regulations.

     The purpose of this chapter shall be to promote the general public health and welfare through a sound policy of conservation, protection and beneficial use of our water resources. The water system shall be operated as a self-sustaining enterprise, funded through water consumption rates, connection fees and such other charges as may be necessary to ensure sufficient revenues to defray the normal operation and maintenance costs, maintain the integrity of the system, and provide for future expansions to the system. (Prior code § 24.100)

 

13.08.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

     “Air-gap separation” means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and flood-level rim of the receptacle, and must be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the flood-level rim of the vessel. In no case may the gap be less than one inch.

     “Auxiliary supply” means any water source or system, other than the public potable water system, that may be available in the building or on the premises.

     “Backflow” means the reversal of flow, i.e., other than in the intended direction, into the distribution of the public water system, from a service connection.

     1.     “Back-pressure” means the backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, or other means that could create pressure within the system which is greater than the city’s water system’s normal operating pressure.

     2.     “Back-siphonage” means a form of backflow due to a negative or subatmospheric pressure within the city water system.

     “Backflow-prevention device” means a state-approved device to counteract back-pressure or prevent back-siphonage.

     “Consumer” means any person, public or private corporation, the United States of America, the state, any county, municipality and all governmental agencies and departments, and every officer, agent and employee thereof during the course of employment, who uses, or is entitled to use, water from the Susanville water system.

     “Cross-connection” means any physical arrangement whereby the public water system is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other nonpotable water system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage, reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination into the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, moveable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow could occur, are considered to be cross-connections.

     “Department” means the public works department of the city.

     “Division” means the water division of the public works department of the city.

     “Double-check valve assembly (DCVA)” means an assembly, approved by the state of California Department of Health, composed of two single, independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections, likewise approved by the state Department of Health, for testing the watertightness of each check valve.

     “Fire emergency service connection” means the permanent, unmetered connection to the division’s water main of any system of hoses, sprinklers, hydrants or other appliances, to be designed and used primarily for fire emergencies only.

     “Premises” and “property” means all real property, buildings and appurtenances occupied by an owner, lessee or tenant as a dwelling or a business, commercial or industrial enterprise.

     “Reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention device (RPBD)” means approved by the University of Southern California, Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, as specified in their latest approved list of backflow devices incorporating two or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, two shutoff valves, and equipped with the necessary appurtenances for testing.

     “Service connection” means the pipeline extending from the division’s watermain, whether located in a public thoroughfare or private right-of-way, to the property line of the consumer’s premises, together with the valves, meter and fittings necessary to connect to the consumer’s private pipeline.

     “Water division” means that division of the public works department of the city designated to operate and administer the water system. The term includes the public works director and other employees of the city serving in said water division.

     “Water service” means the procurement, treatment and delivery of potable water through the water system to the consumers.

     “Water system” means all water pipelines, storage tanks, springs, wells, pumps, and appurtenances purchased by the city from C. P. National, on or about June 1, 1985, together with such additions and improvements thereto as may be made from time to time. (Prior code § 24.110)

 

13.08.030 Water division.
     A.    Officials. The city council shall be the governing body of the water division, and the city administrator shall act as the chief administrative officer of the division and the public works director shall direct and supervise the operations of the division.

     B.     Assignment of Organizational Responsibilities. The director of public works may delegate or assign responsibilities for water system operations and activities to such division and personnel as the director of public works may deem appropriate and necessary.

     C.     Principal Function and Activities. The principal functions and activities of the water division shall include, but not be limited to:

     1.     To the extent the water system and supply is capable, provision of an adequate supply of water for domestic, commercial, industrial and public use;

     2.     Protection of water sources, supplies, and facilities from contamination and degradation;

     3.     Maintain and enhance the quality and performance of system facilities;

     4.     Ensure the fiscal integrity of the water division.

     D.    Water Service Area. The area in which water service is provided is shown on the “Official City of Susanville Water Service Area Map,” now on rile in the office of the director of public works. The city council may, from tune to time by resolution, adjust boundaries of said map.

     E.     The city council reserves the right and power to, and may from time to time, by resolution, adopt rules and regulations for the operation, conduct and maintenance of the water system, and for furnishing water to consumers, and may likewise by resolution prescribe rules for the extension of water mains within and outside the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 05-923 § 1, 2005; prior code § 24.120)

 

13.08.040 Water rates, charges, fees and deposits.
     A.    The city council as governing body of the water division, shall by resolution following a public hearing, establish and/or modify the water rates, charges, fees, deposits and other costs as are necessary to protect  the fiscal integrity of the water system.

     B.     Water Service Charge. Water supplied to consumers shall be measured through meters installed by the water division at the expense of the consumer. A basic minimum monthly service charge for all metered service is fixed by meter size. The service charge is a readiness-to-serve charge to which is added the charge, computed at the quantity rates, for water used during the month.

     C.     Quantity Rates. Quantity rates are those monthly rates for water supplied through the meter. Meters may not be read for billings every month, but shall be read at least quarterly each year. For the months meters are not read, bills will be based on an estimate of customer’s use, and will be adjusted to actual use at the next meter reading.

     D.    Fire Emergency Service Fee. The fee for fire emergency service is applicable to all public and private hydrants and private sprinkler systems for fire suppression uses only, and is in addition to the basic monthly water service charge and quantity rates. The fee shall be based on the size of the fire connection service pipeline.

     E.     Service Connection Fees. The fee for new service connections, fire emergency service connections, or additions to existing service connections represent an allocation of the value of the existing water system and shall be determined based upon the specific needs of the new facility for service.

     1.     Facility needs will be determined by the public works director using recognized engineering standards for determining peak demand for the specific use.

     2.     This service connection fee shall be applicable to all new service connections, or additions to existing service connections, whether commercial, individual, residential, multiple-dwelling unit (per unit), mobilehome parks (per space) development, subdivision or otherwise, and must be paid to the city before the service connection or addition can be made.

     F.     Other Service Connection Charges. The applicant shall pay for all costs of the water service installation, including, but not limited to, the pipe, service tap fee, meter box, meter valves, hydrants, labor, trenching, backfilling, patching, and administrative costs. This water service line shall be installed from the nearest main to the applicant’s property line. All work shall conform to city standards. The applicant may have the city provide this work or have a contractor perform the work. Only the city water division is authorized to make the service tap at a city water main.

     G.    Water Service Deposits. Upon making application to the city for provision of water service, the consumer so making written application shall pay to the city a security deposit unless said applicant is able to show financial responsibility by reference to previous utility use. Said deposit shall be retained by the city, to insure payment of all bills. When service to the applicant is discontinued permanently, this deposit, less any amount still due the city for water service, shall be refunded without interest.

     H.    Miscellaneous Fees and Deposits. Following is a listing of services for which fees or deposits are required:

     1.     Water service application;

     2.     Restoration of service;

     3.     Second restoration of service;

     4.     Meter maintenance, repair, and renewal;

     5.     Meter tampering;

     6.     Meter testing (deposit);

     7.     Backflow prevention devices, etc.;

     8.     Fire hydrant use (deposit);

     9.     Application fee.

     I.      Prorating of Charges, Fees or Deposits for Water. There shall be no prorating of charges, fees or deposits for water whatsoever.

     J.      Vacant Dwellings. In the event a premises becomes vacant, the regular rates shall continue to be charged until the water division has been notified by the owner or consumer to shut off the water. (Ord. 06-929 § 2, 2006; Ord. 05-923 § 1, 2005; prior code § 24.140)

 

13.08.050 Application for water service.
     Application for Water Service. Before water shall be supplied to any consumer, the consumer shall first make a written application accompanied by the application fee to the city for water service on a form provided by and containing such information as may be required by the city. Thereupon, a service connection shall be made at the nearest distribution main to consumer’s premises after all charges provided for have been paid. (Ord. 05-923 § 1, 2005: prior code § 24.150)

 

13.08.060 Water bills.
     A.    Monthly Billing. Regular water bills shall be issued on a monthly basis according to the billing dates established by the director of public works.

     B.     Payment. All charges for water shall be due and payable on the billing date. All unpaid water charges shall become delinquent at five p.m. on the twentieth day after the billing date as indicated on the water bill.

     C.     Billing Errors. In the event of a billing error, an adjustment shall be made in the consumer’s bill. The adjustment period shall not exceed one year, from the date the error occurred, either in the consumer’s favor or the city’s favor.

     D.    Owners of Property Liable for Payment. In the event the consumer fails to pay for city water service provided to the consumer, then, in that event of nonpayment, the owner of the property shall be liable for the payment of the rates for such water.

     E.     Delinquent Payments and Penalties—A Lien Upon Real Property. Water charges that have not been paid after the fifteen days notice set forth in Section 13.08.070(B)(1) of this chapter, and any other delinquent rates, charges, liens and penalties provided for in this chapter, shall constitute a lien upon the real property served (except that no such lien shall be created against any publicly owned property) and such lien shall continue until the delinquent rates, charges, liens and penalties thereon are fully paid or the property sold therefor. (See Government Code Sections 54354 and 54355.) (Ord. 05-923 § 1, 2005; prior code § 24.160)

 

13.08.070 Discontinuance and restoration of service.
     A.    Consumers About to Vacate Premises. Each consumer about to vacate that consumer’s premises supplied with water service by the division shall give advance notice of same to city, specifying the date service is desired discontinued; otherwise, the consumer will be held responsible for payment of city water service furnished to such premises until the division shall have notice of such vacancy.

     B.     Division’s Right to Discontinue Service.

     1.     For Nonpayment of Bills. If water charges are not paid by the twentieth day after the billing date, a notice of delinquency shall be mailed to the consumer stating that water service shall be disconnected and a penalty imposed, if not paid in full within fifteen (15) days from date of mailing. If the amount owed is not paid on or before the fifteenth day, then the water service shall be shut off and a penalty imposed, which penalty, together with all delinquencies and fines, shall be paid before the service can be restored to the same consumer at the same address or at a new address.

     2.     For Failure to Comply with Regulations. If a consumer fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter or the regulations of the division after five days notice of the violation, the division may forthwith discontinue water service to consumer until full and complete compliance is obtained.

     3.     For Failure to Have Current Sewer Service. The following shall apply (except where the consumer has never had sewer service supplied to the premises, and instead has a septic system): if a consumer fails to have current sewer service supplied to the premises, the division, after twenty-four (24) hours notice to the consumer, may forthwith discontinue water service to the consumer at said premises. Written notification to the division from the local Susanville Consolidated Sanitary District (SCSD) shall be sufficient cause for the division to issue the twenty-four (24) hour notice to the consumer.

     4.     For Improper Disposal of Water. Any person who, as a consumer on any premises, fails, refuses, or neglects to equip and maintain such premises with plumbing of such character, quality and design as to assure that water will be disposed of into a disposal system acceptable to the city, five days after notice thereof shall have all water service discontinued pending such improvements.

     5.     For Wastage of Water. Any person who wastes, causes, permits or allows to be wasted any water whatsoever, five days after notice thereof shall have all water service disconnected.

     6.     For Refusal to Admit Employees to Inspect the Premises Water System. Any person who, as consumer on any premises, refuses admittance to, or hinders or prevents an inspection of the premises water system by an authorized employee of the division, after twenty-four (24) hours’ notice thereof, shall have all water service discontinued.

     C.     Only Water Division May Turn Water On. No person shall tap, open, connect to, or cause, permit or allow to be turned on, by any means, any water service after the water has been turned off by the division.

     D.    Restoration of Service. Restoration of service will be made upon compliance with rules and regulations and payment of the amounts due and owing, and payment of a reconnection fee. In the event the consumer turns on the water service or suffers or causes to be turned on after it has been turned off for any such reasons mentioned in this subsection, the division may again turn off the water service, remove the meter, and charge the consumer the appropriate fee for this service in addition to any other amounts due from the consumer, before water service is restored. (Ord. 05-923 § 1, 2005; Ord. 05-915 § 1, 2005: prior code § 24.170)

 

13.08.080 Meters.
     A.    Meters City Property. All services and all water meters shall remain the property of the city. The expense of the maintenance, repair, and renewal of such meters due to the wear of normal service shall be borne by the city, and city shall pass the cost of same on to the consumer by following proper rate setting procedures according to law; provided, however, any expense occasioned by any act, careless or otherwise, on the part of the consumer, or any member of the consumer’s family, or any person in the consumer’s employ, shall be charged to such consumer.

     B.     Unlawful to Tamper with Meters or Break Seals. No person shall tamper with, or remove, cause, permit, or allow to be tampered with or removed, any meter where the meter has been attached to any service, nor break, cause, permit, or allow to be broken, any meter seal. If such tampering or breaking occurs, the division shall impose a penalty charge for such tampering and may remove the meter.

     C.     Bypass Connections Unlawful. Any bypass or connection around the meter between the service and the main shall be prohibited. All water use shall pass through the meter.

     D.    Unlawful to Cover Meter Boxes. It is unlawful at any time to cover meter boxes with trash, rubbish, dirt, or other foreign matters, to permit vegetation or other shrubbery to grow over meter boxes, or to park automobiles or other vehicles over meter boxes.

     E.     Consumer’s Dissatisfaction with Meters. In case of a consumer’s dissatisfaction with the registration of any meter, the consumer shall make a written complaint to the director of public works, together with a deposit to cover the cost of meter testing as set from time to time by resolution of the city council, which sum will be returned and the water bill equitably adjusted for a period of not to exceed the prior six months in any case where the meter is found to register over three percent more than the amount of water which actually passes through the meter. If the meter is found to be accurate within three percent, the deposit shall be retained by the city and the water bill paid as rendered. If the meter is found to register more than three percent less than the amount of water which actually passes through the meter, the deposit shall be forfeited and the bill equitably adjusted for a period of not to exceed the prior six months.

     F.     Meter Failures. If a meter fails to register during any billing period the consumer shall be charged on the basis of the average monthly consumption as shown by the meter when in use and registering accurately over a period of one year or, in the event the consumer has not received water for a period of one full year, then over such lesser period. (Ord. 05-923 § 1,, 2005; prior code § 24.190)

 

13.08.090 City’s responsibility for water damage.
     The city’s responsibility shall end at the meter, and the city shall in no case be liable for damages occasioned by water running free from open or faulty fixtures or from broken or damaged pipes beyond the water meter. (Prior code § 24.200)

 

13.08.100 Water usage.
     A.    Supplying Other Persons. No service connection for water shall be made for the purpose of supplying through a common service two or more independent consumers occupying premises held under the same or independent ownership, unless such premises are located on the same lot or the premises are known as an apartment, hotel, or other facility covering more than one lot, and then only provided the owner or operator of such premises shall guarantee the payment of all bills for water and water service.

     B.     Property Disposal. Wasting Water. As provided in subsection (B)(3) of Section 13.08.070 of this chapter, water shall be disposed of into an approved legal disposal system. No person shall waste any water in any device of any kind as set forth in subsection (B)(4) of Section 13.08.070.

     C.     Backflow Prevention Device, Pressure Regulators, Check Valves, Syphon Breakers, and Pressure and/or Temperature Relief Valves. If and when the safety and protection of the water system or any appliance thereof so requires, either a backflow prevention device, approved pressure regulator, check valve, siphon breaker, or pressure and/or temperature relief valve shall be installed immediately by the consumer, at the consumer’s expense, on the consumer’s side of the city’s water meter, and at the appliance or piece of equipment as required by the division to effectively serve the purpose intended. The device must operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves, less than the pressure on the public water system side of the device. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the check valves must be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve the differential relief valve must operate to maintain the reduced pressure by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure drops below two pounds per square inch, the relief valve must open to the atmosphere thereby providing an atmospheric zone between the two check valves.

     D.    May Be Restricted. The use of water for sprinkling, wetting construction, or industrial purposes may be restricted if and when consumer’s water usage is contrary to the public safety and welfare.

     E.     In Case of Fire. In case of fire in the city within reach of the water system, fire hydrants, hose connections, faucets, and other outlets to such system in the immediate area of the fire shall be promptly closed, except such as may be used in quenching the fire and preventing the spread of fire, and shall be kept closed until such fire is extinguished. In addition, it shall be the responsibility of the director of public works to divert, reroute, pump, and otherwise provide the necessary water supply to suppress such fire.

     F.     Unlawful to Connect Other Water. No person shall allow a connection to be made or exist between the city’s water system and another source of water supply or water system unless such connection is fitted with a suitable backflow prevention device approved by the city and the county or state Health Department preventing water from such other source of supply entering the city’s water system.

     G.    Unlawful Entries on Water Facilities. No person shall climb on or upon any water tank or enter on or upon any water source, storage facility, pumphouse or pit without written permission from the department of public works. (Ord. 05-923 § 1, 2005; prior code § 24.210)

 

13.08.110 Cross-connections.
     A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section, in conjunction with Section 1003 of the Uniform Plumbing Code and in conjunction with the state of California Administrative Code, Title 17, Department of Health, and any additions, deletions or amendments thereto, is to protect the public health by the control and prevention of actual and potential cross-connections by requiring the proper installation and safeguarding of service lines leading to premises where cross-connections exist or are likely to occur, by periodic inspections and by regulating plumbing within premises to minimize the danger of contamination to the water system on the premises or the public water system itself.

     B.     Application. This section applies throughout the district to all owners and occupants thereof served by the water system. Every owner and occupant covered by this section is responsible for compliance with its terms and shall be strictly liable for all damages occurring as a result of failure to comply with express terms and provisions contained herein.

     C.     Enforcement. The public works director shall administer the provisions of this chapter. Any deviation, modification or changes from standard or approved methods and materials shall be approved in writing by the public works director.

     D.    Cross-Connections Prohibited.

     1.     Except as provided below, all cross-connections, whether or not they are controlled by automatic devices such as check valves or by hand-operated mechanisms such as gate valves, are prohibited.

     2.     Failure on the part of person, firms or corporations to discontinue the use of all cross-connections and to physically separate cross-connections is sufficient cause for immediate discontinuance of public water service to said premises.

     E.     Installation of Backflow-Prevention Devices. Backflow-prevention devices shall be installed at the service connection or within any premises where, in the judgment of the public works director, the nature and extent of activity on the premises, or the materials used in connection with the activities, or materials stored on the premises would present an immediate or potential and dangerous hazard to health should a cross-connection occur, even though such cross-connection does not exist at the time, the backflow-prevention device is required to be installed. This includes:

     1.     Premises having an auxiliary water supply;

     2.     Premises having internal cross-connections that are not correctable, or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impracticable to ascertain whether or not cross-connection exists;

     3.     Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist;

     4.     Premises having a history of cross-connections being established or re-established;

     5.     Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to permit entry into the public water system, or where a cross-connection could reasonably be expected to occur. This includes the handling of process waters and cooling waters;

     6.     Premises with commercial or residential water softener units (backwash);

     7.     Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled such that if backflow should occur, a serious health hazard may result;

     8.     The following types of facilities, unless the public works director determines that no health hazard exists:

     a.     Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics,

     b.     Laboratories,

     c.     Sewage treatment plants,

     d.     Food and beverage treatment plants,

     e.     Chemical plants using a water process,

     f.      Metal plating industries,

     g.     Petroleum processing or storage plants,

     h.     Radioactive material processing plants nuclear reactors,

     i.      Car washes,

     j.      Any building or structure three stories or higher,

     k.     Others specified by the certified cross-connection specialist.

     F.     Types of Backflow-Prevention Devices Required. The type of prevention device required by subsection E of this section depends on the degree of hazard which exists:

     1.     An air-gap separation or reduced-pressure backflow device shall be installed where the water supply may be contaminated by sewage, industrial waste of a toxic nature, or other contaminant which could cause a health hazard;

     2.     In the case of a substance which may be objectionable but not hazardous to health, a double-check valve assembly, air-gap separation or reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed;

     3.     Pressure type vacuumbreaker units (spring loaded), are the approved units for district supplied irrigation systems. The unit must be installed at least twelve (12) inches above the highest fixture point of water usage and in such a manner that drainage will preclude back pressure.

     G.    Location. Backflow-prevention devices required by this section must be installed at the meter, or at a location designated by the public works director. The device must be located so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and testing, and where part of the device will not be submerged or hidden from proper inspection.

     H.    Installation. Backflow-prevention devices required by this section must be installed under the supervision of the public works director, or assigned agent.

     I.      Approved Backflow Devices. Any protection devices required by this chapter must be approved by the University of Southern California, Foundation for Cross-connection Control and Hydraulic Research, as specified in their latest approved list of backflow devices.

     J.      Inspections. Backflow-prevention devices must be inspected and tested annually or more often when inspections indicate any occasion of failure. An annual inspection fee will be charged. The device must be repaired, overhauled or replaced whenever it is found to be defective. Inspections and tests must be made by a certified cross-connection specialist and the device tagged. Repairs and overhauls will be at the expense of the owner or occupant.

     K.    Termination of Service. The failure of the customer to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, testing or inspection of backflow-prevention devices required by this section is grounds for immediate termination of water service to the premises. (Prior code § 24.215)

 

13.08.120 Water rates outside the city limits and outside the service area.
     A.    Water Rates Outside the City Limits and Inside the Service Area. The rate for each outside-the-city limits water system connection shall be the same as the rate paid by inside-the-city limits water system consumers providing said connection is within the service area existing as of June 1, 1985.

     B.     Water Rates for Existing Connections Outside the Service Area. The rate for each connection existing as of June 1, 1985, which are outside the service area shall be the same as in subsection A of this section.

     C.     Minimum Monthly Water Rates for New Connections Outside the Service Area. The minimum monthly rate for new service connections outside the service area and/or outside the city limits which occur after June 1, 1985, which shall take into consideration the cost of operation and maintenance, property tax costs to the city, and any other cost occurring as a result of providing the service. (Prior code § 24.220)

 

13.08.130 Water systems in subdivisions and other developments—Dedications.
     A.    Subdividers and Developers to Install Approved Water Systems. For any development or subdivision approved by the city council, the subdivider or developer shall furnish and install, at his own expense and cost, a domestic water and fire protection system approved by the public works and fire departments. Upon completion of all work to the satisfaction of the public works and fire departments, the system shall be irrevocably offered for dedication to the city. Water systems to be installed by subdividers or developers shall consist of water mains, laterals, meters, hydrants, valves, pumps, and storage facilities to meet city standards. The water system shall include fire hydrants meeting all standards of design and spacing by the Susanville fire department. All installations will be connected to and become a part of the city water system.

     B.     Use of Service Connections When Property is Subdivided. When property provided with a service connection is subdivided, the service connection shall be considered as belonging to that part of the lot or parcel of land which it directly enters.

     C.     Water Supply Source and Storage Capacity In-Lieu Fee. Subsection A of this section requires that developer-installed water systems include wells, pumps and storage facilities. Concurrent with the submittal of the tentative map or other development application, each and every developer shall submit a water use consumption report for their respective developments to the public works department. Upon a determination by the city that the construction of wells, pumps and storage facilities to serve this development is not practical at this time, the developer shall pay an in-lieu fee dedicated to the construction of these facilities at some future time. The in-lieu fee shall be calculated on the basis of the approved water use consumption report quantities and the unit cost fees established by city council resolution. This fee is in addition to the service connection fee and all other fees and charges enumerated herein. (Prior code § 24.230)

 

13.08.140 Fire hydrants.
     A.    Permits to Use. Any person intending to take water from a fire hydrant in the city, including fire hydrants on private property which are connected to the city water system, shall file an application with the public works department specifying the hydrant(s) to be used and the proposed time(s) of such use. Permits are applicable only to the specific hydrant(s) designated and are not assignable to any other party.

     B.     Fees and Rates for Use. The permit application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee. Users shall be required to pay the current rate for all water usage and shall post a deposit for each hydrant used. This deposit shall be fully refunded upon payment of all water charges and provided the hydrant(s) is in proper working order.

     C.     Proper Use of Hydrant(s). Any person taking water from a city fire hydrant shall use a hydrant wrench obtained from or approved by, the department of public works. The user shall carefully open or close hydrant valves and shall ensure that the hydrants and all parts thereof, remain in good working order.

     D.    Unlawful to Damage Fire Hydrants. It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently damage any fire hydrant in the city. Any person so doing, shall be liable for all costs associated with the repair and restoration of such hydrant(s) to full service.

     E.     Unlawful to Obstruct Access to Fire Hydrants. It is unlawful for any person to create or permit to be created, any obstruction on a public street or alley within fifteen of any fire hydrant in the city. Nothing in this section shall apply to such temporary obstructions as are authorized by an encroachment permit issued by the public works department and upon notification to the fire department of such temporary obstruction. (Prior code § 24.240)

 

13.08.150 Violations—Penalties.
     Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Prior code § 24.250)

Chapter 13.12 GEOTHERMAL SERVICE SYSTEM
Article I. General Administrative Provisions
13.12.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide comprehensive management of the geothermal resources and thermal groundwaters within and adjacent to the city. In furtherance of this overall purpose, this chapter is specifically intended to serve the following subpurposes:

     A.    Conservation and beneficial management of geothermal resources and thermal groundwaters within the city in comprehensive and coordinated manner, so as to assure their continued availability and productivity;

     B.     Continued technical assistance for individual private geothermal resource and thermal groundwater uses, including residential, commercial and industrial activities within the city;

     C.     Maximization of the public welfare and economical benefit to be derived from geothermal resources and thermal groundwaters, by extending their availability throughout the city and elsewhere as much as practical with city geothermal services;

     D.    Minimization of the potential for damage or degradation to geothermal resources and thermal groundwaters;

     E.     Protection of the surface and subsurface environment during development and utilization of geothermal resources and thermal groundwaters within the city;

     F.     Advancement of the scientific study of geothermal resources and thermal groundwaters, through the collection and dissemination of resource data and the demonstration of geothermal technologies;

     G.    Implementation of the city’s general plan and its goals and policies for geothermal development and unitization;

     H.    Coordination with the provisions of Division 3 and Division 6 of the Public Resources Code, and any amendments thereon. (Prior code § 23.1)

 

13.12.020 Scope.
     This chapter includes general provisions for administration of this chapter; the establishment of, and operating measures for, a city-owned and -operated geothermal district and geothermal service in the city; and the establishment of geothermal and thermal groundwater reservoir management procedures. (Prior code § 23.2)

 

13.12.030 Definitions.
     For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, the words, phrases and terms set forth in this chapter shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them in this section.

     “Altering” means the deepening, reaming, recasing, perforating, reperforating, installation of packers or seals, and other material changes in the design or operation of a well.

     “Applicant” means the person making application for a geothermal connection or geothermal service from the city under the provisions of this chapter.

     “Btu” means British thermal unit.

     “Byproduct” means any mineral or minerals (exclusive of oil, hydrocarbon gas, helium or other hydrocarbon substance) which are found in solution or in association with geothermal resources.

     “Cascaded use” means any use which receives the city geothermal service from fluids discharged by a foregoing use, prior to the return of such fluids to a city geothermal service pipeline.

     “City” means the city of Susanville.

     “Commission” means the Susanville utility commission.

     “Constructing” means the boring, digging, drilling or excavating of a well, including the installation of casing or well screens, and other facilities pertinent to development of geothermal resources.

     “Council” means the city council of the city of Susanville.

     “Department” means the public works department of the city of Susanville.

     “Department of public works” means and includes the city office which acts as a geothermal information clearinghouse and data repository and is maintained in the public works department.

     “Director of public works” means director of the public works department of the city, or the director’s authorized representative.

     “Drilling a well” means the drilling, redrilling and deepening of a well within the city.

     “Drilling site” means any site within the city where drilling operations will be, are being, or have been undertaken to construct or alter a well.

     “Geothermal facility” means any space or process heating or cooling apparatus or system used to pump, convey or transport geothermal resources or thermal groundwater, including, but not limited to, groundwater heat pumps, fluid heat exchangers, well and circulating pumps, pipelines, valves, fittings or controls.

     “Geothermal fluid” means any fluid transporting or capable of transporting geothermal heat.

     “Geothermal heat” means heat derived from geothermal resources.

     “Geothermal resources” means the natural heat of the earth and the energy, in whatever form, below the surface of the earth present in, resulting from, or created by, or which may be extracted from, the natural heat, and all minerals in solution or other products obtained from naturally heated fluids, brines, associated gases, and steam, in whatever form, found below the surface of the earth, exclusive of oil, hydrocarbon gas, helium or other hydrocarbon substances, but including specifically:

     A.    All products of geothermal processes, embracing indigenous steam, hot water and hot brines;

     B.     Steam and gases, hot water and hot brines resulting from water, gas or other fluids artificially introduced into geothermal formations;

     C.     Heat or other associated energy found in geothermal formations; and

     D.    Any byproduct derived from them.

     “Geothermal service” means the provision of geothermal fluid by the city to a user pursuant to Article II of this chapter.

     “Groundwater” means any water, except capillary moisture, beneath the land surface or beneath the bed of any stream, lake, reservoir, or other body of surface water, whatever may be the geological formation or structure in which such water stands, flows, percolates, or otherwise moves.

     “Heat rate” means the user fee schedule charged by the city for geothermal service according to a rate schedule adopted by a recommendation of the commission, approved by resolution of the city council.

     “Inhabitant” means businesses and persons within the city.

     “Injection well” means a well constructed, altered, operated or maintained for purpose of injecting geothermal fluids or thermal groundwater into the ground.

     “Owner” means the holder of the record title to real property or the vendee under a recorded land sale contract or any lessee with the lessor’s written consent. Owner does not include those who solely own mineral or geothermal rights in real property.

     “Person” means an individual person, firm, partnership, association, social or fraternal organization, corporation, nonprofit corporation, trust, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch of government, or similar entities, any group combination acting as a unit, or the successors or assigns of any of the aforesaid.

     “Prospect well” means any well constructed or altered as a geophysical test well, seismic shot hole, mineral exploration drilling, core drilling or temperature gradient test well and constructed or altered specifically in prospecting for geothermal resources.

     See “geothermal service.”

     “Service connection” means that part of the city geothermal service distribution system which connects the city’s meter and pipeline to the user’s pipeline.

     “Therm” means a unit of measure consisting of one hundred thousand Btu’s. This unit is used to measure delivered geothermal heat for billing purposes.

     “Thermal groundwater” means groundwater which is of a temperature greater than ambient groundwater.

     “User” means a person who receives or is capable of receiving geothermal heat and/or fluids from the city.

     “User service pipeline” means the private pipeline that connects the user’s private geothermal system to the city’s meter and distribution pipeline.

     “Water well contractor and drilling machine operator” is as defined by ordinance or state law, and any amendment thereto.

     “Well” means any artificial opening or artificially altered natural opening, however made, by which geothermal fluids or thermal groundwater is sought or through which geothermal fluids or thermal groundwater flows under natural pressure or is artificially withdrawn, or is used to operate a heat exchanger within the well, provided that this definition shall not include a natural spring.

     “Well drilling machine” means any machine or equipment used in the construction or alteration of wells. (Prior code § 23.4—23.17, 23.19—23.39)

 

13.12.040 Rates, fees and charges.
     The rates, service charges, connection fees, and such other charges as provided for by this chapter shall be established by recommendation of the commission and resolution of the city council, and may be amended upon recommendation of the commission, as approved by resolution of the city council, at any time. Rates charged may be fixed and classified according to the type of use or the amount of geothermal resources and/or fluid used or any combination thereof. Such rates, fees and charges shall not be changed without a public hearing first being held before the city council. Such hearing shall be advertised by published notice as required by state law. (See Government Code Section 66018.) (Prior code § 23.40)

 

13.12.050 Service map—Adoption of standards.
     A.    Geothermal Service Map. The location of geothermal service facilities are hereby established on the map entitled, “Susanville Geothermal Service Map” as presently on file in the department of public works, which map is incorporated herein by reference. The map shall hereinafter be referred to as the “Geothermal Service Map,” and shall be maintained on file in the department of public works. Any revision or replacement of this map shall be likewise filed and incorporated into this chapter by reference.

     B.     Public Works Department Geothermal User Service Pipeline Connection Standards. Pipeline connection standards shall be established by the director of public works. (Prior code § 23.41)

 

13.12.060 Conformity with general plan and other ordinances and statutes.
     All actions pursuant to this chapter and all uses of land in conjunction herewith shall conform to the city’s general plan, all other applicable code provisions and ordinances, and applicable state statutes. (Prior code § 23.42)

 

13.12.070 Appeal of administrative decisions.
     Any decision rendered by administrative officials of the department pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the commission. Such appeal shall be in writing, shall identify the administrative decision appealed from, the specific grounds for appeal, and shall be filed with the director of public works not more than fourteen (14) days following the date of the notice to the affected party of the administrative decision. The commission shall consider the appeal at its next regular meeting following the filing of the appeal, and upon considering all pertinent testimony and evidence, may sustain, modify or reverse the decision appealed from. The commission shall provide a written report of its decision to the affected party by certified mail within five days of the commission’s action. Within ten (10) days following receipt of the commission’s written decision, the affected party may appeal the commission’s decision to the city council, by filing a written notice of appeal with the specific grounds for appeal stated thereon, with the city clerk. The city clerk shall set the matter for consideration before the city council at its next regular meeting following filing of the appeal. The decision of the city council on the appeal shall be final, and the council may for good cause, continue the matter to a later meeting date. (Prior code § 23.43)

 

Article II. City Geothermal Service
13.12.080 Administrative organization and principal functions.
     A.    Officials. The city council shall act as the governing body of the geothermal service, and the director of public works shall act as the chief administrative officer of the service.

     B.     Assignment of Organizational Responsibilities. The director of public works may delegate or assign responsibilities for geothermal service functions and activities to such divisions and personnel as the director of public works may deem appropriate or necessary.

     C.     Principal Functions and Activities. The principal functions and activities of the geothermal services shall include, but not be limited to:

     1.     The exploration for and confirmation of geothermal resources and/or thermal groundwaters;

     2.     The monitoring of geothermal and/or thermal groundwater reservoirs and the management of reservoir activities, so as to promote stable reservoir conditions and enhance reservoir productivity;

     3.     The supplying, furnishing and selling of geothermal resources to city inhabitants;

     4.     The supplying, furnishing, and selling of any surplus geothermal resources over and above the needs of the city to persons outside the city, and for purposes deemed appropriate by the city council;

     5.     The establishment and maintenance of an office where local geothermal information and all geothermal records authorized or required by this chapter shall be kept and made available for public inspection and reproduction; a registry of local geothermal wells and geothermal facilities shall be established and maintained at the department of public works;

     6.     The sponsoring of and participation in the scientific study and demonstration of geothermal resources and technologies;

     7.     Geothermal disposal drainage work as authorized by the city; and

     8.     All other acts and things which may be requisite, necessary or convenient in carrying out the purpose of this chapter and state law. (Prior code § 23.44)

 

13.12.090 Boundary.
     A.    Establishment. The geothermal service boundary shall encompass all land within the corporate limits of the city, as now or hereafter constituted.

     B.     Extension of Service Outside City Boundary. Service shall normally be available only to users located within the city boundary. However, the city council may, by contract, extend service outside the boundary in cases where such extension is deemed in the best interests of the city, but only after determining that such service capability is based upon a surplus of geothermal resources existing over and above any and all demands of the users within the city boundary. Contracts for service outside the city boundary shall condition continued service upon the continuance of the surplus over city needs. (Prior code § 23.45)

 

13.12.100 Finances.
     A.    Operational Financing. Geothermal service operations and maintenance, within or without the city boundary, may be financed by one or more, or any combination, of the following methods:

     1.     Such rates, fees and charges as may be required by this chapter;

     2.     Refunding bonds, of the same character and tenor as those general obligation bonds replaced thereby, by resolution of the commission and approval by resolution of the city council;

     3.     Revenue bonds pledging the gross revenues of the city’s heating service, if approved by resolution of the city council;

     4.     Federal and state grants-in-aid, and private endowments; and

     5.     All other legal means.

     B.     Improvement Financing. Geothermal service improvements, within or without the city boundary, and including, but not limited to, the purchase, lease or acquisition of real estate or equipment, and the planning, design, construction, reconstruction, extension, enlargement, purchase, lease or acquisition of geothermal facilities, may be financed by one or more, or any combination, of the following methods:

     1.     Such rates, fees and charges as may be required by this chapter;

     2.     Revenue bonds secured by all or any part of the geothermal service’s gross revenues subject to approval by resolution of the city council; such revenue bonds shall not be subject to the percentage limitations applicable to general obligation bonds, but shall be payable solely from such part of the revenues of the geothermal service;

     3.     Refunding bonds, of the same character and tenor as those revenue bonds replaced thereby, by resolution of the city council;

     4.     Special assessments, pursuant to laws of the state of California, and city procedures for local improvement districts;

     5.     Federal and state grants-in-aid, and private endowments; and

     6.     All other legal means.

     C.     Refund of Certain Geothermal Pipeline Extension Costs. If any person is required by the city council to advance to the city costs of extending a geothermal pipeline adjacent to property other than their own so that geothermal service is provided for such other property without further extension of the geothermal pipeline, the commission shall require the owner of the other property, prior to providing geothermal service to that property, to pay to the department a pro rata portion of the cost of the extension. The commission, upon approval of the city council, may then refund a portion of the funds originally paid by the first owner. The right to require subsequent users to pay the pro rata portion shall not continue for more than twenty (20) years after the date of installation of the extension of the geothermal pipeline. The amount to be refunded shall be determined by commission resolution, and granted only upon city council approval. (Prior code § 23.46)

 

13.12.110 Authorized facilities and other geothermal sources.
     A.    Authorized Facilities. In performance of the functions and activities specified in Section 13.12.080(C), the city may plan, design, construct, acquire, lease, operate, maintain and improve a system of geothermal facilities, which may include, but need not be limited to, wells; heat exchangers; pumps for fluid extraction, circulation, and injection; pipelines for conveying fluids; disposal facilities; tanks for storing fluids; fluid or heat metering devices; and various testing instruments and system control devices.

     B.     Other Heat Sources. The commission, with city council approval by resolution, may authorize, by contract, the department’s purchase and distribution of heat or fluid generated by sources other than the city’s wells, in order to supplement the city’s geothermal resource. (Prior code § 23.47)

 

13.12.120 Improvement procedures.
     A.    Authority to Initiate Improvement Projects. Improvement projects for the geothermal service shall be initiated by the city council upon its own motion or upon the written petition of the owners of one-half of the property that benefits specifically by the proposed improvement. A study will then be initiated by the commission to assess economic feasibility.

     B.     Compliance with State Siting Requirements. All contemplated improvements shall comply with applicable statutes and regulations of the state of California.

     C.     Procedures for Special Assessments. Whenever any geothermal service improvement is to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessments according to benefits, the city council shall administer such assessment procedure in accordance with state law and this code, and such other procedures applicable to local improvement districts.

     D.    Means of Improvements. The construction work for improvements of city geothermal facilities will be done in whole, or in part, by the city, by a contract, or by any other governmental agency, or by any combination thereof, as authorized by the city council and the laws of the state.

     E.     Acquisition of Private Wells and Geothermal Facilities. As provided for in Section 13.12.100(B), the city council may purchase, lease or receive as a gift, any privately owned geothermal wells and/or geothermal facilities, within or without the city boundary, for purposes of improving the geothermal services principal functions and activities. (Prior code § 23.48)

 

13.12.130 Service connection procedures.
     A.    Application Procedure. Any person desiring to connect a user pipeline to the city geothermal distribution pipeline, may apply for such service connection with the department on forms provided for that purpose. An application fee to be paid at the time of making application shall be set by resolution of the city council. The department shall approve or deny said application in writing within fourteen (14) days of its filing.

     B.     Service Connection Fees. Upon approval of a service connection application, the applicant shall remit a connection fee to the department in an amount to be established by resolution of the city council.

     C.     Upon payment of the connection fee, said applicant shall receive a service connection permit that will expire one year following its issuance. An extension of the one-year period may be granted for good cause by the department.

     D.    Failure to remit the fee in full, or otherwise comply with fee requirements, within fourteen (14) days of the date of application approval shall render said approval void. The applicant shall be given written notice by mail that the approval is void.

     E.     Service Connection Standards and Inspections. All user service pipeline connections to the geothermal service system, including cascaded use connections, shall be completed under procedures promulgated by the department. All completed and approved user service pipeline connections shall remain inoperable, by department deactivation of the city geothermal meter, until such time as a service account is activated by the department. All completed and approved service connections shall be used only for the purpose expressly cited in the connection permit; service users shall not, in any manner, otherwise connect or divert the heat or fluid provided by the service connection. The city shall not be liable for the materials, workmanship, operation or maintenance, relating to the user service pipeline or to private heating or cooling equipment installed beyond the city’s service connection. (Prior code § 23.49)

 

13.12.140 User service procedures.
     The commission shall recommend to the city council application procedures, required service deposits, billing procedures, service charges, and procedures for delinquent accounts. The city council, by resolution, shall adopt same and shall, after reviewing the recommendation of the commission, establish all fees and charges to be charged for geothermal service and supply, as well as for cascaded uses. (Prior code § 23.50)

 

13.12.150 Terms and conditions of geothermal service.
     All geothermal services provided by the city shall be subject to the following terms and conditions:

     A.    The city reserves the right to cease operation of the geothermal system, or any part thereof, and cancel such services as may be provided by the system for reasons of emergency maintenance or repairs as authorized by the director of public works. The director of public works shall diligently endeavor to provide user and public notice prior to such emergency actions at the earliest time and most comprehensive extent;

     B.     The city council, by resolution, may establish regular seasonal periods of geothermal service operation and nonoperation;

     C.     The city shall assume no liability whatsoever, direct or implied, for any user damages or injuries incurred as a result of geothermal service interruption or cancellation;

     D.    The city shall not warrant or guarantee the temperature or chemical quality of the fluid delivered to users. The city shall not assume any liability whatsoever, direct or implied, for corrosion, scaling, or similar physical degradation of user pipelines or private heating or cooling equipment utilized beyond each service connection;

     E.     Force Majeure. Natural catastrophe, or other causes beyond the reasonable control of the parties, which prevent city from providing, or user from accepting, any of city’s services covered by this chapter, shall operate to suspend the obligations of user and city during the period required to remove such cause. (Prior code § 23.51)

 

Article III. Geothermal and Thermal Groundwater Reservoir Management
13.12.160 Reservoir management policy.
     In furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, it shall be the policy of the city, in exercise of its powers to provide for the public health, safety and welfare, that all geothermal and thermal groundwater wells existing on the effective date of this chapter, and those constructed or altered thereafter, be used in such a manner as to:

     A.    Conserve and protect the geothermal resource and thermal groundwater within and adjacent to the city, in order to enhance reservoir productivity and benefit; prevent wasteful extraction and disposal of geothermal fluids and thermal groundwater; prevent geothermal fluid and thermal groundwater temperature degradation; maintain stable static levels of geothermal fluids and thermal groundwaters; prevent thermal pollution of surface environs and waters;

     B.     Increase and disseminate the scientific knowledge of geothermal and groundwater resources; and

     C.     Protect the public health, safety and welfare from improperly constructed, operated, maintained or abandoned geothermal or thermal groundwater wells or pipelines. (Prior code § 23.52)

 

13.12.170 Existing wells.
     A.    All geothermal and thermal groundwater wells existing or under construction within the city on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as existing wells, and shall be subject to the requirements of this article.

     B.     Registration of Existing Wells. Owners of such existing wells, within and without the city, may register their wells with the department of public works as soon as said ordinance becomes effective. Such registration shall be voluntary and without cost to the owner, and shall be for purposes of providing information to the department of public works in accordance with Section 13.12.080(C)(5). Said registration shall be on forms supplied by the department of public works for that purpose, and may include, but not be limited to, the name and address of the owner, specific location of the well, date of construction, depth and diameter of the well, specifications of casing, bottom hole temperature, static fluid or water level, type of geothermal utilization system, accessibility for monitoring devices, and disposal method, if any. The director of public works shall direct reasonable public notice of the city’s inhabitants at large, explaining the registration program and encouraging participation.

     C.     Existing Surface Discharge Elimination. Any geothermal or thermal groundwater well or geothermal facilities constructed or altered after the effective date of said ordinance shall be operated or altered in such a manner as to conform with applicable environmental rules and regulations. Surface discharges for maintenance purposes shall be conducted in accordance with applicable environmental rules and regulations. (Prior code § 23.53)

 

13.12.180 New wells.
     A.    All geothermal or thermal groundwater wells constructed or altered within the city subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as new wells, and shall be subject to the requirements of this article.

     B.     Application for Well Permit. In addition to all applicable state and federal requirements, any person, except the city, desiring to construct, install or alter a geothermal or thermal groundwater well within the city shall first apply for a well permit at the department of public works, on forms provided for that purpose by the department of public works. Well contractors or drilling operators shall not commence construction or alteration of a geothermal or thermal groundwater well prior to the owner of a proposed well receiving a well permit.

     C.     Application Fee. All applications for a geothermal or thermal groundwater well permit shall be accompanied by an application fee established by city council resolution.

     D.    Application Review. The director of public works shall review each application to determine any potential impacts upon the city geothermal service; any potential for adverse effects to the surrounding reservoir and other wells; conformity with city plans and ordinances; and to assure registration with the department of public works.

     E.     Permit Decision. No later than thirty (30) days from the date of filing a well permit application using the criteria contained in subsection F of this section, the director of public works shall notify the applicant, by certified mail, of his or her decision, setting forth any conditions imposed, and, if denied, the basis thereof. Any well permit issued pursuant to this chapter is in addition to any permits required by state and federal regulations.

     F.     Permit Decision Criteria. Permit decisions pursuant to subsection E of this section shall contain written findings for approval or denial which may include, but are not limited to, the following criteria:

     1.     The estimated hydrological impacts of the proposed well’s operation upon the reservoir and surrounding wells;

     2.     The adequacy of provisions for environmental protection and public safety;

     3.     The compliance of the proposed well and its use with this chapter, the city’s general plan, and all other applicable city laws, ordinances, regulations; and

     4.     Such other reservoir management criteria as may be deemed directly relevant to the proposed well or its operation.

     G.    Appeal of Permit Decision. Applicants or other affected persons may appeal the permit decision to the commission in accordance with Section 13.12.070.

     H.    Authority to Attach Conditions to Permits. When the director of public works determines that certain construction or operational conditions are necessary to assure the conservation and protection of thermal groundwater and/or geothermal resources, or to assure the conservative and efficient utilization of said water and/or resources, the director of public works may stipulate conditions within a well permit issued according to subsection I of this section; such conditions may include, but are not limited to:

     1.     Restrictions on hours of well construction, with appropriate requirements for noise muffling and waste disposal necessary to assure compatibility with surrounding land uses;

     2.     Well casing requirements above and beyond state requirements, necessary for groundwater and geothermal resource protection;

     3.     Restrictions on pumping, heat exchanging, storage and injection operations necessary for the conservation or protection of thermal groundwaters and geothermal resources;

     4.     Requirements for scientific sampling, testing or monitoring, necessary to conserve or protect thermal groundwater or geothermal resources, or to determine the permitted well’s impacts on such water or resources.

     5.     Utilization of the geothermal resource to be for the maximum public benefit in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter and the city’s general plan.

     I.      Completion Inspection. Upon completion of any geothermal or thermal groundwater well construction or alteration, but prior to any testing or commencement of regular use, the owner shall promptly notify the department of public works to request a well completion inspection. Promptly after receiving such request, the department of public works shall cause an inspection and written report thereof to be made for purposes of assuring compliance with this chapter and registration with the department of public works. Notice of well pump testing shall be given in accordance with Section 13.12.200(C).

     J.      New Surface Discharges. Any geothermal or thermal groundwater well or geothermal facilities constructed or altered after the effective date of this chapter shall be operated or altered in such a manner as to conform with applicable environmental rules and regulations. Surface discharges for maintenance purposes shall be conducted in accordance with applicable environmental rules and regulations. (Prior code § 23.54)

 

13.12.190 Injection wells—Filing of application copy.
     All wells constructed, operated, or maintained for purposes of injecting geothermal fluids or thermal groundwater into the ground shall comply with applicable state statutes and rules relating to injection, as well as applicable portions of Section 13.12.180 of this chapter, including, but not limited to, permit requirements. (Prior code § 23.55)

 

13.12.200 Resource data collection.
     A.    Annual Well Survey. The department of public works in accordance with Section 13.12.180(C), shall annually mail to all registered geothermal or thermal groundwater well owners within and without the city, a questionnaire to update original registration information and to document, to the extent possible, well operation characteristics of a designated time period. Scheduling of the survey shall be determined by the director of public works and response to it shall be voluntary. The city may issue such surveys on a more frequent and geographically selective basis when investigating specialized geothermal or groundwater matters.

     B.     Well-Drilling Data. A copy of all well logs prepared in accordance with the state or city law shall be furnished to the department of public works within thirty (30) days after the completion of the well construction or alteration by the well contractor or drilling operator.

     C.     Well Maintenance or Pumping Notice. No less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to performing any well maintenance or maintenance-related well pumping within the city, the person performing said work shall notify, telephonically or by written or personal message, the department of public works. Such notification shall include, but need not be limited to, the nature of maintenance or pumping to be performed, well location, name of owner, and the approximate duration of the work. Notice of maintenance necessary for emergency reasons for which advance notice was impossible may be given to the department of public works as soon as such emergency conditions will reasonably permit. (Prior code § 23.56)

 

13.12.210 City inspection and monitoring of wells and geothermal facilities.
     A.    In connection with the principal functions and activities of the city geothermal service, city officials, employees and agents may enter upon any property within the city for purposes of inspecting geothermal or thermal groundwater wells and geothermal facilities, or monitoring the operational characteristics of such wells and facilities, when such inspection and monitoring is reasonably necessary to the assessment of groundwater or geothermal fluid temperatures, chemistry, static levels, quantities and movements; the assessment of land subsidence or erosion; or other assessment of other indices related to geothermal or groundwater reservoir management, or protection of the public safety and welfare.

     B.     The department of public works shall provide affected property owners with reasonable prior notice of any intended inspection or monitoring, describing the nature, purpose and duration of the necessary inspection or monitoring; such inspections or monitoring shall be conducted in accordance with applicable city and state procedures for inspection warrants, if the land owner or other person in possession objects to any such inspection or monitoring. (Prior code § 23.57)

 

13.12.220 Wasteful or defective wells— Repair—Violation.
     Whenever the director of public works determines that any geothermal or thermal groundwater well within the city is, by the nature of its construction, installation or operation, causing wasteful use of thermal groundwater or geothermal fluids, or is adversely interfering with other wells, or is polluting groundwater or surface water, or creating a public nuisance, the director of public works shall promptly notify the affected owner, by certified mail, of the wasteful or defective well, and require said owner to repair or adjust the well within sixty (60) days. Any person who fails to repair a well, or continues a wasteful or defective operation, after expiration of the sixty (60) days shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable as provided in Article IV. (Prior code § 23.58)

 

Article IV. Enforcement
13.12.230 Enforcement—Violation—Penalty.
     A.    Responsible Official. The director of public works, or his authorized representative, shall be responsible for enforcing this chapter.

     B.     Violations. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, and subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day of violation. A violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense for each day the violation continues after notice of violation, but such fine shall not exceed a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).

     C.     Equity. In addition to any other remedies provided by law, the city council or its authorized representative acting for and on behalf of the council may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate proceedings to prevent or temporarily or permanently enjoin or abate the violation of any provisions of this chapter.

     D.    User Noncompliance. In addition to other enforcement measures provided by this chapter, the city council may discontinue geothermal service to any user who fails to comply with provisions of this chapter after fourteen (14) days’ written notice to comply, sent by certified mail by the department of public works to said user. Said notice may include an explanation of the city’s intent to discontinue service, and shall offer the user an administrative hearing before the city council in order to resolve the dispute. If no hearing is requested, of if the hearing fails to resolve the dispute, the department may proceed to discontinue service as scheduled. (Prior code § 23.60)

Chapter 13.16 NATURAL GAS SERVICE SYSTEM
Article I. General Provisions
13.16.010 General service area.
     The city establishes its right to provide natural gas service to customers within the general service area as adopted by the city council and as may be amended from time to time by the city council. Under that right the city establishes a natural gas utility as an enterprise of the city. Natural gas service shall not be mandatory for potential customers and the city expressly reserves the right to deny or postpone service to applicants until the necessary distribution system extensions become economically feasible and product supplies are adequate to meet the required demand. (Ord. 01-875 § 1, 2001; Prior code § 27.01)

 

13.16.020 Turning on.
     No natural gas from the city natural gas supply shall be turned on for service into any premises by any person but the director of public works or some person authorized by him or her to perform this service. (Prior code § 27.02)

 

13.16.030 Application—Fee.
     Application to have natural gas turned on shall be made in writing to the city, and shall contain an agreement by the applicant to abide by and accept all of the provisions of this chapter as conditions governing the use of the city natural gas supply by the applicant. A fee for turning on the natural gas shall be set by city ordinance. (Prior code § 27.03)

 

13.16.040 Deposit.
     A deposit to be set by city ordinance shall be made with each such application, this sum to be retained by the city, to insure payment of all bills. When service to the applicant is discontinued permanently this deposit, less any amount still due the city for natural gas service, shall be refunded without interest. (Prior code § 27.04)

 

13.16.050 Natural gas retrofit.
     No natural gas shall be turned on for service in premises in which the customer’s piping and/or facilities including appliances do not comply with the ordinance of the city.

     All new natural gas customer piping and methods of installation shall comply with the requirements of the applicable uniform code. Installations using existing piping shall be approved by the city applying applicable codes and ordinances. (Ord. 01-875 § 1, 2001; Prior code § 27.05)

 

13.16.060 Service connection—Fee.
     Only authorized and qualified individuals working for or at the direction of the natural gas operator (city) may make any connection to the natural gas mainline and/or service line facilities up to and including the natural gas meter. (Ord. 01-875 § 1, 2001; Prior code § 27.06)

 

13.16.070 Resale.
     No natural gas shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the city supply to any premises other than that for which application has been made and the meter installed, except in case of emergency. (Prior code § 27.07)

 

13.16.080 Tampering.
     It is unlawful for any person not authorized by the city to tamper with, alter or injure any part of the city natural gas works or supply system, or any meter. (Prior code § 27.08)

 

Article II. Service Pipes
13.16.090 Installation.
     All natural gas service line facilities from the mains to and including the meter on the premises to be served shall be at the cost of the owner of the property to be served or the applicant for the service. Such installation shall be made by the city. (Ord. 01-875 § 1, 2001; Prior code

§ 27.10)

 

13.16.100 Pipes.
     No service shall be installed unless all applicable fees are paid and the service conforms to specifications drawn up by the city council and approved thereby, a copy of which specifications shall be kept on file by the city clerk and shall be open to inspection by any person interested. (Prior code § 27.11)

 

13.16.110 Repairs.
     All repairs to customer houseline facilities shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises served. The city may in the case of an emergency, repair any customer houseline facilities and if this is done the cost of such repair work shall be repaid to the city by the owner of the premises served. (Ord. 01-875 § 1, 2001; Prior code § 27.12)

 

13.16.120 Excavations.
     Excavations for installing customer houseline pipe and facilities or repairing the same shall be made in compliance with the ordinance provisions relating to making excavations in streets. (Ord. 01-875 § 1, 2001; Prior code § 27.13)

 

13.16.130 Shut-off boxes.
     Each natural gas service line shall include a readily accessible shut off valve located outside the premises in accordance with State and Federal pipeline safety regulations. (Ord. 01-875 § 1, 2001; Prior code § 27.14)

 

13.16.140 Main line extensions.
     If any person is required by the city to advance costs to extend a gas line to property other than their own so that gas service is available for such other property without further extension of the gas line, the city shall require the owner of the other property, prior to connecting to the gas line, to pay the city a pro rata portion of the original cost of the gas line extension. The city, upon approval of the city council, may then refund a portion of the funds originally paid by the first owner. The right to require subsequent users to pay the pro rata portion shall not continue for more than ten years after the date of installation of the extension of the gas line. The amount to be refunded shall be based on a square footage ratio of individual property owners and total square footage of all potential users; and the council shall deduct therefrom no more than ten percent in administrative costs, to be paid to the city before refund is made. (Prior code § 27.15)

 

13.16.145 Construction standards.
     All new construction or reconstruction of all gas service or distribution services shall be by permit issued by the city of Susanville and shall conform to the Susanville Municipal Utility Construction Standards, January 15, 2001, which is adopted by reference. (Ord. 01-875 § 1, 2001)

 

Article III. Meters—Rates
13.16.150 Meters required.
     All premises using the city natural gas supply must be equipped with an adequate natural gas meter furnished by the city but paid for by the consumer; provided, that such natural gas service may be supplied by the city at a flat rate of charge until such meter may be installed.

     Before any premises are occupied a natural gas meter shall be installed therein as herein required or application made for such natural gas service at the flat rate of charge until the meter can be installed or no natural gas shall be furnished such premises. (Prior code § 27.20)

 

13.16.160 Installation.
     Meters shall be installed in a location that will be easy of access. (Prior code § 27.21)

 

13.16.170 Reading meters.
     The director of public works shall read or cause to be read every natural gas meter used in the city at such times as are necessary that the bills may be sent out at the proper time. (Prior code § 27.22)

 

13.16.180 Testing meters.
     Any municipal natural gas meter shall be taken out and tested upon complaint of the consumer, upon payment of a fee to be set by city ordinance. If upon test the meter is not within three percent of being accurate, it shall be repaired or replaced and the fee returned to the consumer. (Prior code § 27.23)

 

13.16.190 Rates and charges.
     All property upon which any building has been or may hereafter be erected having a connection with any mains or pipes which may be hereafter constructed and used in connection with the city natural gas system shall pay those fees, costs, charges and rates as established by city council resolution. The city council may also establish by resolution such depreciation, reserve, contingency and replacement funds as may be necessary and appropriate for the efficient and reasonable operation of the natural gas utility enterprise. The fees, cots, charges and rates may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city council without a public hearing. (Ord. 01-875 § 1, 2001; Prior code § 27.24)

 

13.16.200 Bills.
     Bills for natural gas used shall be dated and sent out at times as may be directed by the mayor and council, but no less than monthly. (Prior code § 27.25)

 

13.16.210 Nonpayment.
     The natural gas supply may be shut off from any premises for which the natural gas bill remains unpaid as set forth in applicable state law. When shut off, natural gas shall not be turned on unless applicable state law requirements regarding payment of the past due amounts and a reconnect fee are met. (Prior code § 27.26)

 

13.16.220 Abandoned connection.
     Whenever any connection to the natural gas system is abandoned, because the building to which the natural gas connection is made has been abandoned, destroyed or removed, the director of public works may remove the meter and any pipe or connections in the public right of way or easement, and cap, plug or otherwise seal the pipe or main. Before taking any such steps the director of public works shall notify the owner of the real estate if the owner’s name and address is known, and shall notify the persons shown on the real estate tax records as having paid taxes on the property the last time taxes were paid. Such notice shall be made by mail, at least thirty (30) days before any action is taken under this section. If natural gas is leaking, the director of public works shall take immediate action, and send the notices within three working days of the time action was taken. (Prior code § 27.27)

 

13.16.230 Unlawful connection.
     No person, firm or corporation shall make any connection to the natural gas system of the city without the permission of the city. (Prior code § 27.28)

 

13.16.240 Penalties for violations.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as prohibiting institution of criminal charges against any person stealing natural gas from the city by bypassing a meter, tampering with a meter or for any other action which violates any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 01-875 § 1, 2001; Prior code § 27.29)

Chapter 13.20 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT
13.20.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.

     “Commission” means the public utilities commission of the state.

     “Person” means individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

     “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

     “Underground utility district or district” means the area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.20.030.

     “Utility” means all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Prior code § 22.1)

 

13.20.020 Public hearing by city council.
     The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned, by mail, of the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be opened to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 22.2)

 

13.20.030 Underground utility districts— Designation by resolution.
     If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Prior code § 22.3)

 

13.20.040 Underground utility districts— Maintenance, etc., of overhead structures prohibited—Exceptions.
     Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.20.030, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.20.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 22.4)

 

13.20.050 Exceptions to chapter—Generally.
     In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030, the city may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:

     A.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

     B.     Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.

     C.     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited.

     D.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts.

     E.     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street.

     F.     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services.

     G.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts.

     H.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Prior code § 22.5)

 

13.20.060 Exceptions to chapter—Overhead facilities allowable in emergencies.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten (10) days, without authority of the director of public works in order to provide emergency service. The director of public works may grant special permission on such terms as he may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated structures. (Prior code § 22.6)

 

13.20.070 Notice to utility companies and property owners of underground requirements.
     Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location.

     Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners, as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to the affected utilities. (Prior code § 22.7)

 

13.20.080 Responsibilities—Utility companies.
     If the underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Prior code § 22.8)

 

13.20.090 Responsibilities—Property owners.
     A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.20.080 and the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served.

     B.     In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.20.030, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. (Prior code § 22.9)

 

13.20.100 Responsibilities—City.
     The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.20.030. (Prior code § 22.10)

 

13.20.110 Extension of time.
     In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Prior code § 22.11)

Title 14 (RESERVED)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Note
Chapter 15.02 BUILDING REGULATIONS—GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 15.04 BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 15.08 BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM
Chapter 15.09 NEGLECTED VACANT BUILDINGS
Chapter 15.10 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Chapter 15.12 MOVING OF BUILDINGS
Chapter 15.16 OCCUPANCY OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Chapter 15.40 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapter 15.50 HISTORIC BUILDING PRESERVATION

Note
*       As to removal of rubbish, etc., from buildings, etc., see Sections 8.08.070 to 8.08.090 of this code. As to obstruction of streets during construction of buildings, see Section 12.04.020. As to numbering of buildings, see Chapter 15.08.

Chapter 15.02 BUILDING REGULATIONS—GENERAL PROVISIONS
15.02.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the building regulations adopted by this title is to safeguard life, health, and safety by regulating the following:

     A.    The design, construction, type of materials, use, occupancy, and maintenance of all buildings and structures within the city;

     B.     The design, location, construction, installation, type of materials, use, operation, and maintenance of all building service equipment within the city, including all electrical equipment, mechanical equipment, and plumbing equipment; and

     C.     The design, location, construction, installation, type of materials, and maintenance of all signs within the city. (Ord. 20-1021 § 1, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 1, 2017)

 

15.02.020 Administration of building regulations.
     The building official shall be primarily responsible for administration of the building regulations adopted by this title, subject to the overall direction and control of the director. In carrying out such responsibility the duties of the building official shall include, but not be limited to, the application of the building standards adopted by Chapter 15.04 of this title, issuance of the building permits, issuance of the certificates of occupancy and connection approvals, conduct of the inspections, test and surveys, and undertaking the enforcement actions for violations of this title. The fire chief shall assist the building official in administering the building regulations adopted by this title when specially required by such regulations. (Ord. 20-1021 § 1, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 1, 2017)

 

15.02.030 Maintenance of copies of current building standards.
     The building official shall make available in the offices of the building division, for review by the general public, at least one copy of all uniform codes or state building standards adopted by Chapter 15.04 of this title, as well as any other state regulations relating to buildings or structures, building service equipment or signs published in Titles 8, 19, 20, 24, and 25 of the California Code of Regulations. (Ord. 20-1021 § 1, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 1, 2017)

 

15.02.040 Maintenance of building records.
     A.    The building official shall maintain an official copy, which may be on microfilm or electronically scanned image or another type of reproducible copy, of the approved plans and specifications for every building or structure for which a permit has been issued throughout the life of such building or structure; except that the building official need not maintain copies of approved plans and specifications for the following buildings or structures:

     1.     Single- or multiple-family dwellings not more than two stories and a basement in height;

     2.     Garages and other structures appurtenant to single- or multiple-family dwellings;

     3.     Farm or ranch buildings; and

     4.     Any one story building, other than steel frame or concrete buildings where the span between framed walls does not exceed twenty-five (25) feet.

     B.     The official copy of all approved plans and specifications maintained by the building official pursuant to the provisions of this section, other than plans and specifications for banks, other financial institutions, or public utilities, shall be public records and open for inspection at the office of the building official. Provided that official copies of approved plans and specifications may hot be duplicated, in whole or in part, except with the written permission of the certified, licensed, or registered professional or a successor, if any, who signed the original plans and specifications and a written permission of the owner of such building, or by order of a proper court. (Ord. 20-1021 § 1, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 1, 2017)

 

15.02.050 Manner of serving notices.
     Any notice required to be served on a person pursuant to the provisions of building regulations adopted by this title shall be deemed served when made in writing and either personally delivered to such person or deposited in the U.S. mail, registered and postage prepaid, addressed to such person’s last known address. However, when a notice is required to be served on the owner of any premises on which a building or structure, building service equipment or sign is located, such notice may be served by depositing a copy of same in the U.S. mail, registered and postage prepaid, addressed to the owner of the premises at the owner’s address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county of Lassen. Service of a notice by mail in the manner provided by this section shall be effective on the date of mailing and the failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the notice. (Ord. 20-1021 § 1, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 1, 2017)

 

15.02.060 Administrative review of determination or action of building official by city administrator.
     A.    Right to Administrative Review. Any person aggrieved by a determination made or action taken by the building official under the building regulations adopted by this chapter, may apply to the city administrator for administrative review of such determination or action.

     B.     Applications for Administrative Review. Applications for the administrative review of a determination made or action taken by a building official shall be in writing and shall be filed in the office of the city administrator no later than fifteen (15) days following the date such determination or action was made or taken, or where a written notice of such determination or action is required to be served, the date such notice is served, provided that the city administrator may extend the time for filing an application for good cause shown. In addition to setting forth a request for administrative review of a determination made or action taken by the building official, such application shall contain a brief statement of the reasons why the applicant believes that such determination or action does not comply with the building regulations adopted by this title and the relief requested by the applicant from such determination or action.

     C.     Decision on Application for Administrative Review. Upon the filing of an application for administrative review of a determination made or action taken by the building official, the city administrator shall consider the application and render a decision either affirming the determination or action of the building official or reversing or modifying such determination or action. Prior to rendering a decision, the city administrator may, with sole discretion, convene an informal hearing for the purpose of reviewing evidence or hearing arguments bearing on such decision, provided notice of the date, time, and place of such hearing is served a reasonable time prior to such hearing on the applicant and any other person who would be aggrieved by a decision reversing or modifying the determination or action of the building official and who has filed with the city administrator a written request for notice of such decision. After rendering a decision the city administrator shall promptly inform the building official of the decision and cause a notice of the decision to be served on the applicant and any other person who would be aggrieved by a decision reversing or modifying the determination or action of the building official and who has filed with the director a written request for notice of such decision.

     D.    Stay of Determination Made or Action Taken by Building Official Pending Administrative Review. Any determination made or action taken by the building official, save and except for an order revoking a permit, an order to stop work on a building or structure, building service equipment or sign, an order to vacate a building or structure, or an order to disconnect building service equipment which is made by the building official, shall be stayed pending a decision of the city administrator on an application for administrative review of such determination or action. (Ord. 20-1021 § 1, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 1, 2017)

 

15.02.070 Appeal from decision of city administrator.
     A.    Right to Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city administrator following the filing of an application for the administrative review of a determination made or action taken by the building official, may appeal such decision to the city council by filing a written request within fifteen (15) days of the notice of decision of the city administrator and accompanied by a fee as may be set by the city council.

     B.     Stay of Decision of City Administrator Pending Appeal. Any decision of the city administrator on an application for administrative review of a determination made or action taken by the building official, save and except for a decision affirming or modifying an order revoking a permit, an order to vacate a building or structure, building service equipment or sign, or an order to disconnect building service equipment which was made by the building official pursuant to this title, shall be stayed pending a decision of the city council on such appeal. (Ord. 20-1021 § 1, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 1, 2017)

 

15.02.080 Administrative review and appeals—Aggrieved person.
     A person shall be deemed “aggrieved” for purposes of the administrative review of a determination made or action taken by the building official and for purposes of the appeal of a decision of the city administrator following the filing of such application for administrative review, if such determination, action or decision has a significantly greater effect on such person than on the public in general. (Ord. 20-1021 § 1, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 1, 2017)

 

15.02.090 Building regulations preempted by state or federal law.
     The building regulations adopted by this title shall not apply to nor govern any building or structure, building service equipment, or sign where the local regulation of such building or structure, building service equipment, or sign is preempted by any federal or state law. Provided, however, that the purpose of this section is merely to confirm existing law and is not intended to grant an exemption or exclusion from compliance with the city’s building regulations in any instances where the city may exercise jurisdiction under the laws of the federal and state government as well as this code. (Ord. 20-1021 § 1, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 1, 2017)

Chapter 15.04 BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
15.04.010 California Building Standards Code—Adopted by reference.
     The California Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition, adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, including the amendments, appendixes, annexes, attachments and modifications included in Title 15 Building and Construction of the city of Susanville Municipal Code is adopted as the building code of the city and one certified copy thereof shall be kept in the office of the building official. (Ord. 2020-1021 § 2, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 2, 2017; Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.020 California Building Code appendices—Adopted by reference.
     Appendices C, G, H, I and J of the California Building Code, 2019 Edition, are adopted as part of the building code of the city. (Ord. 2020-1021 § 2, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 2, 2017; Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.030 California Residential Building Code appendices—Adoption by reference.
     Appendix H of the California Residential Building Code, 2019 Edition, is adopted as part of the building code of the city. (Ord. 2020-1021 § 2, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 2, 2017; Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.040 California Electrical Code appendices—Adopted by reference.
     Annex C of the California Electrical Code, 2019 Edition, is adopted as part of the building code of the city. (Ord. 2020-1021 § 2, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 2, 2017; Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.050 California Mechanical Code appendices—Adopted by reference.
     Appendices B and C of the California Mechanical Code, 2019 Edition, are adopted as part of the building code of the city. (Ord. 2020-1021 § 2, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 2, 2017; Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.060 California Plumbing Code appendices—Adopted by reference.
     A.    Appendices A, C, and I of the California Plumbing Code, 2019 Edition, are adopted as part of the building code of the city.

     B.     A pressure expansion tank with a minimum acceptance capacity of one gallon shall be installed in every new potable water system connected to the city’s water system. Additionally, when a water heater is replaced and there is not an expansion tank present one shall be installed.

     C.     A pressure regulator in compliance with California Plumbing Code, 2019 and with a maximum supply pressure setting of 80 psi shall be installed in each water system where the City determines that there may be the potential for excess water pressure.

     D.    All proposed gray water systems shall require planning division use permit approval prior to issuance of a plumbing permit. (Ord. 2020-1021 § 2, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 2, 2017; Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.070 California Fire Code appendices—Adopted by reference.
     Appendices B, BB, C, CC, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, N and Appendix Chapter 4 of the California Fire Code, 2019 Edition are adopted as part of the fire code of the city. (Ord. 2020-1021 § 2, 2020; Ord. 17-1007 § 2, 2017; Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.080 Establishment of certain limits.
     Limits of districts referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the California Fire Code in which storage of class 1 and class 2 liquids in aboveground tanks are prohibited.

     The limits of districts referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the California Fire Code in which new aboveground storage of class 1 and class 2 liquids are prohibited, are established as follows:

 

Commencing at a point which is the point on the easterly line of Roop Street distant 300 feet north of the northerly right-of-way line of Main Street and thence running easterly and parallel to the northerly and easterly right-of-way line of Main Street to the southeasterly right-of-way line of Riverside Drive Extension; thence southwesterly along the southeasterly right-of-way line of Riverside Drive Extension and Riverside Drive to a point which is southwesterly 300 feet distant from the southwesterly right-of-way line of Main Street; thence northwesterly and westerly parallel to the southerly line of Main Street to the easterly line of Roop Street; thence northerly, along the easterly line of Roop Street to the point of beginning.

(Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.090 Fire protection systems.
     A.    Section 903.2 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

An Automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all levels of all new Groups A, B, E, F, I, M, R-1, R-2, R-4, and S occupancies of more than 3,000 square feet.

 

Automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 13 for Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, R-2, R-4, and S occupancies. NFPA 13R is applicable for residential occupancies up to and including four stories in height, in Groups R-1, R-2, R-4 occupancies.

 

Exceptions to or reductions in code requirements are not allowed for the installation of sprinkler systems, in accordance with NFPA 13R, unless specifically allowed by the California Fire Code.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Detached gazebos, temporary tents and ramadas for public use.

2.     Independent buildings such as restrooms or snack shops 600 square feet or less that are of non-combustible construction associated with golf courses, parks, and similar uses.

3.     Guardhouses that are less than 300 square feet in size used to control access to or within residential and/or commercial developments of combustible construction or 600 square feet or less that are of non-combustible construction.

4.     Detached equipment or storage buildings for commercial use not exceeding 300 square feet.

5.     Detached non-combustible canopies used exclusively for automotive, motor fuel-dispensing stations not exceeding 5,000 square feet, or detached non-combustible carports or parking canopies regardless of size.

6.     Recreation vehicles that were not site built and are portable in nature.

7.     Factory built buildings utilized as temporary office buildings similar to real estate leasing offices and construction offices.

 

     B.     Building Additions. Section 903.21.2.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

Building additions in existing occupancies other than R-3 shall be protected by an automatic fire sprinkler as follows:

a.     Existing buildings less than 3,000 square feet as of January 1, 2014. Additions resulting in the structure exceeding 3,000 square feet shall be protected by automatic fire sprinklers in the new addition area. Additions resulting in the structure exceeding 3,000 square feet and increasing the size by more than 50% will require that the entire structure be retrofitted with automatic fire sprinklers.

b.     Existing buildings greater than 3,000 square feet as of January 1, 2014. Addition(s) resulting in an increase of up to 50% of the existing size shall be protected with automatic fire sprinklers in the new addition area. Additions greater than 50% of the existing building size will require the entire structure to be retrofitted with automatic fire sprinklers.

c.     They are required to be protected in accordance with the California Fire Code, NFPA 13R, and NFPA 13.

 

     C.     Modifications. The chief of the fire department shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the intent of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed shall be entered upon the records of the city and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.

     D.    Appeals. Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the chief of the fire department to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision being appealed.

     E.     Determination of New Materials, Processes or Occupancies Which Shall Require Permits. The building inspector and the chief of the fire department shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code. The chief of the fire department shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his or her office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.

     F.     Fire Prevention and Self-Inspection.

     1.     Bureau of Fire Prevention—Appointment of Inspectors. The chief of the fire department may designate such members of the fire department as inspectors, as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the city council the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the fire department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause.

     2.     Self-Inspection for Certain Low Risk Businesses. For the purpose of providing and maintaining functions necessary for the prevention of fire and for the protection of life and property from fire and panic, the chief of the fire department does establish a self-inspection program assuring certain occupancies within the city are inspected on a periodic basis for fire safety or at the discretion of the chief of the fire department or designee. The chief of the fire department will maintain the policy, forms and documents to administer this self-inspection program. Failure to comply with this self-inspection program will result in treble inspection fees as outlined in the current “City of Susanville Fees for Services.”

     G.    Penalties for Violation. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the California Fire Code adopted herein or fails to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor. All persons violating the Fire Prevention Code shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 19-1015 § 1, 2019; Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.100 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings—Adopted by reference.
     The 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings shall be used when addressing substandard and dangerous buildings that cannot be addressed with Health and Safety Code Sections 17920 through 17927 or other adopted codes and is adopted as part of the building code of the city. (Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.110 Amendments.
     Due to local climate conditions the following amendments shall apply in all cases:

     A.    Building Code Section 1809.5 item Number 1 shall read as:

 

The frost line in the city of Susanville is hereby determined to be twenty inches below finished grade.

 

     B.     Section 1809.8 for plain concrete is revised to read:

 

In each building foundation, except those that are engineered by a California licensed architect, civil or structural engineer, there shall be two # 4 reinforcing bars spaced six inches apart side by side in the footings.

(Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.120 Furnishing of security in connection with certificate of occupancy.
     A permit applicant may qualify for a temporary certificate of occupancy under the provisions of the building code when they are unable to comply with all of conditions of his or her project, the building official with the consent of other applicable departments/divisions is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy, provided that the applicant satisfies the following requirements: (1) agreeing in writing to perform any such act or condition within a specified period of time; and (2) furnishing security in connection with the performance of such act or condition. The security shall be one of those allowed by the state of California Government Code Section 66499(a), and shall be at least one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the costs of performance of such act or condition. (Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.130 Certificate of occupancy.
     No building or structure shall be used or a certificate of occupancy shall only be issued when the building permit is issued as final, all fees have been paid, and all other departments, agencies and divisions who have placed conditions upon the permit have been satisfied. Certificates of occupancy are issued for all new construction including, but not limited to, industrial, commercial and residential buildings; building additions where a change in occupancy classification occurs; and any change in occupancy classification for an existing building. (Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.140 Resolution changing fees.
     On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required in accordance with the established fee schedule as currently adopted by resolution of the city of Susanville. The permit cost is based upon the current cost of construction valuation established by either taking the actual contract price or shall be determined by the use of the most recent building valuation data chart for construction cost as published in the “Building Safety Journal,” published by the ICC, and/or by permit fees established by resolution for individual electrical, mechanical, or plumbing items or fixtures. (Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.04.150 Work commenced without permit.
     Where work for which a permit is required is started prior to obtaining a permit the fees for said permit shall be doubled. The payment of the double fee shall not relieve the persons from fully complying with the other provisions of this title or from additional penalties prescribed in this title. (Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 15.08 BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM
15.08.010 Required.
     Prior to the occupancy of any building within the city and throughout the life of the building, the owner of said building shall comply with the requirements of this section.

     A.    All numbers shall be assigned by the city, shall be legible, shall be placed in an approved location and shall be easily viewed from the public entrance to the property. Numbering plans for multiple units, condominium projects and alike shall be submitted and approved during the project review process.

     B.     All numbers shall be maintained for the life of the use.

     C.     All new numbers shall be internally illuminated, with a contrasting background, four-inch minimum height and one-half-inch minimum stroke width. New multiple unit dwellings shall also erect and maintain a lighted directory(ies) at each vehicle entrance displaying building and unit numbers. (Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.08.020 Notice to change building numbers.
     Whenever any property owner has been notified by the city to change the numbers of a building, the old numbers may be temporarily retained in addition to the new numbers for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. (Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.08.030 Enforcement of chapter.
     It is made the duty of the city, whenever they have knowledge of any violation of this chapter, to give notice thereof to the owner, or if he or she cannot be found, to the agent or occupant of the premises where the violation occurs; and if, after two weeks, the cause of complaint is not removed, the penalties of this code will be enforced. (Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 15.09 NEGLECTED VACANT BUILDINGS
15.09.010 Findings and purpose.
     The Susanville city council finds that vacant buildings and vacant boarded-up buildings are a major cause and source of blight in both residential and nonresidential neighborhoods, especially when the owner of the building fails to actively maintain and manage the building to ensure that it does not become a liability to the neighborhood. Vacant buildings attract vagrants and transients and invite criminal activity, the dumping of trash and garbage and unauthorized occupation. The use of vacant buildings by transients, who may employ primitive cooking or heating methods, creates a risk of fire for vacant buildings and adjacent properties. Vacant buildings, whether or not those buildings are boarded, discourage economic development and retard appreciation of property values. It is the responsibility of the owner to prevent owned property from becoming a burden to the neighborhood and community, and a threat to the public health, safety and welfare.

     The city council also finds that because of the potential economic and public health, safety and welfare problems caused by vacant buildings, the city needs to monitor vacant buildings so that they do not become attractive nuisances, are not used by vagrants or trespassers, are properly secured and maintained, and do not become a blighting influence in the neighborhood. City departments involved in such monitoring include the police department, fire department, planning and building division and engineering division. There is a substantial cost to the city for monitoring vacant buildings which should be paid by the owners of the vacant buildings. The city has established the vacant building monitoring program to accomplish this purpose.

     The purpose of this chapter is to require that vacant dwellings and buildings within the incorporated limits of the city of Susanville are maintained to certain minimum standards and suitable for use or habitation while allowing them to be properly secured and boarded up for a limited period time, and that dwellings and buildings which remain vacant and unoccupied for appreciable periods of time do not become public nuisances. (Ord. 17-1011 § 6, 2017)

 

15.09.020 Remedies for violation.
     A building that is vacant or vacant and boarded in violation of this chapter is a public nuisance. In addition to the provisions in this chapter, the city is authorized to use the remedies set forth in state law, the California Building Code, the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, and the city of Susanville Municipal Code.

     The remedies, procedures and penalties provided by this chapter are cumulative to each other and to any others available under state law or other city ordinances. The imposition of a vacant building monitoring program fee shall not preclude the city from seeking all other remedial penalties available under the city of Susanville Municipal Code.

     Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be charged with either an infraction for each day such violation continues or with a misdemeanor. In addition to the remedies provided herein, violations of this chapter may be abated as a public nuisance pursuant to Chapter 8.32 of this code and/or administrative citation(s) issued pursuant to Chapter 8.40 of this code. (Ord. 17-1011 § 6, 2017)

 

15.09.030 Vacant and neglected vacant building.
     A.    “Vacant building” means any building or structure, or unit in a building or structure, which is unoccupied or occupied by unauthorized persons. The definition includes without limitation, buildings or structures of any nature intended for human habitation, occupation or use and includes manufactured housing or mobile homes. A neglected vacant building is a vacant building which is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     A building or structure, or unit in a building or structure, is not deemed to be vacant for purposes of this chapter if:

     1.     The building is the subject of an active building permit for improvement, repair or rehabilitation and the owner is progressing diligently to complete the repair or rehabilitation;

     2.     The building or structure meets minimum building code standards, does not otherwise constitute a pub lic nuisance, is ready for use or occupancy and/or is actively being offered for sale, lease or rent;

     3.     The building or structure, including the premises on which it is located, does not otherwise constitute a public nuisance and is not likely to become a public nuisance because it is being actively maintained and monitored. Active maintenance and monitoring shall include:

     a.     Maintenance of landscaping and plant materials in good condition,

     b.     Maintenance of the exterior of the building or structure, including, but not limited to, its paint and finishes, in good condition,

     c.     Regular removal of all exterior trash, debris and graffiti,

     d.     Maintenance of the building or structure in continuing compliance with all applicable codes and regulations,

     e.     Active prevention of all criminal activity on the premises, including, but not limited to, use and sale of controlled substances, prostitution and criminal street gang activity, loitering or trespassing;

     4.     The building or structure, or unit in a building or structure is unoccupied due to fire, flood, earthquake, or other form of natural disaster and the owner provides evidence to the city that he or she is actively pursuing assistance for demolition, rehabilitation or restoration of the building and/or premises from local, state or federal assistance programs or from insurance agencies. (Ord. 17-1011 § 6, 2017)

 

15.09.040 Compliance required.
     It is unlawful for any person who owns, controls, or is the responsible agent for a vacant building to maintain, or cause or permit the maintenance of the vacant building as a neglected vacant building or in a neglected condition. (Ord. 17-1011 § 6, 2017)

 

15.09.050 Structural and building standards.
     A.    All vacant buildings shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition.

     B.     All electrical, natural gas, sanitary, and plumbing facilities shall be maintained in a condition which does not create a hazard to public health or safety. (Ord. 17-1011 § 6, 2017)

 

15.09.060 Fire safety standards.
     A.    All vacant buildings shall be maintained in a manner which does not create an unreasonable risk of fire, including the removal of weeds, brush, vegetation, and debris which may constitute a fire hazard.

     B.     No vacant building or portion thereof shall be used for the storage of hazardous, combustible or flammable liquids or other materials which would constitute a safety or fire hazard.

     C.     Heating facilities maintained in accordance with applicable codes. If heating equipment in a vacant buildings is to be disabled fuel supply shall be removed or terminated in accordance with applicable codes and ordinances and the water supply to the building turned off to prevent burst water pipes in freezing weather conditions.

     D.    The street address of the building shall be posted and shall be visible from the street. (Ord. 17-1011 § 6, 2017)

 

15.09.070 Security standards.
     A.    All vacant buildings shall be maintained in a way which secures it from any unauthorized entry.

     B.     The owner or responsible agent of a vacant building which has remained unoccupied for a period of more than thirty (30) days and which has suffered from vandalism, broken windows, broken doors or which had an unauthorized entry must repairs such damage within fifteen (15) days of becoming aware of such damage. Alternately, the owner or responsible agent may provide security which is adequate to prevent further deterioration and/or unauthorized entry for a time period of up to six months. After six months the building must be un-boarded and actively maintained and monitored as required in Section 15.09.030(B)(3) or payment of the quarterly monitoring fee described in Section 15.09.120 shall be applied to the property.

     Methods of securing the building or structure must meet or exceed the following minimum standards or equivalent standards as determined by the city building official:

     1.     Windows. Windows and similar openings shall be boarded with exterior grade plywood of minimum thickness three-fourths inch (to be consistent with door security standards) or its equivalent. Vent holes may be required, as deemed necessary by the building official. The plywood shall be secured in place, as a minimum standard, by a set of two Grade No. 2 Douglas fir two-by-four cross members set at two feet on center vertically, secured to the plywood by three-eighths-inch plated carriage bolts with large washers at each end. Bolts used to secure the cross member shall be threaded to the correct length. A minimum of two such cross members shall be used on each window. Each cross member shall be a continuous piece of lumber, and each should extend approximately one foot past the window opening in each direction unless interior condition limit such extension. Bolts and nuts used to secure the cross members to the plywood must be tightened enough to slightly deflect the wood. Bolt heads must fit tightly against the wood and not give a purchase for pliers or pry bars. The nuts are to be located on the interior side of the structure.

     2.     Exterior Doors. There shall be at least one operable door into each building and into each unit of the building. If an existing door is operable but lacks an operable locking mechanism it may be used and secured with a suitable lock such as a hasp and minimum two-inch case hardened padlock or a one-inch deadbolt or deadlatch with two and one-half-inch long # 8 screws in the strike-plate penetrating into the trimmer stud. If doors and frame(s) have been damaged, the main exterior (required) residential exit door(s) and all commercial exterior exit doors shall be boarded with exterior grade plywood of a minimum thickness of three-fourths inch or its equivalent, fitted to the entry door jamb with maximum one-eighth-inch clearance at each edge from the door jambs and threshold. The existing door should be removed. The plywood shall, as a minimum standard, be attached to three Grade No. 2 Douglas fir horizontal two-by-four wooden crossbars with two each three-eighths-inch carriage bolts and matching hardware, with nuts located on the interior side of the structure. The plywood shall be attached to the door entry with three case-hardened strap hinges located at quarter points and the plywood shall be secured by two case-hardened steel hasps located at third points on the strike side of the door and minimum two-inch case-hardened padlock. Fasteners used to attach the door hasp and hinges shall be the nonreversible type that do not give a purchase for pliers or pry bars. All other unsecured residential doors providing exterior access shall be removed and be secured in the same fashion as windows noted above.

     3.     Overhead garage doors shall be secured. Nailing the door to the jamb or nailing pieces of two-by-four to the jamb is not acceptable. The overhead door shall be padlocked with the existing garage lock or a newly installed one. In an attached garage it is acceptable, as a minimum standard, to insert a piece of Grade No. 2 Douglas fir two-by-four lumber through the overhead mechanism on the inside of the door. The two-by-four shall be long enough to go through both sides of the mechanism or shall be nailed in place on the inside so that it cannot fall out. Secondary garage entrances to the outside of the garage shall be secured with strong-backed plywood as described for windows above. Access doors between the house and attached garage need not be boarded. Detached garages shall be secured as separate structures.

     4.     All materials used to cover and secure window door or other openings shall be painted to match or complement the color of the main structure.

     5.     The property owner shall obtain a building permit for work done under this section and an inspection of the work shall be performed by the city. (Ord. 17-1011 § 6, 2017)

 

15.09.080 Debris removal.
     All vacant buildings including all adjoining yard areas shall be maintained free of debris, combustible materials, litter and garbage. (Ord. 17-1011 § 6, 2017)

 

15.09.090 Appearance.
     A.    All vacant buildings must be maintained in a manner which minimizes the appearance of vacancy, including the prompt removal of graffiti pursuant to Chapter 12.24 of this code.

     B.     All exterior surfaces, including any boarded windows or doors shall be applied with sufficient paint, siding, stucco or other finish to weatherproof the vacant building and to create a sufficient appearance of repair. If the building is subject to an existing use permit all conditions related to maintenance of the exterior of the structure or parcel on which the building is located shall continue to be complied with including the maintenance of landscaping.

     C.     The exterior of the vacant building property, including all landscaping, shall be kept in such condition as not to create the appearance of an unsecured, unoccupied structure or other hazard to public safety. Grasses and weeds shall be cut to a height not to exceed four inches and dead shrubs and trees removed.

     D.    Signage that no longer relate to the activities in the building shall be removed from the site. Any remaining signage shall be maintained in a manner which minimizes the appearance of vacancy. (Ord. 17-1011 § 6, 2017)

 

15.09.100 Quarterly monitoring fee.
     A.    Purpose. The quarterly monitoring fee will be used to finance the cost of monitoring, inspection and enforcement related to this chapter and to secure buildings and abate conditions on the property.

     B.     Fee Imposed. A quarterly monitoring fee in an amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) may be imposed upon every owner of a neglected vacant building in violation of this chapter. The quarterly monitoring fee is due within thirty (30) days of notice that the building is vacant and in violation of this chapter. The fee is due for every quarter upon which the building is vacant, even if the building is only vacant part of the quarter. The owner will be billed at the beginning of each quarter while the building is in violation of this chapter. The fee shall be payable as to any building, residential or nonresidential, which the hearing board, as defined by Chapter 8.32, determines to be in violation of this chapter or has been boarded up for more than six months. Within ten (10) days of enrollment in the vacant building monitoring program, the owner must place a sign in a visible area in the front of the vacant building that indicates that the building has been enrolled in the city of Susanville’s vacant building monitoring program. The sign will be provided to the owner by the city upon enrollment.

     C.     Notice and Procedures. The vacant building monitoring fee shall be billed to the owner of the property. Notice shall be served either personally, by first class mail, or by certified mail, addressed to the owner as the address appears on the last equalized assessment roll or as known to the enforcement official. A hearing shall also be set with the hearing board as proscribed in Section 8.32.120 to allow the owner opportunity to contest enrollment into the vacant building monitoring program. The hearing board may waive the fee and enrollment if the property owners can show that that any of the conditions listed in Section 15.09.030(B)(3) are applicable to the building or structure. The owner shall provide substantial evidence supporting the grounds for the waiver. After conducting the hearing and finding that the property is subject to the vacant building monitoring program, the hearing board shall direct that a bill be sent to the property owner with the notice stating a violation of this chapter exists, setting forth the reasons for the decision and that notice shall constitute enrollment in the vacant building monitoring program.

     D.    The owner of a vacant building shall not allow or cause any use of the property or any buildings thereon unless the property owner has first corrected the violations which caused placement into the program and has paid the required quarterly monitoring fee, as well as any other penalties or fines owed to the city.

     E.     Within fifteen (15) days of the decision by the hearing board to bill for the vacant building monitoring program fee, the city administrator or designee shall file in the office of the county recorder a notice that the building is subject to the vacant building monitoring program fee and that upon transfer of the property the new owner shall have ninety (90) days to bring the building or structure into compliance.

     F.     Upon transfer or sale of a vacant building, the seller shall provide written notification to the city administrator or designee that the property has been transferred or sold.

     G.    Any fees established pursuant to this chapter which are more than thirty (30) days delinquent, or not paid within thirty (30) days after the decision of the hearing board has been mailed to the owner, shall constitute an assessment against the property. The city may use all legally available procedures to collect any unpaid fee, including, but not limited to, collecting the unpaid fee on the tax roll or recording a lien on the property, consistent with applicable law. (Ord. 17-1011 § 6, 2017)

Chapter 15.10 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
15.10.010 Definition—Dangerous building.
     For purposes of this chapter “dangerous building” means any building falling within the definition of “dangerous building” under the provisions of the California Building Code and 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, or within the definition of “substandard building” under the provisions of the California Building Code, which, in addition thereto, presents an immediate and imminent threat to public safety. Such threat may arise by virtue of numerous circumstances such as, but not limited to, substantial risk of collapse or danger of fire. (Ord. 17-1011 § 7, 2017)

 

15.10.020 Abatement—Informal procedures authorized.
     This chapter contemplates situations arising where insufficient time exists, due to the imminent threat to public safety, for due process notices and hearings to be held prior to abatement action. Accordingly, whenever the city building official determines that a building is a dangerous building, he or she shall contract for the abatement of the dangerous building by repair or demolition. In awarding such contract, the building official need not obtain formal bids but may award the contract on the basis of informal solicitations. (Ord. 17-1011 § 7, 2017)

 

15.10.030 Abatement—Costs.
     The costs and expenses of abatement of a dangerous building may be made a lien against the property on which the dangerous building was located, a special assessment against said parcel, and/or a personal obligation against the property owner through enforcement as a public nuisance and after a hearing as provided for under Sections 8.32.200 through 8.32.230 et seq., of the city of Susanville Municipal Code as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 17-1011 § 7, 2017)

 

15.10.040 Scope.
     This chapter shall apply and govern in those situations where insufficient time exists due to imminent threat of substantial danger to the public health, safety and welfare to invoke the procedures of notice and hearing provided for in the California Building Code, Uniform Housing Code, Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, and other provisions of law as adopted by the city of Susanville Municipal Code. (Ord. 17-1011 § 7, 2017)

 

15.10.050 Definition—Dangerous structure.
     The term “dangerous structure” as used in this chapter means any building which is considered “unsafe” under the criteria of the California Building Code, “dangerous” under the criteria of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, or “substandard” under the criteria of the Uniform Housing Code and which, in addition thereto, presents an imminent threat of substantial danger to public health, safety and welfare. The term “dangerous structure” also means any other structure, whether man-made or a condition of nature, which presents an imminent threat of substantial danger to public health, safety and welfare. Such threat may be presented by, but is not limited to, situations where a structure, or some part thereof, is likely to collapse onto a public street or sidewalk or where it presents an extreme fire hazard. Any structure falling within the definition of “dangerous structure” is declared a public nuisance. (Ord. 17-1011 § 7, 2017)

 

15.10.060 Determination of condition—Order of abatement.
     The city administrator, with the advice of the building official and such other persons he or she chooses to consult, shall make the determination whether a structure constitutes a “dangerous structure” as hereinabove defined. As an exception to this procedure, the building official is hereby authorized to make said determination in those circumstances where, in his sole discretion, he concludes that an emergency situation exists requiring immediate abatement and that delay to consult with the city administrator would cause substantial risk to public health, safety and welfare. Summary abatement, without the necessity of prior notification to anyone other than occupants of the structure, may be immediately ordered by the city administrator or the building official, whichever has made the determination that a dangerous structure exists. In the event the building official has made the determination and ordered summary abatement, he shall immediately thereafter report to the city administrator as to the situation. If summary abatement is to be accomplished by contract, the building official need not obtain formal bids but may award the contract on the basis of informal solicitations. (Ord. 17-1011 § 7, 2017)

 

15.10.070 Effect on existing law.
     Sections 15.10.040 through this section shall not restrict, limit or otherwise inhibit any power or authority for ordering summary abatement of dangerous and hazardous conditions invested in the city of Susanville fire chief under the California Fire Code or other provisions of law. (Ord. 17-1011 § 7, 2017)

Chapter 15.12 MOVING OF BUILDINGS
15.12.010 Generally.
     The following requirements shall apply within the corporate limits of the city:

     A.    The building shall be approved by the city and a building permit shall be secured before a building or structure is moved, stored or placed upon any lot or parcel of land within the city limits.

     B.     All necessary permits required for the transportation of the structure on city streets shall be obtained prior to relocation.

     C.     The building shall comply with all zoning and building code requirements including regulations related to changes in occupancy.

     D.    All applicable fees shall apply as if it were a new building project. (Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.12.020 Relocating buildings from beyond the city limit.
     It is unlawful for any person to move any building, modular home or manufactured home into the city limits and place such structure upon any lot or parcel of land within the city limits. This section does not apply to temporary construction offices or new modular or new manufactured housing being transported directly from the factory or sales lot. (Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 15.16 OCCUPANCY OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
15.16.010 Definitions.
     The definition of recreational vehicle and recreational vehicle park shall be the same as contained in the city of Susanville Municipal Code Section 17.08.010. The definition recreational vehicle shall also include a “slide-in camper” as that term is defined in Section 18012.4 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

 

15.16.020 Use of recreational vehicles for occupancy as living quarters prohibited.
     It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to establish, keep or maintain any recreational vehicle or tent trailer for occupancy as living quarters on any public road or private property other than in a legally established recreational vehicle park operated under permits from the state and the city. (Ord. 13-994 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 15.40 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Article I. General Provisions
15.40.010 Statutory authorization.
     The Legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city of Susanville does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.020 Findings of fact.
     A.    The flood hazard areas of the city of Susanville are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

     B.     These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, flood proofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazard, which increase flood heights and velocities, also contributes to flood losses. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.030 Statement of purpose.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land within flood prone, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to:

     A.    Protect human life and health;

     B.     Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

     C.     Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

     D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

     E.     Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

     F.     Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

     G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

     H.    Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.
     In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to:

     A.    Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

     B.     Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

     C.     Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

     D.    Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

     E.     Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.050 Definitions.
     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

     “Accessory structure” means a structure that is either:

     1.     Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or

     2.     A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in value.

     “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

     “Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

     “Apex” means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.

     “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter.

     “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

     Area of Special Flood Hazard. See “Special flood hazard area.”

     A Zone. See “Special flood hazard area.”

     “Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

     “Base flood elevation (BFE)” means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

     “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.

     Building. See “Structure.”

     “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

     “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

     “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 6, 1985.

     “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

     “Flood,” “flooding,” or “flood water” means:

     1.     A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and

     2.     The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.

     “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the floodway.

     “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

     “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

     “Floodplain administrator” is the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

     “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

     “Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

     “Floodplain or flood prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “Flooding.”

     “Flood proofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet flood proofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.

     “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

     “Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the “regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

     “Fraud and victimization,” as related to Section 15.40.230 of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

     “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

     “Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

     “Hardship,” as related to Section 15.40.230 of this chapter, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city of Susanville requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

     “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

     “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

     1.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

     2.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

     3.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

     4.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

     “Levee” means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

     “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

     “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see “Basement” definition).

     1.     An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

     a.     The flood openings standard in Section 15.40.180(C)(3);

     b.     The anchoring standards in Section 15.40.180(A);

     c.     The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.40.180(B); and

     d.     The standards for utilities in Section 15.40.190.

     2.     For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see “Basement” definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

     “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

     “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

     “Market value” is defined in the city of Susanville substantial damage/improvement procedures. See Section 15.40.150(B)(1).

     “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

     “New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after June 6, 1985 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

     “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 6, 1985.

     “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

     One-Hundred-Year Flood or 100-Year Flood. See “Base flood.”

     “Program deficiency” means a defect in a community’s floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations.

     “Public safety and nuisance,” as related to Sections 15.40.230 and 15.40.240 of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

     “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

     1.     Built on a single chassis;

     2.     Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

     3.     Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

     4.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

     “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

     “Remedy a violation,” means to bring the structure, or other development, into compliance with state and/or local floodplain management regulations, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include, protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

     “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

     Sheet Flow Area. See “Area of shallow flooding.”

     “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1 A30, AE, A99, or AH.

     “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

     “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

     “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

     “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

     1.     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

     2.     Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

     “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

     “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

     “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. “Watercourse” includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.

     “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.060 Lands to which this chapter applies.
     This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of city of Susanville. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.070 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
     The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the city of Susanville dated June 6, 1985, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated September 3, 2010 and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city of Susanville by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at the building department, 66 N. Lassen Street. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.080 Compliance.
     No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Susanville from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
     This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.100 Interpretation.
     In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

     A.    Considered as minimum requirements;

     B.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

     C.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
     The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of city of Susanville any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.120 Severability.
     This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.130 Use of other base flood data.
     When the base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.40.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source, in order to administer Article III of this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

Article II. Administration
15.40.140 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
     The building official is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.150 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
     The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     A.    Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine:

     1.     Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures;

     2.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

     3.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

     4.     The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city of Susanville; and

     5.     All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

     B.     Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures.

     1.     Use FEMA publication FEMA 213, “Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings,” to develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining “market value.”

     2.     Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff.

     C.     Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.40.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Sections 15.40.180 through 15.40.220 of this chapter.

     Note: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication FEMA 265, “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas – A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations” dated July 1995.

     D.    Notification of Other Agencies.

     1.     Alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

     a.     Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

     b.     Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

     c.     Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

     2.     Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations:

     a.     Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR).

     b.     All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

     Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data.

     3.     Changes in corporate boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.

     E.     Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

     1.     Certification required by Sections 15.40.180(C)(1) and 15.40.210 (lowest floor elevations);

     2.     Certification required by Section 15.40.180(C)(2) (elevation or flood proofing of nonresidential structures);

     3.     Certification required by Section 15.40.180(C)(3) (wet flood proofing standard);

     4.     Certification of elevation required by Section 15.40.200 (subdivisions and other proposed development standards);

     5.     Certification required by Section 15.40.220 (floodway encroachments); and

     6.     Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

     F.     Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.40.170.

     G.    Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.40.080.

     H.    Biennial Report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA.

     I.      Planning.

     1.     Assure community’s general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein.

     2.     The floodplain administrator shall review all proposals for new development and shall weight all requests for future floodplain development against the city’s most recent adopted general plan. Considerations of the following elements are required before approval.

     a.     Determine whether or not a proposed development is in or affects a known floodplain;

     b.     Inform the public of the proposed activity by at least one public notice in the local newspaper and posting of a minimum of three notices within three hundred (300) feet of project site;

     c.     Determine if there is a practicable alternative or site for the proposed activity;

     d.     Identify impact of the activity on the floodplain;

     e.     Provide a plan to mitigate the impact of the activity to comply with provisions in this section. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.160 Development permit.
     A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.40.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city of Susanville. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information:

     A.    Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:

     1.     Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location;

     2.     Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities;

     3.     Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities;

     4.     Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;

     5.     Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 15.40.070 or 15.40.150; and flood elevation certificate for lowest floor elevation of existing and proposed structures;

     6.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and

     7.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be flood proofed, as required in Section 15.40.180(C)(2) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93.

     B.     Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood proofed building meets the flood proofing criteria in Section 15.40.180(C)(2).

     C.     For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.40.180(C)(3) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93.

     D.    Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

     E.     All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.40.150(E) of this chapter. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.170 Appeals.
     The city council of the city of Susanville shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

Article III. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
15.40.180 Standards of construction.
     In all areas of special flood hazard the following standards are required:

     A.    Anchoring.

     1.     All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

     2.     The storage or processing of materials that are, in the time of flooding, buoyant, flammable, explosive or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, is prohibited below the base flood elevation.

     3.     Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.

     B.     Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed:

     1.     With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;

     2.     Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

     3.     With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and

     4.     Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

     C.     Elevation and Flood Proofing.

     1.     Residential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

     a.     In AE, AH, A1-30 zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.

     b.     In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.

     c.     In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM (unnumbered A zone), elevated to or above the base flood elevation; as determined under Section 15.40.150(C).

     Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

     2.     Nonresidential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with subsection (C)(1) or:

     a.     Be flood proofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under subsection (C)(1), so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

     b.     Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

     c.     Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of subsections (C)(2)(a) and (b) of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

     3.     Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria:

     a.     For non-engineered openings:

     i.      Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding,

     ii.     The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade,

     iii.    Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices; provided, that, they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater, and

     iv.    Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter; or

     b.     Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.

     4.     Manufactured Homes. See Section 15.40.210.

     5.     Garages and Low Cost Accessory Structures.

     a.     Attached Garages.

     i.      A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters. See subsection (C)(3) of this section. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials. See subsection (B)(1) of this section.

     ii.     A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry flood proofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.

     b.     Detached Garages and Accessory Structures.

     i.      “Accessory structures” used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 15.40.050, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

     (A)  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage;

     (B)   The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials;

     (C)   The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement;

     (D)  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or flood proofed to or above the BFE;

     (E)   The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 15.40.220; and

     (F)   The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with subsection (C)(3) of this section.

     ii.     Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in this section. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.190 Standards for utilities.
     A.    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

     1.     Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

     2.     Discharge from the systems into flood waters.

     B.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.200 Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development.
     A.    All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:

     1.     Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE).

     2.     Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans.

     3.     If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator:

     a.     Lowest floor elevation.

     b.     Pad elevation.

     c.     Lowest adjacent grade.

     B.     All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

     C.     All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

     D.    All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.210 Standards for manufactured homes.
     A.    All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall:

     1.     Within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

     B.     All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:

     1.     Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or

     2.     Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade.

     Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.220 Standards for recreation vehicles.
     All recreational vehicles on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps described in Section 15.40.070 of this chapter will either:

     A.    Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;

     B.     Be fully licensed and ready for highway use—a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

     C.     Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.40.160 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.40.180(A). (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.230 Floodways.
     Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

     A.    Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city of Susanville

     B.     Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city of Susanville shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

     C.     If subsections A and B of this section are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 15.40.180 through 15.40.200. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

Article IV. Variance Procedures
15.40.240 Nature of variances.
     The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.

     The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

     It is the duty of the city of Susanville to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.250 Conditions for variances.
     A.    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.40.180 through 15.40.220 and 15.40.270 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

     B.     Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Section 15.40.050 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

     C.     Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

     D.    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city of Susanville need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city of Susanville believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

     E.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

     1.     The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and

     2.     Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Lassen County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

     F.     The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.260 Appeal board.
     A.    The city council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. The application forms and fees shall be the same as required for zoning variances.

     B.     In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:

     1.     Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

     2.     Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

     3.     Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

     4.     Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

     5.     Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

     6.     Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

     7.     Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

     8.     Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

     9.     Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

     10.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

     11.   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

     C.     Variances shall only be issued upon a:

     1.     Showing of good and sufficient cause;

     2.     Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” to the applicant; and

     3.     Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see “Public safety and nuisance”), cause “fraud and victimization” of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

     D.    Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided, that, the provisions of subsections A through D of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

     E.     Upon consideration of the factors of subsection A of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.270 Maintenance of flood protection measures.
     The maintenance of any and all flood protection measures (levees, dikes, dams, or reservoirs) is required of the jurisdiction agency, or other entity to whom such measures provide protection. If these measures are privately owned, an operation or maintenance plan is required of the owner. The city shall acknowledge all maintenance plans by the adoption of such plans by ordinance. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

Article V. Amendments and Revisions to National Flood Insurance Program Maps
15.40.280 Amendments and revisions to NFIP maps.
     A.    The four methods listed in Section 15.40.290 may be used to request FEMA exempt a single structure from the purchase of flood insurance. All four of these methods shall be applied for by the individual property owner or his or her representative.

     B.     The three methods listed in Section 15.40.300 may be used to request revisions to effective Flood Insurance Studies. All three of these methods require that the city is aware of the impacts of the request, and notifies impacted property owners, when required.

     C.     All seven methods must be applied for in accordance with FEMA requirements. All costs incurred must be paid by the property owner or his or her representative. Copies of all certification and application forms submitted to FEMA shall also be submitted to the floodplain administrator at the time of application.

     D.    Copies of all notifications either granting or denying requests for exemptions from the purchase of flood insurance, or requests to revise flood insurance studies shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator with fifteen (15) days of receipt by the property owner or his or her representative. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.290 Single structure exemptions.
     Application for one of the following may be used to request FEMA exempt a single structure from the purchase of flood insurance.

     A.    Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA). A letter from FEMA stating that an existing structure or parcel of land that has not been elevated by fill would not be inundated by the one-hundred-year flood;

     B.     Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA). A letter from FEMA stating that a proposed structure that is not to be elevated by fill would not be inundated by the one-hundred-year flood if built as proposed;

     C.     Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F). A letter from FEMA stating that an existing structure or parcel of land that has been elevated by fill would not be inundated by the one-hundred-year flood; or

     D.    Conditional Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (CLOMR-F). A letter from FEMA stating that a parcel of land or proposed structure that is to be elevated by fill would not be inundated by the one-hundred-year flood. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

 

15.40.300 Revisions to effective flood insurance studies.
     Application for one of the following may be used to request revisions to effective flood insurance studies:

     A.    Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR). A letter from FEMA commenting on whether a proposed project, if built as proposed, would justify a map revision (LOMR or PMR), or proposed hydrology changes.

     B.     Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). A letter from FEMA officially revising the current NFIP map to show changes to floodplains, floodways, or flood elevations. LOMRs typically depict decreased flood hazards.

     C.     Physical Map Revision (PMR). A reprinted NFIP map incorporating changes to floodplains, floodways, of flood elevations. Because of the time and cost involved to change, reprint, and redistribute an NFIP map, a PMR is usually processed when a revision reflects increased flood hazards or large-scope changes. (Ord. 13-988 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 15.50 HISTORIC BUILDING PRESERVATION
15.50.010 Intent and purpose.
     The city council finds that the protection and enhancement of buildings or sites that have historical or architectural significance located within Lassen County and the city of Susanville are of cultural and aesthetic benefit to its citizens. This provision will enhance the economic, cultural and aesthetic standing of the county and the city. The purpose of this provision is to promote the general welfare of the public by providing a means by which to protect and enhance historic structures in Lassen County and the city of Susanville.

     Further, the intent of this chapter is as set forth in State Historic Building Code Section 8-101.3, Intent:

 

It is the intent of these regulations to facilitate the preservation and continuing use of qualified historical buildings or properties while providing reasonable safety for the building occupants and access for persons with disabilities.

 

(Ord. 02-882 § 1 (part))

 

15.50.020 Authority.
     This provision is enacted under the authority set forth in Section 18955 of the State Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 02-882 § 1 (part))

 

15.50.030 County of Lassen and city of Susanville historic building review committee.
     A.    The Lassen County/city of Susanville historic building review committee is hereby created to review applications requesting buildings and/or sites to be placed on the Lassen County/city of Susanville historic building registry for the purpose of utilizing the State Historic Building Code. Said committee shall be comprised of five members, to be appointed as hereinafter provided.

     B.     The city council of the city of Susanville and the Lassen County board of supervisors shall appoint four members (selecting two members each) through an application process. The fifth member shall be selected at large by those four appointees. Applicants shall have demonstrated special interest, experience and/or knowledge of local history. Appointees shall serve staggered two-year terms and the at large member shall serve a one-year term. (Ord. 08-951 § 1; Ord. 02-882 § 1 (part))

 

15.50.040 Responsibilities and duties of the Lassen County/city of Susanville historical building review committee.
     The joint Lassen County/city of Susanville historical building review committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council/board of supervisors on matters relating to the identification, protection, retention and preservation of historical resources within the county and their duties shall include the following: To advise and make recommendations to the board of supervisors/city council on how it can best promote the preservation of cultural and historic resources of Lassen County. (Ord. 02-882 § 1 (part))

 

15.50.050 Initiation of official register designation process by the property owner(s).
     The process to consider the designation of individual cultural or historic building and/or site may be initiated upon application of the owner of the property for which such designation is requested (or the authorized representative of the owner). Any such application shall be filed with the county community development department or city building department, as appropriate, depending on the location of the structure, and shall be accompanied by the following information (as appropriate):

     (a)   The assessor’s parcel number and address of the site or the property whereon the building and/or site proposed for designation is located as well as the legal description of the property;

     (b)   A descriptive narrative detailing the building and/or site proposed for designation;

     (c)   A description of special aesthetic, cultural, architectural or historical qualities which justify such designation;

     (d)   Sketches, drawings, photographs or other descriptive material;

     (e)   A statement of the condition of the building and/or site;

     (f)    Any other information determined to be appropriate by the building official;

     (g)   Written, notarized authorization of the property owner(s) of record (or an authorized agent);

     (h)   Special recommendations from a local historical organization. (Ord. 02-882 § 1 (part))

 

15.50.060 Review criteria.
     The committee shall consider the following criteria in the review of applications:

     (a)   The age of the building and/or site;

     (b)   The building and/or site are associated with events that have made significance in the heritage of the city or county;

     (c)   The building and/or site are associated with the lives of persons significant in the city’s or county’s past;

     (d)   The building and/or site embody the distinctive characteristic of a type, period or method of construction or represent the work of a master or possess high artistic value;

     (e)   The proposed building and/or site materially benefits the architectural or historical character of the community;

     (f)    The unique location or singular physical characteristic of the building and/or site proposed for designation represents an established and familiar visual feature of the community, area, city or county;

     (g)   The preservation of a building and/or site is essential to the integrity of the community;

     (h)   The committee may consider other unique buildings and/or sites. (Ord. 02-882 § 1 (part))

 

15.50.070 Processing of applications.
     The property owner(s) whereon such cultural/historic resource exists must submit an application for inclusion on the Lassen County/city of Susanville historical building registry to the Lassen County community development department or city of Susanville building department, as appropriate.

     The content of the application shall be as determined by the Lassen County community development department or city building department, as appropriate.

     A non-refundable application fee is paid at the time of application. An application fee will be established by resolution.

     Upon acceptance of a completed application, the building official shall within thirty (30) days convene the Lassen County/city of Susanville historic review committee to review the application and determine if the application qualifies to be included on the Lassen County/city of Susanville historic building registry. If property in the county is so qualified, the county building official will convey the recommendation of the historic building review committee (HBRC) to the board of supervisors for the building and/or site to be added to the Lassen County/city of Susanville historic building registry; if property in the city is so qualified, the city building official shall convey the recommendation of the HBRC to the city council for the building and/or site to be added to the Lassen County/city of Susanville historic building registry.

     If the building and/or site are added to the Lassen County/city of Susanville historic building registry list, the Lassen County community development department or the city building department will record, at no additional fee, the historical listing on the property title. (Ord. 02-882 § 1 (part))

 

15.50.080 Clarification.
     The terms “use” or “occupancy,” when used in the California Historic Building Code, only refer to the classification of building construction types in reference to how a structure is required to be constructed and not to land use and zoning regulations. Local zoning regulations still apply. (Ord. 02-882 § 1 (part))

Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 16.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 16.06 LOT MERGERS/UNMERGERS
Chapter 16.08 TENTATIVE MAPS
Chapter 16.12 FINAL MAPS
Chapter 16.16 PARCEL MAPS
Chapter 16.20 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Chapter 16.24 DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 16.28 HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 16.32 PARK LAND DEDICATION

Chapter 16.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
16.04.010 Citation of chapter.
     This chapter shall be known and cited as the Susanville subdivision ordinance. (Prior code § 21.1)

 

16.04.020 Powers of planning commission.
     The planning commission of the city is empowered and given the duty to investigate the design, layout and other features of proposed maps and approve with or without conditions or deny proposed tentative maps. (Prior code § 21.2)

 

16.04.030 Compliance with requirements, rules and regulations of title prerequisite.
     Prior to the subdivision of any land in the city the subdivider thereof shall conform to and comply with the requirements, rules and regulations of this title. (Prior code § 21.3)

 

16.04.040 Placement of monuments.
     Before the transmission of any map to the council for approval, approved permanent monuments shall be set at the locations indicated on the map and in conformity with the specifications of the director of public works. Monuments shall be installed at street intersections, between street intersections where necessary to preserve the street alignment, the angle points along the exterior boundaries where necessary, and at all lot corners. (Prior code § 21.11)

 

16.04.050 Modification of requirements.
     A.    Whenever in the opinion of the planning commission the land involved in any subdivision is of such size or shape or is subject to such title limitations of record or is affected by such topographical location or conditions or is to be devoted to such use that it is impossible or impracticable in the particular case for the subdivider to conform fully to the regulations contained in this title, the planning commission may make such modification thereof as in its opinion is reasonably necessary or expedient and in conformity with the spirit and purpose of the map act and of this title. Each such proposed modification shall be referred to the officer or department under whose particular jurisdiction the regulation involved comes, and such officer or department shall transmit to the planning commission his, her or its written recommendations on each such proposed modification and the facts supporting such recommendation. Such recommendation shall be reviewed by the planning commission and in case such modification is made by the planning commission, a copy of the recommendation shall be transmitted to the city council with the final subdivision map.

     B.     In addition to the foregoing minimum improvements, the planning commission may recommend, and the city council, when in its judgment a necessity exists for such improvement, may require, curbs, gutters and sidewalks in the whole or part of such subdivision where indicated by local needs and the character of the subdivision. (Prior code § 21.12)

 

16.04.060 Lot line adjustments.
     A.    An application for a lot line adjustment shall be submitted to the city community development department on the application form provided by the city. A lot line adjustment application shall include the required map(s) and other information as identified on the application form provided by the city, together with any application processing fee as may be established by the city council.

     B.     The community development director and city engineer shall be responsible for reviewing lot line adjustment applications. The community development director shall be responsible for acting on lot line adjustment applications. Conditions may be imposed upon a lot line adjustment to ensure conformity with city zoning and building ordinances, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements. The decision of the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission as provided for elsewhere in this code.

     C.     The following finding shall be made at the time of approval of a lot line adjustment application: The proposed lot line adjustment, as approved by the city, is in conformance with city zoning and building ordinances and the Subdivision Map Act.

     D.    The community development director and city engineer may establish administrative procedures for the review and processing of lot line adjustment applications as necessary to implement the requirements of this title. (Prior code § 21.52)

 

16.04.070 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment in the County Jail, for a term not exceeding three months, or by both fine and imprisonment.

     The enforcement procedures and remedies set forth in this chapter are not intended to be exclusive but are in addition to any other prohibitions, penalties, remedies and other procedures provided for in this title, the Subdivision Map Act (SMA), or any other provision of law. (Ord. 20-1026 § 1, 2020)

 

16.04.080 Notices of violation.
     Whenever the city has knowledge that real property has been divided, potentially in violation of the provisions of this title or of the provisions of the SMA, the procedures and actions pertaining to owner notification, meetings, clearance letter, or recording of a notice of violation shall be followed in accordance with SMA Section 66499.36. (Ord. 20-1026 § 1, 2020)

 

16.04.090 Certificate of compliance.
     A “certificate of compliance” is a document issued by the city engineer suitable for recordation with the Lassen County recorder’s office stating, with or without conditions, that a certain lot or lots described therein complies with the provisions of this title and the intent of the SMA and is a lawfully existing lot or lots, given the year of applicability for lot creation as defined in the SMA (or as determined at the time of creation of the parcel or parcels in question). Any person owning real property within the city of Susanville may request a determination of whether such real property complies with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. A certificate of compliance may be obtained pursuant to SMA Section 66499.35 and the following procedures:

     A.    Application for a certificate of compliance shall be made to the planning department and shall contain the following information:

     1.     Written statement explaining property history and justification for legal-parcel status.

     2.     An eight and one-half-inch by eleven (11) inch map exhibit of the property drawn to scale that includes the following information: street address(es) if any, assessor’s parcel number, abutting streets, existing property lines and dimensions, lot area in square feet or acres, existing easements (recorded or otherwise), location of all structures and distances to existing property lines, encroachment upon adjacent properties, mineral rights, entitlements, liens, claims or other restrictions, off-street parking areas and driveways, title block, north arrow, and date of preparation.

     3.     Written legal description of the subject parcel typed on standard eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven (11) inch paper and wet-signed and stamped by a licensed land surveyor, or civil engineer licensed prior to January 1, 1982.

     4.     A preliminary title report prepared by a licensed title insurance company, no older than thirty (30) days of the date of application.

     5.     Copy of all deeds, easements, surveys et cetera, recorded or otherwise in the chain of title from the title insurance company not more than forty-five (45) days old, listing grantor-grantee with recording date and document number in ascending chronological order from the date the parcel was created until the current vesting date.

     6.     Other information and documentation as determined necessary by the city engineer for a particular property.

     7.     Application processing fee and deposit, as determined necessary.

     B.     Upon examination of the application, the community development or planning director, or designee, shall, within thirty (30) days, either accept the application as complete for processing, or advise the applicant of any deficiencies in writing.

     C.     Upon acceptance as complete, the application will be reviewed by the city engineer to determine whether the subject property complies with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act.

     D.    Upon making a positive determination, the city engineer shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for recordation with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division of land which created the subject parcel complies with applicable provisions of the city of Susanville Code and the Subdivision Map Act.

     E.     If the city engineer determines that such real property does not comply with the provisions of the municipal code or Subdivision Map Act, he or she may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose such conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property, and which has been established at such time by ordinance. Upon making such a determination and establishing such conditions the city engineer shall cause a conditional certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner who has applied for the certificate pursuant to this section, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued.

     F.     A recorded final or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein.

     G.    Certificate of compliance shall serve only to officially determine whether the subject parcel(s) conforms to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and do not grant any right to develop the parcel.

     H.    Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by payment of the applicable fees, which shall be established by resolution of the city council.

     I.      If the applicant is not satisfied with any conditions placed on the conditional certificate, he or she may, within fifteen (15) days after such action, appeal in writing to the planning commission. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on said appeal and shall render its decision thereon within sixty (60) days of the filing of the appeal. Any appeal hearing shall allow reconsideration of all aspects of a project (de novo), and shall not be limited strictly to the subject of the appeal. (Ord. 20-1026 § 1, 2020)

Chapter 16.06 LOT MERGERS/UNMERGERS
16.06.010 Voluntary mergers.
     A.    Any contiguous parcels or units of land held under common ownership may be merged at the request of the property owner(s), pursuant to Government Code Section 66499.203/4 and this chapter. Approval and recordation of a final or parcel map over previously subdivided property shall be deemed to have merged those properties, and this chapter shall have no force and effect.

     B.     Record owner(s) of contiguous lots may file a request with the planning division of the public works department to merge said contiguous parcels. The request for merger shall be made on a form prescribed by the city engineer and the planning division and accompanied by a fee as established by city council resolution.

     C.     The planning division, in consultation with the city engineer, may approve a voluntary lot merger only if the planning division finds that:

     1.     Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the lot merger are unnecessary for present or future public purposes, or that any dedications or offers of dedication which are necessary for present or future public purposes are preserved on the merged parcels; and

     2.     All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to the lot merger.

     D.    The planning division may require as conditions of the lot merger:

     1.     That all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities be retained if they are necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter;

     2.     Payment of any additional fees necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter; and

     3.     Such other conditions as are necessary to accomplish the purposes or provisions of this title or necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare.

     E.     A voluntary parcel merger shall become effective when the planning division causes a notice of merger to be filed with the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 10-976 § 1, 2010)

 

16.06.020 Involuntary mergers.
     A.    Criteria. Pursuant to Government Code Section 66451.10 and following, the city may initiate the merger of a parcel of land with a contiguous parcel held by the same owner(s), if the planning commission determines that all of the following requirements are satisfied:

     1.     The affected parcels are held by the same owner(s) as of the date the notice of intention is recorded, as required by Government Code Section 66451.13;

     2.     One of the affected parcels does not conform to the standards for minimum parcel size under the applicable zoning;

     3.     One of the affected parcels is either:

     a.     Undeveloped by a structure,

     b.     Developed only with an accessory structure, or developed with a single structure (other than an accessory structure) that is partially sited on the contiguous parcel with which it is proposed to be merged; and

     4.     With respect to each affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions is met:

     a.     The parcel comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at the time the merger is determined,

     b.     The parcel was not created in compliance with applicable laws or ordinances in effect at the time of its creation,

     c.     The parcel does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply,

     d.     The parcel does not meet slope stability standards in that soils investigation indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects,

     e.     The parcel does not have legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability to satisfy the requirements related to the design and specifications for local streets or private roads, as the case may be, and does not have the approval of the city fire department as to meeting its standards for access and maneuverability for fire equipment,

     f.      The parcel does not have sufficient dimensions to allow development that conforms to zoning ordinance development standards, or the proposed development is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than the minimum lot size or density standards, or

     g.     The parcel, if developed, would create one or more of the following health or safety hazards:

     i.      Construction is likely to adversely impact adjoining property, or interfere with an existing drainage course, or is in an area determined to be subject to geological hazard,

     ii.     Surface waters occurring on the affected parcel or flowing onto or through it cannot be conveyed, without damage to an improvement, building or dwelling, to a natural water course or to an existing adequate storm drainage facility,

     iii.    The site available for development does not provide an appropriate buildable site in consideration of the site’s constraints, including slopes, soil characteristics and seismic factors,

     iv.    Development of the site is likely to cause environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure wildlife or their habitat, or

     v.     The type of improvements proposed for the site will conflict with easements acquired by the public at large for access through a use of the site.

     B.     Notice of Intention to Determine Status. Pursuant to Government Code Section 66451.13, the planning division shall mail, by certified mail, a notice of intention to determine the status of the affected parcels to the then current owner(s) of record. The notice shall advise the owner(s) that the affected parcels may be merged under the standards specified in this chapter, and it shall advise the owner(s) of the opportunity to request a hearing of the determination of the status and to present evidence of the hearing that the parcels do not meet the criteria for a merger. The planning division shall cause the notice of intention to determine status to be filed for recordation with the office of the county recorder on the date that the notice is mailed to the property owner(s).

     C.     Hearing. If the property owner files with the planning division, a request for a hearing on determination of status within thirty (30) days after recordation of the notice of intention to determine status, the planning division shall establish a hearing date for the planning commission to consider the merger. The planning division shall notify the property owner(s) of the hearing by certified mail. The planning commission shall conduct a hearing not more than sixty (60) days following receipt of the property owner’s request for the hearing. The hearing date may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the planning commission and the property owner(s).

     D.    Determination of Status Following Hearing. At the hearing, the property owner(s) may present evidence that the affected parcels do not meet the standards for merger specified in this chapter. At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged, and shall notify the owner of its determination.

     E.     Recordation of Notice of Merger. At the direction of the planning commission, the planning division shall cause a notice of merger, specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property, to be recorded within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing.

     F.     Determination Not to Merge. If the planning commission determines that the affected parcels are not to be merged, the planning division shall cause to be recorded a release of notice of intention to determine status, and shall mail a clearance letter to the current owner(s) of record.

     G.    Determination of Merger Where No Hearing is Requested. If, within thirty (30) days after recordation of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected parcel does not file a request for a hearing, the planning commission may at any time thereafter make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. At the direction of the planning commission, a notice of merger shall be recorded not later than ninety (90) days after the date when the planning director mailed the notice of intention to determine status.

     H.    Appeal. The decision of the planning commission made under this chapter may be appealed, pursuant to Section 16.08.030 of this code. (Ord. 10-976 § 1, 2010)

 

16.06.030 Unmerger of parcels.
     Any unmerger of parcels shall be conducted pursuant to Government Code Section 66451.30 and following. (Ord. 10-976 § 1, 2010)

Chapter 16.08 TENTATIVE MAPS
16.08.010 Filing—Contents.
     Every subdivider shall file with the city community development director the required number of copies of a map of each proposed subdivision, together with request for approval thereof. Such map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the community development director. Such proposed map shall set forth:

     A.    An engineering delineation of the land proposed to be subdivided;

     B.     The names and addresses of all persons having an interest in the land proposed to be subdivided;

     C.     A pictorial delineation showing grades and profiles as required by the city engineer of such land and any streets, sidewalks and curbs, together with a cross-section thereof, utilities, easements, lot and property lines, and other information which may be required by the city engineer;

     D.    The names of proposed streets;

     E.     A statement of all restrictions and parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision, together with the purpose, condition and limitations of such reservations, if any, and other proposed reservations in the grant of title;

     F.     Proposed sewers, sanitary and storm;

     G.    The names and addresses of adjoining undeveloped property owners;

     H.    A signed statement indicating the amount of street grading, paving, curbing, sidewalks, storm and sanitary sewers, and other improvements proposed to be constructed;

     I.      Statement of restrictions sought to be imposed by subdivider concerning but not limited to, use or occupancy of land, building setback, yard areas, value of construction or size, and any other restrictions;

     J.      Any required data which is impossible or impractical to place upon the tentative map shall be submitted in writing with the map. (Prior code § 21.4)

 

16.08.020 Approval.
     The community development director shall provide copies of the tentative map to the affected city departments and those persons and agencies requesting them, with a request for written recommendations from such agencies and persons pertaining to the proposed subdivision.

     The community development director shall, after receipt of recommendations from the affected city departments and any other responding persons or agencies, file with the planning commission the tentative map and a report and recommendation thereof for approval with or without conditions or denial.

     After receipt of a proposed tentative map and the report and recommendation of the community development director, the planning commission shall either approve with or without conditions or deny the request for approval of the tentative map. (Prior code § 21.5)

 

16.08.030 Appeals.
     The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. Appeals must be submitted on the form provided by the city. Appeals must be received within ten (10) days of the planning commission’s decision.

     A report from the planning commission explaining their decision shall be transmitted to the city council prior to the council’s consideration of the appeal application. (Prior code § 21.5(a))

Chapter 16.12 FINAL MAPS
16.12.010 Survey—Filing.
     A.    If the tentative map is approved, the subdivider shall, within nine months cause the proposed subdivision to be accurately surveyed in accordance with the tentative map and with any and all alterations or changes required therewith. Within such period and when all the certificates which are required on the final map (except the approval certificate of the clerk of the city council) have been signed, and where necessary acknowledged, the subdivider may file with the city council for approval a final map of the subdivision conforming in all particulars to the provisions of all laws of the state controlling subdivisions.

     B.     At any time prior to the filing of such final map the subdivider shall file with the director of public works the following:

     1.     Four prints of such final map;

     2.     A statement as to the nature and type of the improvements by this chapter required to be constructed in said subdivision, together with the necessary set of complete plans, profiles, details and specifications for such improvements.

     C.     The city council shall, at its next meeting approve such map if the same conforms to all the requirements of this chapter. (Prior code § 21.6)

 

16.12.020 Effect of failure to file.
     The failure of a subdivider to file a final map with the city council in time for action thereon as provided in this title and to record such map within nine months from the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map by the council shall automatically terminate all proceedings unless an extension of time has previously been granted. (Prior code § 21.7)

 

16.12.030 Completion of improvement or filing of bond.
     No final map shall be presented to the council of the city for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements, or enters into a contract with the city agreeing to do such work, and files with the city clerk a surety bond approved by the city attorney in such an amount as the city council shall estimate and determine to be necessary to complete all the improvements required to be done by the subdivider as principal, and a corporation authorized to so act under the laws of the state, as surety, the same to be payable to the city, and to be conditioned upon the faithful performance of any and all work required to be done by the subdivider, and such bond shall be further conditioned to the effect that should the subdivider fail to complete all work required to be done by him within a specified reasonable time and to maintain the same for a period of twelve (12) months after completion and acceptance by the city council, the city may, at its option, cause all uncompleted required work to be done and the parties executing the bond shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs therefor; or in lieu of a surety bond the subdivider may post security as provided in the subdivision map act of the state. (Prior code § 21.8)

 

16.12.040 Inspection—Fee.
     The subdivider shall furnish the director of public works copies of the field notes, traverse sheets and all other data necessary to ascertain that the final map is technically correct. When the copies of the final map are presented to the director of public works as required herein, the subdivider shall pay to the director of planning commission a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) per lot for each lot shown on the final map, to cover the cost of checking the information indicated on the final map. (Prior code § 21.9)

 

16.12.050 Contents.
     Every final map shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet or less, on a sheet or sheets eighteen (18) by twenty-six (26) inches in conformity with all of the requirements of the subdivision map act and shall show:

     A.    The boundary lines of the tract with accurate distances and bearings, the exact location and width of all existing or recorded streets intersecting the boundary of the tract.

     B.     Correct bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments, which shall be accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and bearings. The map shall show the equation of the bearing of true north.

     California coordinates shall be established and shown when required by the city engineer.

     C.     Street and alley names.

     D.    The length of all arcs, radii, internal angles, points of curvature, length and bearing of the tangents.

     E.     All easements for rights-of-way provided for public services or utilities and limitations of the easements.

     F.     All block and lot numbers and lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths and with bearings and angles to street and alley lines.

     G.    Location of monuments in conformity with the requirements of the city engineer.

     H.    The accurate outline of all property which is offered for dedication for public use with the purpose indicated thereon, and of all property that may be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners in the subdivision or the city.

     I.      Tract number of the subdivision.

     J.      Name and address of the subdivider.

     K.    True north point, scale and date.

     L.     A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided consenting to preparation and recordation of such map.

     M.    A certificate, signed and acknowledged as above, offering for dedication for certain specified uses those parcels to be dedicated.

     N.    A certificate by engineer or surveyor stating the survey is true and complete, monuments are of character and occupy positions indicated, and that survey can be retraced from monuments and data provided.

     O.    A certificate by the city engineer stating he or she has examined the final map and it is in accord with the tentative map and any approved alterations thereof, complies with the subdivision map act and this local ordinance and is technically correct.

     P.     A certificate for execution by the city clerk stating that the city council approved the final map.

     Q.    A certificate by the secretary of the planning commission stating that the tentative map was approved by the planning commission.

     R.     Other certificates required by laws.

     S.     Other information which may be required by the city engineer. (Prior code § 21.10)

Chapter 16.16 PARCEL MAPS
16.16.010 Contents and submission of tentative parcel map.
     Prior to the division of any lands within the city into four or less parcels or the division of lands within the city into five or more parcels where the criteria listed in Government Code Section 66426(a) through 66426(d) is met, the owner or owners thereof shall submit to the community development director a tentative map prepared by a licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer, showing:

     A.    The size, shape, dimensions and locations of such lands;

     B.     The size, shape, dimensions and locations of such parcels;

     C.     The city street or streets, if any, upon which such lands and such parcels abut or, the location in relation to such land and parcels of the nearest accessible city street and, if any, the land ownerships intervening between such land and parcels and such street or way;

     D.    The location, in relation to such land and such parcels, of the nearest light, power, water, telephone, gas and sewer lines;

     E.     Such additional matters as the chairman of the subdivision committee shall in his judgment be necessary to protect prospective purchasers, lessees or tenants of the parcels created by such division. (Prior code § 21.40)

 

16.16.020 Powers of community development director.
     The community development director of the city is empowered and given the duty to investigate the design, layout and other features and approve with or without conditions or deny proposed tentative maps for division of land into four or less parcels or the division of lands within the city into five or more parcels where the criteria listed in Government Code Section 66426(a) through 66426(d) is met. (Prior code § 21.40(a))

 

16.16.030 Size of parcels.
     No lands within the city shall be divided into parcels which are of size, dimension or area less than those required by the applicable provision or Title 17 of the city. (Prior code § 21.41)

 

16.16.040 Access to parcels.
     No lands within the city shall be divided into parcels in such a manner as to create one or more interior parcels unless provision is made for an easement for ingress to and egress from such interior parcel or parcels from a presently existing and dedicated public street or way; such easement shall be over a feasible route, shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete paving in accordance with and as provided in the policy or standards adopted by the city council on November 5, 1979, for access to parcels created under this chapter and shall be not less than twenty (20) feet in width plus an additional ten (10) feet for each interior parcel (in excess of one) that will require the use of such easement for ingress to and egress from such street or way; provided, however, that no such easement shall be required to be more than fifty (50) feet in width, but further provided, that if it appears to the planning commission that future development and division of other lands may occur which would require the utilization of such easement by the owners of such other lands, the planning commission may require such easement to be not more than sixty (60) feet in width. The easement or easements mentioned above shall be shown upon the preliminary and final map and such maps shall bear on their face a covenant, signed by the subdivision committee, which will guarantee the use of such easements to prospective purchasers, lessees or tenants of the parcels created by the proposed division. (Prior code § 21.42)

 

16.16.050 Interior parcels—Require utility easement.
     No lands within the city shall be divided into parcels in such manner as to create one or more interior parcels unless provision is made for suitable and feasible utility easements to and from such interior lots. (Prior code § 21.43)

 

16.16.060 Interior parcels—Definition of “interior lot.”
     The words “interior lots” as used in the preceding two sections, shall mean a parcel of land having a frontage of less than twenty (20) feet on a public street or way (exclusive of alleys). (Prior code § 21.44)

 

16.16.070 Disposition of tentative map.
     The community development director shall retain in his or her office all tentative maps with a record attached thereto showing the action taken thereon by the community development director, planning commission and/or city council. (Prior code § 21.45)

 

16.16.080 Approval and accompanying documents of tentative map— Drawing specifications.
     The tentative map shall be prepared in a format approved by the community development director. The tentative map shall show all matters and things required by Section 16.16.010 of this chapter and any other information required by the community development director. The tentative map shall be in conformity with all requirements of this chapter.

     The community development director shall consider the tentative map and shall, in a written report, approve with or without conditions or deny the request for approval of the tentative map. Findings for the action shall be contained within the report. The community development director shall approve the tentative map if the following findings for approval of the tentative map are made:

     A.    The tentative parcel map and related improvements are consistent with the provisions of the adopted general plan for the city.

     B.     The site is physically suited for the type and density of development proposed.

     C.     The design of the tentative parcel map and related improvements is not likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.

     D.    The design of the tentative parcel map and related improvements is not likely to cause serious public health problems.

     E.     The design of the tentative parcel map and related improvements will not conflict with any existing public access or other easements, or alternate easements for access or use are provided that will be substantially equivalent to the existing easement.

     F.     The tentative map is in conformance and consistent with the provisions of the Susanville Subdivision Ordinance and the state of California Subdivision Map Act. (Prior code § 21.46)

 

16.16.090 Appeals.
     The decision of the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission. Appeals must be submitted on the form provided by the city. Appeals must be received within ten (10) days of the community development director’s decision.

     A report from the community development director explaining the decision shall be transmitted to the planning commission prior to the commission’s consideration of the appeal application.

     The planning commission’s decision on an appeal may be appealed to the city council. Appeals must be submitted on the form provided by the city. Appeals must be received within ten (10) days of the planning commission’s decision on the appeal.

     A report from the planning commission explaining its decision shall be transmitted to the city council prior to the council’s consideration of the appeal application. (Prior code § 21.46(a))

 

16.16.100 Permit—Preparation of record of parcel map.
     Upon the approval of the tentative map, the community development director shall transmit a written report of decision to the developer and property owner of the affected lands. Such owner shall within twenty-four (24) months of issuance of such report, cause to be prepared a final parcel map, which shall be:

     A.    In conformity with the tentative map as finally approved;

     B.     In conformity with the provisions of this chapter;

     C.     In compliance with Article 3, commencing with Section 66444, of Chapter 2, Division 2 of Title 7 of the state Government Code, and shall record the same in the office of the county recorder. Failure to record such parcel map within such time shall nullify all previous proceedings hereunder. (Prior code § 21.47)

 

16.16.110 Filing of record of parcel map prerequisite to sale.
     It is unlawful to sell, or contract for the sale of, any lands in the city which are subject to the provisions of this chapter prior to the recording of the final parcel map or to sell, or contract to sell, in parcels, with easements, other than as shown thereon or after the recording of a final parcel map which is recorded after the time provided in the preceding section. It is unlawful to record any parcel map that differs in any respect from the tentative map as finally approved. (Prior code § 21.48)

 

16.16.120 Street openings to be paved, etc., by owner.
     In any division of lands under this chapter, where a street opening is required, the planning commission shall, as a condition of approval of the tentative map, require that the owner of such lands construct, and pave, such street and install therein sidewalks, curbs and gutters, all to city specifications. (Prior code § 21.49)

 

16.16.130 Variances.
     A.    Application for variances from the strict application of the terms of this chapter may be made and variances granted when the following circumstances are found to apply:

     1.     That any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and district in which the subject property is situated; and

     2.     That because of special circumstances applicable to subject property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of this chapter is found to impose restrictions upon subject property which restrictions are not necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter.

     B.     Applications for variances shall be made in writing by a property owner, lessee, purchaser in escrow or optionee with the consent of the owners on a form prescribed by the city council and such applications shall be made to such city council. They shall be accompanied by evidence showing:

     1.     That the granting of the variance will not be contrary to the intent of this chapter or to the public safety, health and welfare; and

     2.     That due to special conditions or exceptional characteristics of the property or its location, the strict application of this chapter would result in practical difficulties and unnecessary hardships. (Prior code § 21.50)

 

16.16.140 Exceptions to chapter.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to lands owned by the city, the county or any school, sanitary or other special district or by any other public entity, nor shall the provisions of this chapter apply to a lot line adjustment as described in the state Subdivision Map Act. (Prior code § 21.51)

Chapter 16.20 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Article I. General Provisions
16.20.010 Citation and authority.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California (hereinafter referred to as the Vesting Tentative Map Statute), and may be cited as the vesting tentative map ordinance. (Prior code § 26.01)

 

16.20.020 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this title shall apply to the vesting tentative map ordinance.

     To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. (Prior code § 26.03)

 

16.20.030 Consistency.
     No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, or not permitted by the zoning ordinance or other applicable provisions of the municipal code. (Prior code § 26.05)

 

16.20.040 Definitions.
     A.    “Vesting tentative map” means a “tentative map” for a residential subdivision, as defined in this title, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map” at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 16.20.060, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     All other definitions set forth in this title are applicable. (Prior code § 26.07)

 

16.20.050 Application.
     A.    This chapter shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this title, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. (Prior code § 26.09)

 

Article II. Procedures
16.20.060 Filing and processing.
     A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports, and shall be processed in the same manner, as set forth in this title for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided.

     A.    At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”

     B.     At the time a vesting tentative map is filed a subdivider shall also supply the following information:

     1.     Height, size and location of buildings;

     2.     Information as to the uses to which the buildings will be put;

     3.     Architectural plans;

     4.     Geological studies as required by city staff;

     5.     Flood control information;

     6.     Off-site improvements—curb, gutter, sidewalks, and existing road details as required by city staff;

     7.     Existing locations of telephone lines and poles and existing and proposed locations of street lights and television cables;

     8.     Existing and proposed fire hydrant locations;

     9.     Existing and proposed underground utility improvements details. (Prior code § 26.20)

 

16.20.070 Fees.
     Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required by resolution of the city council for the filing and processing of a tentative map. (Prior code § 26.23)

 

16.20.080 Expiration.
     The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by the subdivision ordinance for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. (Prior code § 26.27)

 

Article III. Development Rights
16.20.090 Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map.
     A.    The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2.

     However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.

     B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined:

     1.     A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both;

     2.     The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.

     C.     The rights referred to in this section shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 16.20.080. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:

     1.     An initial time period of one year. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

     2.     The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days, from the date a complete application is filed.

     3.     A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within fifteen (15) days.

     4.     If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subdivisions 1 through 3 of this subsection, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. (Prior code § 26.30)

 

16.20.100 Development inconsistent with zoning—Conditional approval.
     A.    Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding Section 16.20.090(A), confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map, as approved.

     B.     The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 16.20.090(A). (Prior code § 26.35)

 

16.20.110 Applications inconsistent with current policies.
     Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Sections 16.20.090(A) and 16.20.100. Local agencies may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under the applicable law. (Prior code § 26.37)

Chapter 16.24 DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS
16.24.010 Effect of requirements.
     Every proposed subdivision shall conform to the requirements set forth in this chapter. The city planning commission or the city council may grant any variation in the requirements of this chapter only where it is shown that compliance therewith is impractical. (Prior code § 21.13)

 

16.24.020 Width of roads.
     All road rights-of-way shall be sixty (60) feet in width except where the planning commission shall require a wider width. (Prior code § 21.14)

 

16.24.030 Blind streets.
     Blind streets shall not serve more than sixteen (16) lots and shall be not less than sixty (60) feet in width. All blind streets shall terminate in a circular end having a minimum diameter of eighty-four (84) feet, unless the planning commission approves a “T” or “Y” shaped space in lieu of required turning circle. (Prior code § 21.15)

 

16.24.040 Grades.
     The grades on any streets shall be approved by the city engineer. (Prior code § 21.16)

 

16.24.050 Street intersections and curves.
     Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable:

     A.    At street or alley intersections, property line corners shall be rounded by an arc, the minimum radius of which shall be fifteen (15) feet, respectively. In business districts a chord may be substituted for such an arc.

     B.     Street curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of at least ten (10) feet.

     C.     The above minimum radii for property line and curbs shall be increased when the smallest angle of intersection is less than seventy (70) degrees.

     D.    The minimum radii of curvature on centerline of thoroughfare streets shall be five hundred (500) feet, and of all other streets shall be two hundred (200) feet, and there shall be a tangent between all reversed curves at least one hundred fifty (150) feet in length on all streets.

     E.     Clear visibility, measured along the centerline, shall be provided for at least two hundred (200) feet on all streets. (Prior code § 21.17)

 

16.24.060 Private streets or alleys.
     Private streets, alleys or ways shall not be platted or laid out except with the approval and consent of the planning commission and the city council and then only on conditions which guarantee the construction of necessary local improvements and continued maintenance thereof. (Prior code § 21.18)

 

16.24.070 Access to adjoining property.
     Street layout shall be designed to provide for future access to and not impose undue hardship upon property adjoining the subdivision.

     Reserve strips at the end of streets or at the boundaries of subdivisions shall be deeded unconditionally to the city. (Prior code § 21.19)

 

16.24.080 Alleys.
     Alleys shall be required in all business and industrial districts. In residential districts alleys shall be optional. Minimum width of alleys shall be twenty (20) feet with twenty (20) foot roadways. (Prior code § 21.20)

 

16.24.090 Size of blocks.
     The width of blocks shall be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet in length. (Prior code § 21.21)

 

16.24.100 Size of lots.
     Areas and dimensions of all lots for residential use shall conform to the requirements of the land use district in which the particular lots are located. (Prior code § 21.22)

 

16.24.110 Access to subdivision lots.
     Every lot shall abut on a street. (Prior code § 21.23)

 

16.24.120 Key lots.
     Reversed frontage or key lots shall be avoided whenever possible. (Prior code § 21.24)

 

16.24.130 Lot lines.
     Lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the street line on which the lot faces, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. (Prior code § 21.25)

 

16.24.140 Utility easements.
     Easements at least ten (10) feet wide shall be provided for storm and sanitary uses and other utilities across or along the rear or side lines of lots where designated by the city engineer. (Prior code § 21.26)

 

16.24.150 Improvements.
     In all subdivisions the thoroughfares, streets, alleys, easements and lots shall be laid out to provide for approved sewer, drainage, street lighting facilities, TV cables and telephone lines and poles. All streets shall be graded to the full extent and improved to approved grade. The street grading and improvements shall include necessary paving, curbs, sidewalks, catch basins, pipes, culverts, gutters, gutter bridges, storm drains and sanitary sewers. Lighting facilities shall include approved lighting standards, interconnecting conduits and cables, service connections and all appurtenances necessary for a complete street lighting system. (Prior code § 21.27)

 

16.24.160 Dedicated or common-use areas.
     Proper provision shall be given to the allocation of suitable areas for schools, parks and playgrounds to be dedicated for public use, or reserved for the common use of all property owners within the proposed subdivision by covenant in the deeds. (Prior code § 21.28)

 

16.24.170 Fire hydrants.
     The subdivider shall be required to provide and install adequate fire hydrants for the area proposed to be subdivided in accordance with city specifications. (Prior code § 21.29)

 

16.24.180 Improvements installed for benefit of property not within the subdivision.
     The city may impose a requirement that the subdivider shall install improvements for the benefit of the subdivision that contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and in that event said improvement or improvements shall be dedicated to the public. (Prior code § 21.29.1)

Chapter 16.28 HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT
16.28.010 Effect of chapter.
     Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this title, the planning commission may accept and recommend to the city council, for its approval, maps of subdivisions of hillside lands in the manner hereinafter set forth. For the purposes of this chapter the term “hillside lands” shall be construed to mean land proposed to be subdivided which has an average difference in elevation of more than fifteen (15) feet in a horizontal distance of one hundred (100) feet. (Prior code § 21.30)

 

16.28.020 Design standards and principles.
     In reviewing the design of a proposed subdivision of hillside lands, the planning commission shall be guided by the following considerations:

     A.    The basis for requirements for street and roadway width shall be the topography of the land and the density of development in terms of the proposed number of dwellings to be served by said street or roadway.

     B.     The planning commission, in the exercise of sound discretion, shall apply the requirements of this chapter pertaining to hillside lands in a manner that will result in the best possible utilization of the land to be subdivided, giving due consideration to the topography of the land and the general character of the proposed subdivision.

     C.     In hillside land subdivisions extremely rugged land with an average cross slope of forty (40) percent or more, which cannot be subdivided into normal city lots without excessive cuts and fills, shall be given special consideration on the basis of development as an estate type of subdivision. Each lot in this type of subdivision shall be restricted as a building site for one dwelling only. Where the average area of the lots is not less than one acre or the average street frontage of such lots is not less than one hundred (100) feet, the dedicated width of such street shall be not less than forty (40) feet, and shall be of sufficient width to contain the cut and fill slopes and the paved roadway width of such street shall be not less than twenty-four (24) feet.

     D.    Where the hillside land to be subdivided has slopes varying from twenty (20) percent to forty (40) percent and where the proposed lots have an average width of not less than ninety (90) feet, the dedicated width of such street shall be lot less than forty (40) feet and shall be of sufficient width to contain the cut and fill slopes, and the paved roadway widths not less than thirty (30) feet.

     E.     In hillside land subdivisions where the average slope is varying from ten (10) percent to twenty (20) percent and the minimum width of lots fronting on such a street is not less than fifty (50) feet at the front building line, the dedicated width of such streets shall be not less than sixty (60) feet and shall be of sufficient width to contain the cut and fill slopes, and the paved width shall be not less than thirty-six (36) feet.

     F.     Access streets or streets extending through a hillside land subdivision and intended to serve more than local neighborhood traffic shall have a dedicated width of at least sixty (60) feet and a paved roadway of at least forty (40) feet.

     G.    Where the average slope of the land to be subdivided is over fifteen (15) percent the minimum radii of curvature on center line of minor streets shall be seventy-five (75) feet and there shall be a tangent at least fifty (50) feet in length between all reverse curves. (Prior code § 21.31)

 

16.28.030 Street improvements.
     In all cases of subdivisions of hillside lands, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve, all streets, roads, highways or ways in such subdivisions to permanent line and grade in accordance with the requirements pertaining to hillside subdivisions set forth in this chapter. If the subdivider agrees to so improve, such agreement shall be secured by adequate bond as required hereinbefore by this title. Before release of such bond, there shall be on file in the office of the city clerk the certificate of the superintendent of streets that such streets, roads, highways or ways in such hillside subdivision have been completed in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 21.32)

 

16.28.040 Filing of improvement plans.
     Upon approval of tentative map, the subdivider shall furnish the planning commission with six copies of the plans and specifications of the improvement which he or she proposed to make, or agrees to make, prior to acceptance and approval of the final subdivision map by the city council. The minimum improvements for hillside lands shall be:

     A.    Grading, drainage, and drainage structures necessary to the use and the proper drainage of the streets, roads, highways, or ways, and other property as necessary for public health and safety.

     B.     Surfacing of the roadway to the width and in accordance with the specifications as required by this chapter.

     One copy of such plans and specifications shall be transmitted by the planning commission to the city engineer, who shall promptly report thereon his or her recommendations. After receipt of the city engineer’s report, the planning commission shall transmit the plans and specifications to the city council accompanied by recommendations.

     The subdivider of hillside lands shall construct all streets and thoroughfares in full compliance with the specifications therefor approved by resolution of the city council and placed on file with the city clerk and entitled, “Street Specifications of Hillside Subdivisions,” or as such specifications may be amended from time to time by amendments thereto filed with the city clerk by authority of resolution of the city council. The city clerk is directed to have prepared and available to the public mimeographed copies of such specifications, including all amendments thereto. (Prior code § 21.33)

Chapter 16.32 PARK LAND DEDICATION
16.32.010 Purpose.
     Pursuant to Section 66477 of the Government Code of the state of California, the ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted to require the dedication of land or payment of fees in lieu of land dedication, or a combination of both, for park or recreational purposes within the city. The requirements of this chapter for dedication of land and/or payment of in-lieu fees shall be applied to all land divisions within the city, except as noted in this chapter, and to all residential developments on existing lots or future lots located within the city. The land dedication and/or payment of in-lieu fees required by this chapter are in accordance with and consistent with the provisions of the parks and recreation element of the general plan of the city, adopted August 5, 1991, and as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 05-920 § 1, 2005: prior code § 21.90)

 

16.32.020 Requirements and procedures.
     A.    Parcel Maps. At the time of approval of a tentative parcel map, the planning commission shall determine the amount of land upon which an in-lieu fee payment will be based in accordance with Section 16.32.040 of this chapter. The planning commission’s determination may be appealed to the city council as provided herein.

     B.     Subdivision Maps, Less Than Fifty Lots. At the time of approval of a tentative map containing less than fifty (50) lots, the city council shall determine the amount of land upon which an in-lieu fee payment will be based in accordance with Section 16.32.040 of this chapter.

     C.     Subdivision Maps, More Than Fifty Lots, Dedication and/or Fee. At the time of approval of a tentative map containing fifty (50) or more lots, the city council shall determine the amount of land required for dedication and/or upon which an in-lieu fee payment will be based in accordance with Section 16.32.040 and the following:

     1.     When a park or recreation facility identified in the parks and recreation element of the general plan of the city is to be located wholly within the proposed subdivision, lands necessary for establishment of the identified park shall be set aside for dedication. The land to be dedicated for the park or recreation facility shall be sufficient in size and topography and bear a reasonable relationship to serve the present and future needs of the residents of the subdivision. Where the land to be dedicated for the park or recreation facility is less than the amount required for dedication as determined by the city council in accordance with Section 16.32.040, the balance shall be used to determine an in-lieu fee to be paid by the subdivider in addition to the dedication.

     2.     When only a portion of a park or recreation facility identified in the parks and recreation element of the general plan of the city is to be located within the proposed subdivision, such portion of the identified park or recreational facility shall be set aside for dedication. If the land to be dedicated for said portion of the park or recreation facility is less than the amount required for dedication as determined by the city council in accordance with Section 16.32.040, the balance shall be used to determine an in-lieu fee to be paid by the subdivider in addition to the dedication.

     3.     When a major part of the local park or recreation site has already been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, such remaining portion shall be set aside for dedication. If the land to be dedicated for said portion of the park or recreation facility is less than the amount required for dedication as determined by the city council in accordance with Section 16.32.040, the balance shall be used to determine an in-lieu fee to be paid by the subdivider in addition to the dedication.

     D.    Residential Building Permits. Prior to the issuance of new residential permits by the city, payment of the in-lieu fees shall be paid in accordance with this section and Sections 16.32.040 and 16.32.050 of this chapter.

     E.     Payment of Fee/Dedication of Land. Prior to or concurrent with filing of a parcel map or final map, the subdivider shall pay the in-lieu filing fee and/or dedicate land or enter into an agreement for payment of fees at building permit stage for neighborhood and community park or recreational purposes as determined by the planning commission and city council in accordance with subsections A through C and E of this section and Sections 16.32.040 and 16.32.050 of this chapter. The subdivider shall provide, without credit, the following improvements for dedicated lands:

     1.     Full street improvements and utility connections including, but not limited to, curbs, gutters, street paving, traffic-control devices, street trees, and sidewalks to land which is dedicated pursuant to this section; and

     2.     Fencing along the property line of that portion of the subdivision which will have residential units contiguous to the dedicated land. Fencing type and standards shall meet the city’s criteria; and

     3.     Improved drainage through the site of the dedicated land; and

     4.     Other minimal improvements which the city council determines to be essential to the acceptance of the land for parks and recreational purposes.

     F.     The payment of the in-lieu fee may be deferred and paid on a lot-by-lot basis prior to issuance of a building permit in accordance with the following:

     1.     Park in-lieu fees shall be based upon the most current land valuation and land ratio as adopted by resolution of the city council. The community development department shall have this information at its business office.

     2.     Prior to issuance of a building permit for any residential structure on a lot zoned R-1, R-2, R-3A, or PD, the in-lieu fee for the lot shall be paid in an amount as calculated per Sections 16.32.040 and 16.32.050. Alternatively, the in-lieu fee as established by resolution of the city council may be used.

     3.     Prior to issuance of a building permit for any residential structure(s) on a lot zoned R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-4, MHP, C-1, UBD, C-O, C-2, PD or other zone districts in which a residential structure is proposed, the in-lieu fee shall be paid in an amount as calculated per Sections 16.32.040 and 16.32.050. Alternatively, the in-lieu fee as established by resolution of the city council may be used.

     4.     Where park in-lieu fees are deferred to the issuance of the building permit, a note shall be included on the final map or parcel map or on a document recorded concurrently with the final map or parcel map notifying future property owners of the requirements for payment of the park in-lieu fee at the time of application for a building permit.

     G.    Nothing in this section shall prohibit the dedication and acceptance of land for park and recreation purposes in subdivisions of fifty (50) parcels or less, where the subdivider proposes or the city requests such dedication and the land is acceptable to the city council for recreational purposes.

     H.    The land to be dedicated and the improvements to be made thereon shall be reviewed by the city council prior to their dedication. Whether the city council accepts land dedication, or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the size, shape, natural features and location of the subdivision and land available for dedication, the compatibility of dedication with the provisions of the parks and recreation element of the general plan of the city, and the location of other existing or proposed park and recreation facilities. The determination of the city council as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive.

     I.      All lands offered for dedication for park and recreation purposes shall have access to at least one existing or proposed public street. This requirement may be waived by the city council if it determines that public street access is unnecessary for the maintenance of the park area or use thereof by residents.

     J.      In the event park and recreational services are provided by a public agency other than the city, the amount and location of land to be dedicated, or in-lieu fees to be paid, shall be jointly determined by the city and such public agency. (Ord. 05-920 § 1, 2005: prior code § 21.91)

 

16.32.030 General standard.
     It is found and determined that, based upon the amount of existing neighborhood and community park areas in the city, the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that three acres of property for each one thousand (1,000) persons residing within the development be devoted to neighborhood and community park and recreational purposes.

     This finding and determination is made pursuant to the authority provided in Section 66477 of the Government Code. The general standard may be modified from time to time by resolution of the city council based upon current census information derived in accordance with Sections 40200 et seq. of the Government Code. (Ord. 05-920 § 1, 2005: prior code § 21.92)

 

16.32.040 Formula for dedication of land.
     A.    The amount of land to be dedicated and/or the amount of land upon which an in-lieu fee payment is based shall be determined pursuant to a formula established pursuant to Section 66477 of the Government Code, and described as follows:

 

        Minimum acreage dedication =.003 acres x number of dwelling units x average number of persons per dwelling unit.

 

     For purposes of this chapter, “dwelling unit” as used herein shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 17.08.010 of the Susanville Municipal Code, and shall include the term “household” as that term is used in the most recent available federal census in the context of “average number of persons per household.”

     The average number of persons per dwelling unit within the city varies depending on the type of dwelling unit. The following is a sample calculation which utilizes the 2000 federal census for determining the amount of land to be dedicated for one dwelling unit within a subdivision containing land zoned for single-family dwelling units within the city:

 

        Minimum acreage dedication: .003 x 1 x 2.723 =.008169.

 

     The minimum acreage dedication for one single-family dwelling unit is .008169 acre of land.

     As shown in the 2000 federal census pursuant to Section 66477 of the Government Code, within the city the average population densities are as follows:

     1.     For single-family dwelling units (R-1, R-2, R-3A, PD zoning) it is 2.723 persons per dwelling unit;

     2.     For duplexes to four-plexes (R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-4, PD zoning) it is 2.028 persons per dwelling unit;

     3.     For multiple-family residential projects with five or more units (R-3, R-3A, R-4, C-1, C-2, UBD, C-O, PD zoning) it is 1.834 persons per dwelling unit;

     4.     For mobilehomes in mobilehome parks (MHP, PD zoning) it is 1.721 persons per dwelling unit.

     The following table of population density shall apply, unless more recent census data is received and modified by city council resolution, to the population-based calculation estimate contained in subsection A of this section. The community development department will have the most recent census and calculation estimates on file at its office.

 

 

Dwelling Type

Zoning

Number of Persons Per Dwelling Unit

Acres of Parkland Per
Dwelling Unit

Single-family residence

R-1, R-2,
R-3A, PD

2.723

0.008169

Duplex to four plex

R-2, R-3,
R-3A, R-4, PD

2.028

0.006084

Five or More Units

R-3, R-3A, R-4, C-1, C-O, C-2, UBD, PD

1.834

0.005502

Mobilehomes

MHP, PD

1.721

0.005163

 

     C.     For the purposes of this section, the number of new dwelling units shall equal the number of parcels indicated on the tentative parcel map or tentative map when the development is located within the R-1, R-2, R-3A or PD zoning district. Refer to Section 16.32.020 for deferred payment of building permits.

     D.    When all or part of the subdivision is located in an area zoned R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-4, C-1, C-O, C-2, UBD, PD, or other districts which propose residential units, the number of proposed dwelling units in the area so zoned shall equal the maximum allowed under the given zoning where fees and/or land is dedicated at the final or parcel map. Refer to Section 16.32.020(E) for deferred payment of building permits.

     E.     The term “new dwelling unit” does not include dwelling units lawfully in place prior to the date on which the final map or parcel map is approved; refer to Section 16.32.080.

     F.     In the case of a condominium project, the number of new dwelling units shall be the number of condominiums; refer to Section 16.32.080.

     G.    The term “new dwelling unit” shall not include any dwelling units existing longer than a five-year period and lawfully in place prior to the date on which the parcel or final map is filed; refer to Section 16.32.080. (Ord. 05-920 § 1, 2005: prior code § 21.93)

 

16.32.050 Formula for fees in lieu of land dedication.
     When a fee is to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of such fee shall equal the fair market value (FMV), Section 16.32.020(E), of the amount of land which would otherwise be required for dedication as determined by the planning commission or city council pursuant to Section 16.32.040 hereof, plus twenty (20) percent toward costs of off-site improvements, such as those set forth in Section 16.32.020(D)(1) through (4).

     The following formula shall be used to determine the in-lieu fee:

 

        “Acre” as used in the following formula is a typical buildable acre of the subdivision, with a slope of less than ten (10) percent, and located in an area on which building is not excluded due to flooding, easements, or other restrictions.

 

     For lands zoned R-1, R-2, R-3A, PD, the minimum acreage to be dedicated per new dwelling unit is 0.008169 acre.

     For lands zoned R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-4, PD, the minimum acreage to be dedicated per new dwelling unit is 0.006084 acre.

     For lands zoned R-3, R-3A, R-4, C-1, C-2, C-O, UBD and PD, the minimum acreage to be dedicated per new dwelling unit is 0.005502 acre.

     For lands zoned MHP, PD, the minimum acreage to be dedicated per new dwelling unit is 0.005163 acre.

     The most recent calculations for in-lieu payments shall be on file at the community development department.

     A.    The fair market value of a typical buildable acre of land for a subdivision shall be based upon recent sales of lands within the city and under the same zoning. The city council shall adopt the fair market values by resolution and shall update the fair market values at least once annually.

     B.     An alternative calculation for the fair market value may be provided by the subdivider based upon a written appraisal report prepared and signed by a state licensed appraiser in accordance with the following:

     1.     The subdivider shall notify the city of the expected filing of the final map at least six weeks prior to filing the final map. The subdivider shall notify the city of its intent, for fifty (50) lots or less, to either pay the park in-lieu fees at the time of filing the final map or parcel map or to defer payment of park in-lieu fees to the building permit stage.

     2.     The appraisal shall be made immediately prior to the filing of the final map at the subdivider’s expense if the FMV as determined in accordance with this section is not acceptable.

     3.     The appraiser’s determination of fair market value shall be based on a typical buildable acre of the subdivision, with a slope of less than ten (10) percent, and located in an area on which building is not excluded due to flooding, easements, or other restrictions and shall consider the general plan land use designation and zoning of the site.

     4.     If more than three months elapses between preparation of the appraisal and filing of the final map, a new appraisal must be prepared at the subdivider’s expense, or the city council’s estimates for fair market value shall be used in the calculation for the in-lieu fee. (Ord. 05-920 § 1, 2005: prior code § 21.94)

 

16.32.060 Credit for private open space.
     No credit shall be given for private open space in the subdivision except as hereinafter provided.

     Where private open space usable for active recreational purposes is provided in a proposed planned development or real estate development as defined in Sections 11003 and 11003.1 of the Business and Professions Code, partial credit, not to exceed fifty (50) percent, shall be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof provided the city council finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following standards are met:

     A.    Yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space;

     B.     Private park and recreation facilities shall be owned by an association composed of all property owners  in the subdivision and being an incorporated nonprofit organization capable of dissolution only by a one hundred (100) percent affirmative vote of the membership, operated under recorded land agreements through which each lot owner in the neighborhood is automatically a member and each lot is subject to a charge for a proportionate share of expenses for maintaining the facilities;

     C.     Use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreation purposes by recorded covenant which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of the property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city or its successor;

     D.    The proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreation purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location;

     E.     Facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the open space, parks, recreation and child care element of the general plan;

     F.     The open space for which credit is given is generally a minimum of three acres and provides all of the local park basic elements listed below, or a combination of such and other recreation improvements that will meet the specific recreation needs of future residents of the area:

     1.     Recreational open spaces, which are generally defined as parks areas for active recreation pursuits such as soccer, golf, baseball, softball, and football, and have at least one acre of maintained turf with less than five percent slope,

     2.     Court areas, which are generally defined as tennis courts, badminton courts, shuffleboard courts, or similar hard-surfaced areas especially designed and exclusively used for court games,

     3.     Recreational swimming areas, which are defined generally as fenced areas devoted primarily to swimming, diving, or both. They must also include decks, turf area(s), bathhouses, or other facilities developed and used exclusively for swimming and diving, and consisting of no less than fifteen (15) square feet of water surface area for each three percent of the population of the subdivision with a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet of water surface area per pool together with an adjacent deck and/or turf area twice that of the pool,

     4.     Recreation buildings and facilities designed and primarily used for the recreational needs of residents of the development;

     G.    Open space covenants for private park and recreation facilities shall be submitted to the community development department for review. The director shall prepare a report to the city council for their consideration prior to approval of the final map or parcel map and shall be recorded concurrently with the final map or parcel map, if accepted.

     The determination of the city council as to whether credit shall be given and the amount of credit shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 21.95)

 

16.32.070 Disposition of fees.
     A.    In-lieu fees determined pursuant to Section 16.32.050 and paid to the city pursuant to Section 16.32.020 shall be deposited into the city park development trust fund or its successor(s).

     B.     Money in the city park development trust fund or its successor(s) and including accrued interest, shall be expended solely for acquisition of land for park or recreation purposes, development of new or rehabilitation of existing park or recreation facilities or land, or installation of improvements related thereto.

     C.     Fees collected for a given subdivision are to be expended on park or recreation facilities in a location or area that will serve the residents of the subdivision.

     D.    Fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be committed within five years after the payment of such fees or upon the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later.

     E.     If such fees are not so committed, they shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots in the subdivision.

     F.     The city administrator and the administrative services director shall report to the city council at least annually on income, expenditures, and status of the city park development trust fund or its successor(s). (Prior code § 21.96)

 

16.32.080 Exemptions.
     A.    Projects that are not intended for residential purposes shall be exempted from the requirements of this chapter. However, a condition shall be placed on the approval of the tentative map or the tentative parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels, dedication of land for park or recreation purposes or payment of a fee in lieu of dedication shall be required by the owner of each such parcel as a condition of issuance of the building permit.

     B.     The provisions of this chapter do not apply to condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added.

     C.     The provisions of this chapter do not apply to existing single-family residential units in existence at the time of filing the final map or parcel map. (Prior code § 21.97)

 

16.32.090 Subdivider provided park and recreation improvements.
     A.    The value of park and recreation improvements provided by the subdivider to the dedicated land shall be credited against the fees or dedication of land required by this article. Credit shall not be given for the improvements described under Section 16.32.020(D)(1) through (4).

     B.     Should the park and recreation improvements be unacceptable, the city council reserves the right to revoke the approved credit against the fees or dedication. (Prior code § 21.98)

 

16.32.100 Agency to accept land and fees.
     Lands and/or in-lieu fees required under this chapter shall be conveyed or paid directly to the city or agency which provides park and recreational services on a community-wide level and to the area within which the proposed development will be located, if such agency elects to accept the lands and/or fees.

     At the time of tentative map approval, the city council shall determine whether the city is the appropriate local agency.

     The city, county, or other public agency to which the lands and/or fees are conveyed or paid, shall develop a schedule pursuant to Section 66477 of the Government Code specifying how, when, and where it will use the lands and/or fees, to develop park and recreation facilities to serve residents of the subdivision. (Prior code § 21.99)

 

16.32.110 Sale of dedicated land.
     If during the ensuing time between the dedication of lands for park and recreation purposes and commencement of residential construction, circumstances arise which indicate that another site or sites would be more suitable for park and recreation purposes serving the subdivision and the neighborhood, such as receipt of a gift of additional park land or a change in school location, the land may be sold upon the approval of the city council with the resultant funds being used solely for purchase of a more suitable site. (Prior code § 21.100)

Title 17 ZONING
Chapter 17.04 ZONING ORDINANCE GENERALLY
Chapter 17.08 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 17.12 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.16 DUPLEX, RESIDENTIAL (R-2) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.20 DUPLEX AND TRIPLEX RESIDENTIAL (R-3 AND R-3(A)) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.24 MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-4) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.28 MOBILE HOME PARK (MHP) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.32 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (C-1) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.36 GENERAL COMMERCIAL AND SHOPPING CENTER (C-2) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.40 UPTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT (UBD) ZONE
Chapter 17.44 COMMERCIAL OFFICE (C-O) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.48 COMMERCIAL-LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (C-M) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.52 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (M-L) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.56 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (M) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.60 PUBLIC FACILITIES (PF) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.64 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.68 UNCLASSIFIED (U) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.71 AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL (AR-1) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.72 EXCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL (AE-20) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.76 OPEN SPACE (OS) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.80 COMBINING LOT SIZE (B) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.84 DESIGN REVIEW (DR) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.88 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMBINING (H) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.92 RESTRICTIVE FLOOD (F-2) DISTRICT
Chapter 17.96 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Chapter 17.100 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
Chapter 17.104 GENERAL PROVISIONS, CONDITIONS, EXCEPTIONS AND SPECIAL USES
Chapter 17.108 NONCONFORMING USES
Chapter 17.112 APPLICATIONS AND PROCEDURES
Chapter 17.116 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 17.120 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
Chapter 17.124 RECYCLING
Chapter 17.128 SIGNS

Chapter 17.04 ZONING ORDINANCE GENERALLY
17.04.010 Adoption.
     There is adopted a zoning ordinance for the city of Susanville, State of California. The ordinance is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort and general welfare, and consists of regulations and maps as may be amended from time to time by the city council. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.04.020 Title.
     This title shall be known as “The Zoning Ordinance of the city of Susanville.” (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.04.030 Purpose.
     The purposes of this title are:

     A.    To promote and protect the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare;

     B.     To implement the city general plan, and to facilitate and guide growth in accordance with the general plan, in an orderly manner; and

     C.     To protect the social, aesthetic and economic stability of residential, commercial, industrial, resource areas, and recreational activities within the city through the orderly, planned use of the land. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.04.040 Applicability.
     The provisions of this title apply throughout the incorporated portions of the city and apply to lands owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the state or a local government, or any unit or agency of either of them, to the extent permitted by law, or by the consent of or agreement with the state or local government or unit or agency thereof, that is affected by this title. The provisions of this title do not apply to federal reservations or to land owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.04.050 Scope.
     The zoning ordinance consists of the establishment of various zone districts to be used within the incorporated area of the city. Within the districts the height and bulk of future buildings shall be limited, and certain open spaces shall be required around future buildings. Each district shall consist of additional appropriate regulations to be enforced, all as set forth in this title. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.04.060 Establishment of zone districts.
     A.    The designations, locations, boundaries and regulations of the zone districts in the zoning ordinance shall be established by ordinance of the city council. The city council may, by ordinance, incorporate maps or diagrams into the zoning ordinance by reference when necessary or convenient to accomplish the purposes of this title.

     B.     The following zone districts are established as principal districts:

     1.     Residential Zone Districts.

             R-1          Single-family residential

             R-2          Duplex

             R-3          Duplex and triplex

             R-3(A)    Duplex and triplex

             R-4          Multifamily

             MHP        Mobile home park

     2.     Commercial Zone Districts.

             C-1          Neighborhood commercial

             C-2          General/shopping center

             UBD        Uptown business district

             C-O          Office commercial

             C-M         Commercial-light industrial

     3.     Industrial Zone Districts.

             M-L         Light industrial

             M             General industrial

     4.     Special Zone Districts.

             PF            Public facilities

             PD            Planned development

             U              Unclassified

     5.     Resource Zone Districts.

             AR-1       Agricultural Residential

             AE-20     Exclusive agricultural

             O-S          Open space

     C.     The following zone districts are established to be combined with appropriate principal districts:

             B              Combining Lot Size (Building site)

             DR           Design review

             H              Historical preservation

             F-2           Restrictive flood

             PD            Planned development

     D.    All of the incorporated territory of the city which is not otherwise zoned is hereby zoned Unclassified (U). (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.04.070 Zone maps.
     A series of maps, known as “zone maps,” shall be utilized to show the designations and boundaries of each zone district in the city, and shall show base data as directed by the city council. The maps shall be adopted or amended by ordinance and shall be maintained by the community development department. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.04.080 Effect.
     Except as otherwise provided:

     A.    No building shall be erected or placed, and no existing structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building or premises be used, designated, or intended to be used for any purpose, or in any manner other than is included among the uses listed in this title as permitted in the district in which such building, land or premises is located.

     B.     No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit designated in this title for districts in which such building is located.

     C.     No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any required open space be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, building site, and building location regulations specified in this title for the district in which such building or open space is located.

     D.    No yard or other open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one building site shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other building site. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.08 DEFINITIONS
17.08.010 Definitions.
     Unless otherwise provided, whenever the words, terms or phrases listed in this section are used in this title, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. All words, terms and phrases not otherwise defined herein shall be given their usual and customary meaning, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning is intended. Words not listed in this section shall be defined by reference to the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions, 1999, Moskowitz & Lindbloom. Absent guidance there, words not found in this book shall be defined by reference to the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, most current edition.

     “Agriculture” means the activity of growing and harvesting crops, rearing and managing livestock; the commercial production of plants and animals. “Agriculture” does not include the processing of agricultural products.

     “Airport” means any area of land used or intended to be used for the landing and take off of aircraft and appurtenant areas used or intended to be used for airport buildings, facilities or rights-of-way.

     “Alley” means a public or private thoroughfare, affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property.

     “Apartment” means any building or portion thereof which is designed and built for occupancy of more than two families.

     Automobile Wrecking Yards. See “Junk yards.”

     “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (i.e., the “one hundred-year” flood as defined in Section 15.40.050 of the Susanville Municipal Code).

     “Bed and breakfast guest facility” means an owner-occupied single-family residence that provides guest rooms, without individual kitchen facilities, for temporary sleeping purposes by overnight guests. Such use may include meal service limited to the overnight guests.

     “Block” means all property fronting upon one side of a street, between intersecting and intercepting streets, or between a street and a railroad right-of-way, waterway, dead-end street or unsubdivided land. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the block on the side of a street which it intercepts.

     “Boardinghouse” or “rooming house” means a dwelling having only one kitchen and used for the purpose of providing lodging or meals and lodging for pay or compensation of any kind, computed by day, week, or month to persons other than the family occupying the dwelling.

     “Building” means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, and designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal or personal property. “Building” does not include any tent, trailer, recreational vehicle or other vehicle.

     “Building frontage” means those building elevations which face upon a street or parking area between the building and the street.

     Building Height. See “Structural height.”

     Building, Main. “Main building” means a building or mobile home in which the principal use of the lot and/or building site is conducted.

     Building, Residential Accessory. “Residential accessory building” means a detached building subordinate to and located on the same building site as a residence, the use of which is incidental to that of the residential use; does not include any building designed or used for human habitation.

     “Building site” means land occupied or intended to be occupied by a main building and accessory buildings, together with all open space required by this title, which is located on a lot or parcel of land that has been lawfully created and meets all criteria of the city for the intended use. Unless otherwise designated, “building site” has the same meaning as “lot.”

     “Campground” means land or premises used or intended to be used, let or rented for occupancy by campers traveling by automobile recreational vehicle, or for occupancy by tents or similar quarters.

     “Caretaker’s or night watchperson’s quarters” means an area not larger than four hundred (400) square feet, designed to be used by one person, either a caretaker or night watchperson, within a main building in which an authorized commercial or industrial use exists, and is incidental to the established commercial or industrial use.

     “Church” means a building, together with its accessory buildings, maintained and controlled by a body organized to conduct religious worship and used primarily for religious worship and related activities. “Church” does not include “school.”

     “City” means the city of Susanville.

     “City boundary” means the boundary of the city.

     “City council” means the city council of the city.

     “Combining district” means any district which is established to be combined with appropriate principal districts.

     “Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property, together with a separate interest in space called a unit in a residential, industrial or commercial building on the real property, such as an apartment, office or store. In addition, a condominium may include a separate interest in other portions of the real property.

     “Cottage food operation” means the use of a private home for the preparation of food for sale in accordance with the Section 113758 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. A cottage food operation must be registered with or have a permit from the local environmental health department, or equivalent enforcement agency, as required by Section 114365 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California.

     “Day care center” means any child day care facility other than a family day care home and includes infant centers, preschools, and extended day care facilities.

     Day Care Home, Large. “Large day care home” means a home which regularly provides nonmedical care, protection and supervision for nine to fourteen (14) children, inclusive, in the provider’s own house, for a period of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, while the parents or guardian are away. “Children” includes the resident children who are under the age of twelve (12), and all other children under the age of eighteen (18).

     Day Care Home, Small. “Small day care home“ means a home which regularly provides nonmedical care, protection and supervision for eight or fewer children, for a period of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away. “Children” includes resident children under the age of twelve (12), and all other children under the age of eighteen (18).

     “Density” means the number of residential dwelling units allowed per acre of land as set forth in the general plan. A net density will be achieved as determined by minimum lot sizes in each zone district, except for planned developments and townhouses which can vary lot sizes to achieve a gross density.

     “Dog kennel” means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs; any premises where seven or more dogs at least four months of age are kept, except a veterinary hospital or an animal shelter operated by a governmental agency.

     “Dwelling unit” means a structure or the part of a structure that is used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one person who maintains a household or by two or more persons who maintain a common household, with facilities for sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation.

     “Easement” means an area of a lot reserved for use for public utilities or public or private purposes.

     “Emergency shelter” means any noncommercial facility which may provide temporary occupancy of six months or less for a homeless person, and may also provide meals, showers and/or laundry facilities. Specialized programs and services related to the needs of residents may also be provided.

     “Family” means one or more persons occupying premises and living as a single bona fide housekeeping unit, including all necessary domestic employees of such family.

     Garage or Carport, Private. “Private garage or carport” means a residential accessory building or an attached garage or carport designed primarily for the storage of automobiles.

     “Group care home” means a residential facility licensed by any federal, state or local agency which provides housing and nonmedical care for children, elderly persons, or physically and mentally handicapped persons in a family-like environment. A group care home is a non-detention facility and does not include emergency or homeless shelters, half-way houses for parolees or convicted persons or living groups. “Group care homes” include the following:

     1.     An intermediate care facility, developmentally disabled habilitative and intermediate care facility/
developmentally disabled-nursing or congregate living facility as identified in state of California Health and Safety Code Section 1267.8;

     2.     A community care facility as identified in state of California Health and Safety Code Section 1566.3;

     3.     A residential care facility for the elderly as identified in state of California Health and Safety Code Section 1569.85;

     4.     An alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility as identified in state of California Health and Safety Code Section 11834.02;

     5.     A home for the care of mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped person as identified in state of California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 5116;

     6.     A home for the care of dependent and neglected children as identified in the state of California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 300, but not including ward of the court as identified in the state of California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 601.5;

     “Home occupation” means any activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as a customary, incidental and accessory use in or from the resident’s dwelling unit.

     “Junk” means fabricated items which are either abandoned or not longer usable for the purpose for which they were made, and which are not presently being restored or repaired, including, but not limited to, scrap iron, tin, brass, copper, lead or zinc and all other scrap metals and their alloys, bones, rags, paper and paper products, all used cloth, clothing, rubber, rope, tinfoil, bottles, machinery, tools, appliances, fixtures, utensils, lumber, wood, fabrics, boxes or crates, plastics or other synthetic products, paint, clay or porcelain products, pipe fittings, automobile or airplane tires, used automobiles and automobile parts, and all other manufactured goods which are so worn, deteriorated, or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing condition, regardless of whether such material is being held for sale or storage.

     “Junk yard/wrecking yard” means the use of more than one hundred (100) square feet of the area on any lot or contiguous lots used for the storage of junk, and/or for the dismantling or “wrecking” of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery, whether for sale or storage.

     “Kitchen” means any room or area intended or designed to be used for the preparation or cooking of food. “Kitchen” does not include a wet bar.

     “Lot” means a parcel of land upon which not more than one building site may be designated, unless applicable zone district regulations provide otherwise. Unless otherwise designated, “lot” has the same meaning as “building site.”

     Lot, Corner. “Corner lot” means a lot having frontage on two intersecting streets. For the purpose of this title the narrowest frontage of a corner lot facing the street is the front, and the longest frontage facing the intersecting street is the side, irrespective of the direction in which the dwelling faces.

     “Lot depth” means the average lineal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured perpendicular to the front lot line.

     Lot, Flag. “Flag lot” means an L-shaped lot in which one arm of the lot, typically thirty (30) feet in width (pole portion), fronts on the street and is used solely as a driveway.

     Lot, Interior. “Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot.

     Lot, Key. “Key lot” means the first lot to the rear of a corner lot, the front lot line of which is a continuation of the side line of the corner lot regardless of any alley or right-of-way between the corner and key lots.

     Lot Line, Front. “Front lot line” means the lot line abutting a street. In the case of a lot that abuts more than one street, the property owner may choose which street the front lot line is on; except, in a group of developed lots, the front line shall be on the same side as the developed lots.

     Lot Line, Rear. “Rear lot line” means the lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot; a line a minimum of ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.

     Lot Line, Side. “Side lot line” means any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.

     Lot, Through. “Through lot” means a lot, other than a corner lot, having, frontage on two approximately parallel streets.

     “Lot width” means the lineal distance between the side lot lines, measured at a right angle to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot line.

     “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the building’s lowest floor, provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this title. Finish materials such as, but not limited to, carpet, vinyl and tile shall not be included in elevation measurements of the lowest floor. Elevation measurements of the lowest floor shall be taken at the top of the sub-floor material.

     “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width, or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on-site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification and complies with the standards established under this part. “Manufactured home” includes a mobile home subject to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act of 1974 (42 USC, Sec. 5401, et seq.).

     “Mini-storage” means a building or group of buildings in a controlled-access compound that contains varying sizes of individual compartmental and controlled-access stalls or lockers for the self-service dead storage of customer’s goods or wares, and within which no business activity, other than rental of storage units is conducted.

     “Mobile home” means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is eight body feet or more in width and is thirty-two (32) body feet or more in length, is more than three hundred twenty (320) square feet in internal living area and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Mobile home does not include a recreational vehicle, commercial coach, any automobile trailer, camp trailer, camper, house car motor vehicle, or other vehicle defined in the California Vehicle Code, or any factory-built housing as defined in the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Mobile home park” means any area or tract of land where two or more mobile home lots are rented or leased, held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium, or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate manufactured homes or mobile homes used for human habitation. The rental paid for a manufactured home or mobile home shall be deemed to include rental for the lot it occupies.

     “Motel or hotel” means a single building or a group of detached or semi-detached buildings containing guest rooms or apartments, which group is designed and used primarily for the accommodation of transient automobile travelers.

     “Multifamily dwelling” means a building containing three or more dwelling units.

     “Nonconforming buildings and uses” means those structures, buildings, mobile homes and uses which were lawful when established, but which do not conform to subsequently established zoning requirements.

     Office, Professional. “Professional office” means an office from which a doctor, lawyer, engineer, architect, surveyor, real estate salesperson, accountant, bookkeeper, income tax consultant, advertiser, appraiser, draftsman, credit agency, mortgage/finance company, collection agency, stock and bond broker, secretarial service, social worker, insurance, title insurance, travel agency, and offices of governmental, charitable, cultural, educational, recreational and social organizations, etc. may offer services.

     Parking Lot, Public. “Public parking lot” means a parking lot for vehicles created to serve the public at large either as a separate business or as an accessory use to a business, whether owned by a governmental agency or by a private person or business. “Parking lot” is not intended to include a parking lot developed to serve a public building such as a court house, City Hall, library, school, etc.

     “Parking space” means an accessible and usable asphalt or concrete paved space on a building site, or adjacent lot, at least nine feet by twenty (20) feet, for the parking of motor vehicles off the street.

     “Planning commission” means the city planning commission.

     “Public use” means the use of land owned or possessed by a public entity for public facilities or services, when the land, facility or service is available to members of the public in common with each other, including, but not limited to, public parks, human cemeteries, schools, fire halls, libraries, hospitals and other public buildings and uses. “Public use” includes quasi-public uses such as private or parochial schools, private hospitals and other uses that are similar in character and impact to uses typically operated as public uses. “Public use” does not include public utilities, airports or churches.

     “Public utility” means the use of land for public utility purposes by an entity providing pipeline, cable, gas, electrical, telephone, telegraph, water or sewage service that is subject to the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. “Public utility” also includes the use of land for utility purposes, whether or not owned, controlled or operated by a public entity, whose services are performed for or commodities delivered to the public or any portion thereof. Private energy production, transmission relay, repeater, translator, radio and television towers and equipment and cable television facilities are also considered public utilities. “Public utility” does not include airports or television, radio or community television antenna system administration offices or other types of administrative offices or maintenance yards.

     “Recreational vehicle” means any motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or camping trailer, with or without motor power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy, which meets all of the following criteria:

     1.     Contains less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet of internal living room area, excluding built-in equipment including, but not limited to, wardrobe, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, and bath or toilet rooms;

     2.     Contains four hundred (400) square feet or less of gross area measured at maximum horizontal projections;

     3.     Is built on a single chassis; and

     4.     Is either self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently towable on the highways without a permit.

     “Recreational vehicle park” means an area or tract of land developed and operated with one or more spaces which are rented or leased for parking and utilizing recreational vehicles on a temporary basis.

     Residence, Multifamily. “Multifamily residence” means a building or buildings containing three or more dwelling units, such as an apartment house, apartment hotel or flat.

     Residence, Senior Citizen. “Senior citizen residence” means a dwelling unit which is attached to or detached from, a primary residence on a parcel zoned for a single-family residence, if the dwelling unit is intended for the sole occupancy of one adult or two adult persons who are sixty-two (62) years of age or over, and the area of floor space of the attached dwelling unit does not exceed thirty (30) percent of the existing living area or the area of the floor space of the detached dwelling unit does not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.

     Residence, Single-Family. “Single-family residence” means a detached building containing a single dwelling unit, including a mobile home certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974 that complies with all provisions of state law and this code and the city development standards applicable to mobile homes installed on foundation systems and that would be defined as a mobile home if not installed on a foundation system.

     Residence, Two-Family, Duplex. “Two-family duplex residence” means a building containing two independent dwelling units under one roof (duplex).

     Residence, Three-Family, Triplex. “Three-family triplex residence” means a building containing three independent dwelling units under one roof (triplex).

     Residence, Four-Family, Fourplex. “Four-family fourplex residence” means a building containing four independent dwelling units under one roof (fourplex).

     Restaurant, Fast Food. “Fast food restaurant” means any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, for consumption either within the restaurant building or for take-out consumption, and whose design or principal method of operation includes serving food and beverages in edible containers or in paper, plastic or other disposable containers.

     Restaurant, Standard. “Standard restaurant” means any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, usually for consumption within the restaurant, and whose design or principal method of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics:

     1.     Customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served foods and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which such items are consumed.

     2.     A cafeteria-type operation where foods and beverages generally are consumed within the building.

     “Retail sales business” means the selling of goods, wares, articles, commodity or merchandise directly to the ultimate consumer.

     “Shopping center” means two or more retail stores and/or service establishments, or one retail store and one service establishment, sharing customer parking areas, regardless of whether such stores and/or establishments occupy separate structures or are under separate ownerships.

     Sign. Sign definitions are provided in Section 17.128.040.

     “Skilled nursing/intermediate care facility” means a facility or a part of a hospital which provides twenty-four (24) hour inpatient care. Twenty-four (24) hour inpatient care may include skilled nursing, physician and pharmaceutical services and an activity program.

     “Story” means the portion of a building between the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling above it.

     “Street” means a public thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except an alley as defined herein.

     “Street frontage” means the portion of a lot fronting on a street.

     “Street line” means the boundary between a street right-of-way and property.

     “Structural alterations” means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.

     “Structural height” means the height of a structure measured from the average finished grade at the base of the structure to the highest point of the structure, excluding elevator equipment rooms, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment.

     “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on or in the ground or attachment to something located on or in the ground, including fences and swimming pools.

     “Townhouse” means a single-family dwelling unit attached to one or more single-family dwelling units, provided only one dwelling unit is located on a lot. A townhouse may also include an undivided interest in common in a lot, that is contiguous to the townhouse lots.

     “Transitional housing” means housing with supportive services for up to twenty-four (24) months that is exclusively designated and targeted for recently homeless persons. Transitional housing includes self-sufficiency development services, with the ultimate goal of moving recently homeless persons to permanent housing as quickly as possible, and limits rent and service fees to an ability-to-pay formula reasonably consistent with HUD’s requirements for subsidized housing for low-income persons. Rent and service fees paid for transitional housing may be reserved, in whole or in part, to assist residents in moving to permanent housing. Transitional housing and supportive housing are considered residential use and allowed in property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-4, C-1, and C-2.

     “Truck terminal” means any facility designed to serve as a carrier end point for the delivery and receipt of goods, which may include loading docks, storage shed, management offices, truck storage and employee and customer parking.

     “Truck yard” means any facility, including buildings and/or outdoor storage, servicing, maintenance and/or repair of two or more vehicles having a gross vehicle weight of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds each.

     “Use” means the purpose for which land or a building or mobile home is designed, arranged, or intended or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or maintained.

     Use, Accessory. “Accessory use” means any use that is incidental or subordinate to an existing principal use, is customarily a part of and is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use, and does not change the character of that principal use.

     “Vehicle trip” means a one-way trip by a motorized vehicle.

     “Watercourse” means a drainage way which has a defined bed, banks and channel and which carries a flow of water at least periodically.

     “Wet bar” means a sink and small refrigerator.

     “Yard” means an open space, on the same lot with a building, which is unoccupied by any structure and unobstructed from the ground upward by any structure, except as otherwise provided in this title, exclusive of any portion of any court, street alley, sidewalk or road right-of-way.

     Yard, Front. “Front yard” means a yard extending across the front of the lot between the side lot lines and measured from the front line of the lot to the nearest line of the building; provided, however, that if any official plan line has been established for the street upon which the lot faces, the front yard measurement shall be taken from such official plan line to the nearest line of the building.

     Yard, Interior Side. “Interior side yard” means a yard along the interior side line of the lot to a width equivalent to or greater than that required by the district in which the lot is situated, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.

     Yard, Rear. “Rear yard” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the main building.

     Yard, Street Side. “Street side yard” means a yard along a side street, right-of-way or easement to a width equivalent to or greater than that required by the district in which the lot is situated, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. (Ord. 2020-1023 § 1, 2020; Ord. 13-989 § 1, 2013; Ord. 08-957 § 1, 2008; Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.12 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) DISTRICT
17.12.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the single-family residential (R-1) district is to provide for fully serviced, urban-sized lots used exclusively for single-family residences and selected related uses. The maximum residential density is seven dwellings per acre. This district and uses permitted is consistent with the single-family residential general plan land use designation. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.12.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted outright in the R-1 district if a building permit, where necessary, is issued:

     A.    Single-family residences, except that mobile or manufactured homes on foundation systems are subject to subsection B of this section;

     B.     A manufactured home certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) and installed on a foundation system and meeting other adopted development standards, in lieu of a frame-constructed dwelling, provided said unit is not more than ten (10) years old at the time it is installed;

     C.     Small day care home;

     D.    Group care home with six or less persons;

     E.     Accessory buildings, structures and uses when constructed concurrently or subsequently to the main building:

     1.     Decks, fences, patios, and retaining walls,

     2.     Private garages, carports, porte cochere (cover over the driveway at a side yard entrance to the main building for sheltering persons entering or leaving vehicles),

     3.     Private swimming pools, hot tubs, and saunas,

     4.     Storage sheds for tools, garden supplies, noncommercial greenhouses and firewood used on site. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.12.030 Uses requiring administrative permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the R-1 district if an administrative permit is issued:

     A.    Home occupation subject to the provisions of Sections 17.104.060;

     B.     Second unit, subject to development standards in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.12.040 Uses requiring use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the R-1 district if a use permit is issued:

     A.    Senior citizen residence, subject to development standards in Section 17.104.040;

     B.     Church;

     C.     Large day care home, subject to development standards in Section 17.104.070;

     D.    Temporary subdivision sales office and contractor’s yard;

     E.     Bed and breakfast guest facility, subject to development standards in Section 17.104.080; and

     F.     Public or private parking lot when adjacent to a “C” or “M” district, subject to the transitional parking standards in Section 17.100.170; and

     G.    Townhouse. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.12.050 Other permitted uses.
     Other uses permitted in the R-1 district are:

     A.    Private Stables. Horses and private stables may be permitted, if the following criteria are met:

     1.     The minimum lot area upon which a horse may be kept is one acre and one horse may be kept for each one-half acre;

     2.     Stables, paddocks and animals shall be located not less than seventy-five (75) feet from a door or window of any dwelling.

     B.     Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.12.020—17.12.040, as determined by the community development director in accordance with Section 17.116.030. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.12.060 Site development standards.
     The following site development standards apply in the R-1 district:

     A.    Minimum Building Site. Provided that the residential density permitted by the general plan, including any permitted density bonus, is not exceeded, the following minimum building site requirements apply:

     1.     Interior lot, six thousand (6,000) square feet;

     2.     Corner lot, seven thousand (7,000) square feet;

     3.     Lot width, corner seventy (70) feet and interior sixty (60) feet;

     4.     Maximum lot coverage for all structures, forty (40) percent.

     B.     Yards.

     1.     Front, twenty (20) feet; except that houses constructed with garages having a swing driveway, with the entrance facing the side property line, or with the garage facing the street but set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet, may have a minimum fifteen (15) foot setback;

     2.     Where four or more lots in a block have been improved with dwellings prior to August 5, 1963, the original adoption date of the zoning ordinance (not including accessory buildings), the minimum front yard setback shall be the average setback of the existing buildings, if the setback is more or less than the required setback of this district;

     3.     Side, five feet on the interior side yard and ten (10) feet on the corner side yard;

     4.     Rear, fifteen (15) foot setback for the main building;

     5.     Attached or unattached accessory buildings subject to provisions of Section 17.96.020(E).

     C.     Maximum Structural Height.

     1.     Main building, thirty-five (35) feet;

     2.     Accessory building, one story not to exceed fifteen (15) feet.

     D.    Parking.

     1.     Parking requirements as specified in Sections 17.100.010 through 17.100.160. For each newly constructed single-family residence, two covered parking spaces in a carport or garage. Each space shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in depth of unobstructed area. Washing machines, dryers, water heaters, stairways, supporting columns, steps or other obstructions shall not be located within the required parking space.

     2.     Garage Conversions. Existing garages to be converted to nonparking uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 17.104.130.

     E.     Townhouses. Yard and building site standards may vary for townhouses through the use permit, provided the density permitted by the general plan is not exceeded.

     F.     Architectural and Site Plan Review. An applicant for a use permit shall submit architectural drawings, the elevations of all buildings and a site plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. Development plans are also subject to the City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as may be amended. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development director and shall include such additional plans, drawings and information as the planning commission from time to time may require by resolution. Such drawings and site plans shall be considered by the planning commission at a public meeting. The planning commission must find that the architectural and general appearance of such buildings or structures and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the city. The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the plans. 
Architectural and site plan review will be a part of the use permit process and the director’s approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. (Ord. 10-973 § 1, 2010; Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.16 DUPLEX, RESIDENTIAL (R-2) DISTRICT
17.16.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the duplex residential (R-2) district is to provide for fully serviced, urban-sized lots for single-family and duplex dwellings and selected related uses. The maximum density is twelve (12) dwellings per acre. This district is consistent with the single-family and duplex and triplex general plan land use designations. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.16.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted outright in the R-2 district if a building permit, where necessary, is issued:

     A.    Single-family residences;

     B.     A manufactured home per Section 17.12.020(B);

     C.     Duplex or two-family residences;

     D.    Accessory buildings, structures and uses when constructed concurrently or subsequently to the main buildings:

     1.     Decks, fences, patios and retaining walls,

     2.     Private garages or carports, porte cochere (cover over the driveway at a side yard entrance to the main building for sheltering persons entering or leaving vehicles),

     3.     Private swimming pools, hot tubs, and saunas, and

     4.     Storage sheds for tools, garden supplies, noncommercial greenhouses and firewood used on site;

     E.     Small day care home;

     F.     Group care home with six or less persons. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.16.030 Uses requiring administrative permit.
     The following uses are permitted provided an administrative permit is issued subject to the provisions of Section 17.104.060:

     A.    Home occupation;

     B.     Second unit only in conjunction with one single-family home on a lot, subject to development standards in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.16.040 Uses requiring a use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the R-2 district if a use permit is issued and subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.104, General Provisions, Conditions, Exceptions and Special Uses:

     A.    Large day care home, subject to development standards in Section 17.104.070;

     B.     Townhouses;

     C.     Temporary residential development sales office and contractor’s yard;

     D.    Group care home with more than six persons;

     E.     Church;

     F.     Bed and breakfast guest facility, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.104.080;

     G.    Skilled nursing/intermediate care facility serving no more than fifteen (15) people; and

     H.    Public or private parking lot when adjacent to a “C” or “M” district subject to the development standards of Section 17.100.160. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.16.050 Other permitted uses.
     Other uses permitted in the R-2 district are:

     A.    The uses allowed by Chapter 17.104;

     B.     Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.16.020—17.16.040, as determined by the community development director in accordance with Section 17.116.030. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.16.060 Site development standards.
     The following site development standards apply in the R-2 district:

     A.    Minimum Building Site. There shall be at least three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit. No more than one family dwelling unit may be constructed on any lot whose area is less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet, except that any lot of record on the effective date of the zoning ordinance codified in this title (December 2000) which is six thousand (6,000) or more square feet may contain two dwelling units. The residential density and area for parcels created after the effective date of this zoning ordinance shall be as follows:

     1.     Single-Family Detached. Per site development standards of R-1 zone district as set forth in Section 17.12.060.

     2.     Single-Family Attached. Per Section 17.16.060(F).

     3.     Duplex: seven thousand (7,000) square feet:

     a.     Interior Lot. Seven thousand (7,000) square feet and sixty (60) feet minimum width;

     b.     Corner Lot. Seven thousand (7,000) square feet and seventy (70) feet minimum width.

     4.     Maximum Lot Coverage for all Structures. Forty (40) percent).

     B.     Yards. The following yard requirements apply:

     1.     Front. Twenty (20) feet; except that single-family houses and duplexes constructed with garages having a swing driveway, with the entrance facing the side property line, or with the garage facing the street but set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet, may have a minimum fifteen (15) foot setback;

     2.     Side. Five feet on interior side and ten (10) feet on the corner side;

     3.     Rear. Ten (10) feet and one thousand (1,000) square feet uncovered space on rear one-third of lot.

     C.     Maximum Structural Height. The following structural height restrictions apply;

     1.     Main Building. Thirty-five (35) feet;

     2.     Accessory Building. One story not to exceed fifteen (15) feet.

     D.    Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160.

     E.     Outdoor Trash Storage. All outdoor trash storage and collection facilities other than standard containers for individual residential use are required to be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscured fence at least one foot higher than the trash container.

     F.     Townhouses. Yard and building site standards may vary for townhouses through issuance of a use permit, provided the density permitted by the general plan is not exceeded.

     G.    Parking. Parking requirements as specified in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160. For each newly constructed single-family and duplex or two-family residence, two covered parking spaces in a carport or garage; each space shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in depth of unobstructed area. Washing machines, dryers, water heaters, stairways, supporting columns, steps or other obstructions shall not be located within the required parking space.

     H.    Architectural and Site Plan Review. An applicant for a use permit shall submit architectural drawings, the elevations of all buildings and a site plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. Development plans are also subject to the City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as may be amended. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development director and shall include such additional plans, drawings and information as the planning commission from time to time may require by resolution. Such drawings and site plans shall be considered by the planning commission at a public meeting. The planning commission must find that the architectural and general appearance of such buildings or structures and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the city. The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the plans. 
Architectural and site plan review will be a part of the use permit process and the director’s approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.20 DUPLEX AND TRIPLEX RESIDENTIAL (R-3 AND R-3(A)) DISTRICT
17.20.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the duplex and triplex residential (R-3 and R-3A) district is to provide areas for residential development that promote flexibility in site design and type of unit. Selected related uses are also allowed. The maximum density for residential dwellings is twelve (12) dwellings per acre in areas which have the services and facilities necessary for medium density residential uses. Duplexes and triplexes are permitted by right while structures with more than three dwellings are allowed with a use permit. Single-family homes may be located in the R-3(A) district only. The density of a single-family development cannot exceed seven dwellings per acre. Generally the R-3(A) zoning will only be applied to areas that are predominately developed with single-family homes. Multiple structures, excluding single-family dwellings, may locate on one lot, with a maximum density of twelve (12) dwellings per acre. The R-3 and R-3(A) district is consistent with the duplex and triplex general plan designation. Only the R-3 district is consistent with the multiple family general plan designation. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.20.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted outright in the R-3 district if a building permit, where necessary, is issued:

     A.    Duplex or two-family residences;

     B.     Triplex;

     C.     Single-family residences, manufactured homes per Section 17.12.020(B) and all uses permitted by right or with an administrative permit in the R-3 district, are permitted on parcels that are zoned R-3(A), (single-family homes are not allowed in the R-3 zone district);

     D.    Accessory buildings and uses commonly found in residential developments, including garages, carports, laundry facilities, rental and administrative offices, recreational facilities incidental and in conjunction with a residential development, including a swimming pool, tennis courts, clubhouse, etc.;

     E.     Small day care home, only in a R-3(A) zone district in conjunction with one single-family home on a lot; and

     F.     Group care home with six or less persons. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.20.030 Uses requiring administrative permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the R-3 district if an administrative permit is issued, and subject to the provisions of Section 17.104.060:

     A.    Home occupation (allowed in R-3 and R-3(A) zones);

     B.     Second unit in R-3(A) zone, only in conjunction with one single-family home on a lot, subject to development standards in Section 17.104.050. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.20.040 Uses requiring use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the R-3 and R-3(A) district if a use permit is issued:

     A.    Group care home with more than six persons;

     B.     Rooming house or boardinghouse or dwelling group;

     C.     Private club, fraternity, sorority or lodge, except those for which the chief activity is a service customarily carried on by a business;

     D.    Church;

     E.     Day care center;

     F.     Bed and breakfast guest facility, subject to the provisions of Section 17.104.080;

     G.    Skilled nursing/intermediate care facility;

     H.    Public or private parking lot when adjacent to a “C” or “M” district subject to the development standards of Section 17.100.160;

     I.      Single-family residences, except those constructed in developments exceeding seven dwellings per acre, that exist as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title (December 2000) are permitted and may be maintained and reconstructed if destroyed but no new single-family residences shall be constructed on vacant parcels in the R-3 zone district;

     J.      Fourplexes and multifamily with more than four dwellings per structure;

     K.    Large day care home, subject to development standards in Section 17.104.070; and

     L.     Townhouse. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.20.050 Other permitted uses.
     Other uses permitted in the R-3 and R-3(A) district are other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.20.020—17.20.040, as determined by the community development director in accordance with Section 17.116.030. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.20.060 Site development standards.
     The following site development standards apply in the R-3 and R-3(A) district:

     A.    Minimum Building Site. There shall be at least three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit, except that lots six thousand (6,000) square feet in area or more that existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title (December 2000) may be developed with a duplex. Lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall contain at least three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit, except as noted below.

     Single-Family Detached. Per site development standards of R-1 zone district as set forth in Section 17.12.060.

     Single-Family Attached. Per Section 17.20.060(L);

     B.     Maximum Lot Coverage for all Structures. Forty (40) percent.

     C.     Yards. The following yard requirements apply:

     1.     Front. Fifteen (15) feet, except for garages facing the street a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet is required for the garage;

     2.     Side. Five feet on interior side and ten (10) feet on the corner side;

     3.     Rear. Fifteen (15) feet.

     E.     Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.040.

     F.     Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.050.

     G.    Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160. For each newly constructed single-family residence and duplex or two-family residence, two covered parking spaces in a carport or garage, each space shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in depth of unobstructed area. Washing machines, dryers, water heaters, stairways, supporting columns, steps or other obstructions shall not be located within the required parking space.

     H.    Outdoor Trash Storage. All outdoor trash storage and collection facilities other than standard containers for individual residential use shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container.

     I.      Architectural and Site Plan Review. Except for a single family home, a manufactured home, a duplex or a two-family residence on an individual lot, an applicant for either a building permit or a use permit shall submit architectural drawings, the elevations of all buildings and a site plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. Development plans are also subject to the City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as may be amended. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development director and shall include such additional plans, drawings and information as the planning commission from time to time may require by resolution. Such drawings and site plans shall be considered by the planning commission at a public meeting. The planning commission must find that the architectural and general appearance of such buildings or structures and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the city. The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove said plans. If a use permit is required, architectural and site plan review will be a part of the use permit process, and the director’s approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit.

     J.      Locational Criteria. R-3(A) zoning will only be applied to areas that are predominately developed with single-family homes.

     K.    Fourplexes and multifamily dwellings that contain four or more dwellings per structure or more than six dwellings per lot are subject to Section 17.104.110, multifamily development standards.

     L.     Townhouses. Yard and building site standards may vary for townhouses through issuance of a use permit, provided the density permitted by the general plan is not exceeded. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.24 MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-4) DISTRICT
17.24.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the multifamily residential (R-4) district is to provide for a variety of residential dwelling types, with three or more dwelling units per structure with the maximum density of twenty (20) dwellings per acre in areas which have the services and facilities necessary for higher density residential uses. Triplexes, fourplexes and higher density multifamily units are permitted. This district is consistent with the multifamily, general commercial/shopping center and mixed use general plan designations. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.24.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted outright in the R-4 district if a building permit, where necessary, is issued:

     A.    Triplex;

     B.     Fourplex;

     C.     Multifamily units with up to 12 (twelve) dwellings per structure;

     D.    Accessory buildings and uses commonly found in multifamily developments, including garages, carports, laundry facilities, rental and administrative offices, recreational facilities incidental and in conjunction with a multifamily development, including a swimming pool, tennis courts, clubhouse, etc.; and

     E.     Group care home with six or less persons. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.24.030 Uses requiring administrative permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the R-4 district if an administrative permit is issued, and subject to the provisions of Section 17.104.060:

     Home occupation. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.24.040 Uses requiring use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the R-4 district if a use permit is issued:

     A.    Group care home with more than six persons;

     B.     Rooming house or boardinghouse or dwelling group;

     C.     Private club, fraternity, sorority or lodge, except those for which the chief activity is a service customarily carried on by a business;

     D.    Church;

     E.     Day care center;

     F.     Bed and breakfast guest facility, subject to the provisions of Section 17.104.080;

     G.    Skilled nursing/intermediate care facility;

     H.    Public or private parking lot when adjacent to a “C” or “M” district subject to the development standards of Section 17.100.160;

     I.      Multifamily units with more than 12 (twelve) dwelling units per structure; and

     J.      Townhouses. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.24.050 Other permitted uses.
     Other uses permitted in the R-4 district are other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.24.020 and 17.24.040 as determined by the community development director in accordance with Section 17.116.030. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.24.060 Site development standards.
     The following site development standards apply in the R-4 district:

     A.    Minimum Building Site. Provided that the R-4 residential density permitted by the general plan is not exceeded, the following minimum building site requirements apply. There shall be at least two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area per dwelling unit with a minimum lot size as follows:

     1.     Interior Lot. Six thousand (6,000) square feet and sixty (60) feet minimum width;

     2.     Corner Lot. Seven thousand (7,000) square feet and seventy (70) feet minimum width;

     3.     Maximum Lot Coverage for all Structures. Triplex (forty (40) percent), fourplex (fifty (50) percent) and five or more units (sixty (60) percent);

     B.     Yards. The following yard requirements apply:

     1.     Front. Fifteen (15) feet;

     2.     Side. Five feet on interior side and ten (10) feet on the corner side;

     3.     Rear. Fifteen (15) feet.

     C.     Maximum Structural Height. The following structural height restrictions apply:

     1.     Main Buildings. Thirty-five (35) feet; however additional height may be permitted if a use permit is approved;

     2.     Accessory Buildings. One story not to exceed fifteen (15) feet.

     D.    Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.040.

     E.     Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.050.

     F.     Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160.

     G.    Outdoor Trash Storage. All outdoor trash storage and collection facilities other than standard containers for individual residential use shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container.

     H.    Architectural and Site Plan Review. An applicant for either a building permit or a use permit shall submit architectural drawings, the elevations of all buildings and a site plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. Development plans are also subject to the City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as may be amended. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development director and shall include such additional plans, drawings and information as the planning commission from time to time may require by resolution. Such drawings and site plans shall be considered by the planning commission at a public meeting. The planning commission must find that the architectural and general appearance of such buildings or structures and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the city. The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove said plans. If a use permit is required, architectural and site plan review will be a part of the use permit process and the director’s approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit.

     I.      Fourplex and multifamily dwellings that contain four or more dwellings per structure or more than six dwellings per lot are subject to Section 17.104.110 multifamily development standards.

     J.      Townhouses. Yard and building site standards may vary for townhouses through issuance of a use permit, provided the density permitted by the general plan is not exceeded. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.28 MOBILE HOME PARK (MHP) DISTRICT
17.28.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the mobile home park (MHP) district is to provide for the coordinated development and maintenance of mobile home and manufactured home parks. In the mobile home park district, the term mobile home is interchangeable with manufactured home. This district is consistent with the mobile home, all residential general plan designations and the general commercial/shopping center general plan designation, provided the residential density does not exceed fourteen (14) dwellings per acre. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.28.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted outright in the MHP district:

     A.    Mobile home parks meeting the site development standards of Section 17.28.060;

     B.     Residential mobile homes placed in an approved mobile home park;

     C.     Accessory uses commonly found in mobile home parks, including a car garage or carport space, storage facilities, laundry facilities, recreational vehicle parking, maintenance equipment storage areas, space rental and administrative office and other accessory uses commonly found in mobile home parks;

     D.    Common recreation areas and facilities, including a swimming pool, tennis courts, clubhouse, etc.; and

     E.     Group care home with six or less persons. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.28.030 Uses requiring administrative permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the MHP district if an administrative permit is issued, and subject to the provisions of Section 17.104.060:

     Home occupation. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.28.040 Uses requiring use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the MHP district if a use permit is issued:

     A.    Expansion of a mobile home park not meeting the development standards of Section 17.28.060;

     B.     Accessory structures or uses other than those identified in Section 17.28.010;

     C.     Convenience store; and

     D.    Golf course or miniature golf course. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.28.050 Other permitted uses.
     Other uses permitted in the MHP district are those found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.28.020 and 17.28.040, as determined by the community development director in accordance with Section 17.116.030. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.28.060 Site development standards.
     The following site development standards apply in the MHP district. The terms of these conditions equally apply to mobile home subdivisions, where mobile home parks are subdivided into individual lots:

     A.    New Mobile Home Parks or Expansions. All new mobile home parks or expansions to existing mobile home parks shall be developed to the standards set forth in this section, unless a use permit is issued which provides an exception to the standards.

     B.     Minimum Lot Size. Each mobile home park shall be at least one acre in size.

     C.     Minimum Mobile Home Space Size. The minimum space or lot size for each mobile home shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet.

     D.    Maximum Residential Density. The maximum residential density is as provided by the general plan land use designation, not to exceed fourteen (14) dwellings per acre.

     E.     Yards. The following yard requirements shall apply:

     1.     Mobile home park exterior:

     a.     Front yard—Twenty (20) feet;

     b.     Street and interior side and rear yard, twenty (20) feet.

     2.     Mobile Home Spaces (Park Interior). No mobile homes shall front on a public street except in a mobile home subdivision on a local or residential street:

     a.     Front yard—Ten (10) feet, except front yards for garages and carports shall be at least 20 feet from the face of garage or carport to the pedestrian walkway, sidewalk or where a pedestrian way is not provided, curb or flow line;

     b.     Side yard—Five feet on interior sides, ten (10) feet on street sides;

     c.     Rear yard—Ten (10) feet.

     F.     Maximum Structural Height. The maximum structural height is thirty (30) feet for accessory structures and mobile homes shall comply with state standards.

     G.    Walls and Landscaping. A solid masonry wall, concrete wall or block posts supporting solid wood inserts, six feet in height, shall be erected completely around the park. The wall shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from all abutting exterior streets. The exterior yard areas shall be landscaped, as specified in Section 17.96.040 and shall include street trees per Street Tree Standards, City of Susanville Design Guidelines, as may be amended.

     H.    Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.050.

     I.      Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160; If parking is not available on a public street of sufficient width that directly accesses each mobile home space or lot, off-street guest parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per two dwellings and shall be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of each dwelling unit.

     J.      Recreational Vehicle Parking. The requirement for recreational vehicle parking is one space per four mobile home spaces, located in a fenced and gated area.

     K.    Outdoor Trash Storage. All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container.

     L.     Vehicular Access and Circulation. Vehicle access and circulation requirements are as follows:

     1.     Main Entrance. The main vehicular entrance to a mobile home park shall consist of not less than a twenty-four (24) foot-wide undivided access.

     2.     Vehicular Circulation.

     a.     All streets shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in width, curb-to-curb, if no parking is allowed on one side of the street; or a minimum of thirty-two (32) feet in width, curb-to-curb, if parking is allowed on one side of the street, or forty (40) feet in width, curb to curb, if parking is allowed on both sides of the street;

     b.     All turning and cul-de-sac radii shall meet the city fire safety standards;

     c.     All streets shall be constructed and paved in accordance with city standards; and

     d.     No fencing, landscaping or other material impediment to visibility more than two-and-one-half feet above curb level shall be installed or maintained at the intersection of any street.

     M.    Open Space and Recreation. Common landscaped open space and recreation land shall be provided in the park as follows:

     1.     Common open space shall comprise sixteen (16) percent of the gross mobile home park acreage, if the park provides a common recreation center which possesses a total floor area of not less than twenty-five (25) square feet per lot for the first one hundred fifty (150) lots and fifteen (15) square feet per lot thereafter, but in no case less than two thousand (2,000) square feet;

     2.     Common open space shall be twenty (20) percent of the gross mobile home park acreage, if the park does not provide a common recreation center as described in subsection (M)(1)(a) of this section;

     3.     Park walkways, at least ten (10) feet wide and leading to open space and recreation facilities, may count as part of the recreation area;

     4.     Recreation areas shall be provided at locations convenient to park residents and the park service centers;

     5.     Recreation areas may include space for common buildings and common use facilities, such as indoor recreation areas, swimming pools, outdoor courts for games and similar recreation facilities.

     N.    Other Standards. The mobile home park standards of the California Department of Housing and Community Development shall be met, except where the standards of the ordinance codified in this section are more restrictive.

     O.    Development Plan. An applicant for either a building permit or use permit shall submit a site plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section or in the use permit conditions will be met. Development plans are also subject to the City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as may be amended. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development director. If only a building permit is required for the use, then the director’s approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit. If a use permit is required architectural and site plan review will be a part of the use permit process, and the director’s approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.32 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (C-1) DISTRICT
17.32.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the neighborhood commercial (C-1) district is to provide for a limited selection of convenience goods and services to residents in the immediate area. The primary tenant is normally a convenience market or small grocery store, a variety of small shops providing other retail goods and services. Motels, service stations, fast food restaurants, take-out food service, and automobile-related uses, all of which generally require and attract high volumes of traffic are not permitted. This district is consistent with the local/neighborhood and general commercial/shopping center general plan designation. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.32.020 Uses permitted within buildings.
     The following uses are permitted in the C-1 district if conducted within a building:

     A.    A convenience market.

     B.     Uses that commonly accompany a convenience market, including:

     1.     Retail sales, including a variety store, drug store, florist, confectionery store or delicatessen;

     2.     Service uses, including barber, beauty salon, standard restaurant, laundromat, laundry, dry cleaning, locksmith, or shoe repair; and

     3.     Small professional office, such as insurance or real estate sales, CPA’s, medical, dental or legal services.

     C.     Other neighborhood friendly and servicing uses such as a book store, boutique shop, bakery, art gallery or studio, craft sales including limited product assembly, pet shop, interior decorating store, music store or vocal instruction, photo studio, wedding chapel or reception center, health and exercise centers, spas and massage therapy.

     D.    A one-family residence, when attached or included within the main building in which the primary commercial use exists. Any permit required for the commercial use must first be issued. A stand-alone single-family residence is also allowed, subject to R-1 development standards.

     E.     Group care home with six or less persons in an existing dwelling only.

     F.     Recycling facilities as set forth in Chapter 17.124. (Ord. 08-958 § 1, 2008; Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.32.030 Uses requiring use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the C-1 district if a use permit is issued:

     A.    Auto gas sales;

     B.     Day care center;

     C.     Church;

     D.    Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges, excepting those whose chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business;

     E.     Convalescent hospital;

     F.     Mortuary;

     G.    Bed and breakfast;

     H.    Small scale repair shops for lawnmowers, saws, etc., if conducted wholly within an enclosed building;

     I.      Duplex or two-family residences, subject to R-2 development standards;

     J.      Triplex, fourplex and multifamily residential units from five to twenty (20) dwelling units per acre, subject to R-3 development standards for triplex or R-4 site development standards for fourplex and multifamily;

     K.    Large day care home in conjunction with a single-family home, subject to development standards in Section 17.104.070;

     L.     Recycling facilities as set forth in Chapter 17.124;

     M.    Thrift store or second hand store;

     N.    Full or partial conversion of a single-family home to a nonresidential use allowed in the district;

     O.    Group care home with more than six persons;

     P.     Skilled nursing/intermediate care facility;

     Q.    Townhouse;

     R.     Mixed uses (any mix of uses allowed in this zone district with or without a use permit). (Ord. 2020-1023 § 2, 2020; Ord. 2020-1022 § 2, 2020; Ord. 08-958 § 2, 2008; Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.32.040 Other permitted uses.
     Other uses permitted in the C-1 district are uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.32.020 and 17.32.030 as determined by the community development director. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.32.050 Site development standards.
     The development standards for building site area and yards established by this section apply to all development in the C-1 district. However, alternate standards may be approved for a commercial condominium project for a use allowed in this district as part of the use permit process if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design, attractiveness, and compatibility with its surroundings than would result if the routine development standards of this section were applied.

     A.    Location Criteria. Development must be located on a collector or arterial, as designated in the general plan.

     B.     Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site is ten thousand (10,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.010.

     C.     Maximum Building Site. The maximum building site is one-and-one-half acres.

     D.    Building Size. Building size requirements are as follows:

     1.     The primary use shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area;

     2.     Secondary uses shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per use; and

     3.     Larger business may be permitted if a use permit is secured, and the business is found to be compatible with the area.

     E.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width requirements are as follows:

     1.     Interior lot, sixty-five (65) feet; and

     2.     Corner lot, seventy-five (75) feet.

     F.     Yards. The following yard requirements apply:

     1.     Front, ten (10) feet; except where the district abuts a residential district, the front yard shall be the same as the average front setback along the street for homes within two hundred (200) feet of both sides of the C-1 zone district;

     2.     Interior side, none; except where the district abuts a residential district, the adjoining side yard shall be fifteen (15) feet;

     3.     Street side, ten (10) feet;

     4.     Rear, none; except where the district abuts a residential district, the rear yard shall be fifteen (15) feet; and

     5.     Exceptions. If a use permit is issued, front yard exceptions may be permitted in established commercial areas in which the majority of the buildings existed before the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and they do not meet the yard requirement. When this exception is made, the front yard shall be at least a distance equal to the average front yard of fifty (50) percent of the buildings farthest from the street.

     G.    Maximum Structural Height. Maximum permitted structural height is one story, not to exceed twenty (20) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.030.

     H.    Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.040.

     I.      Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.050.

     J.      Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160.

     K.    Signs. Signs as permitted in Chapter 17.128.

     L.     Zone Walls. Zone wall requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.060.

     M.    Outdoor Trash Storage. All outdoor trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container.

     N.    Architectural and Site Plan Review. An applicant for either a building permit or a use permit shall submit architectural drawings, including the elevations of all buildings, and a site plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. Development plans are also subject to the City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as may be amended. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development director and shall include such additional plans, drawings and information as the planning commission from time to time may require by resolution. Such drawings and site plans shall be considered by the planning commission at a public meeting. The planning commission must find that the architectural and general appearance of such buildings or structures and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the city. The planning commission may approve, 
conditionally approve or disapprove said plans. If a use permit is required, architectural and site plan review will be a part of the use permit process, and the director’s approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit.

     O.    Townhouses. Yard and building site standards may vary for townhouses through issuance of a use permit, provided the density permitted by the general plan is not exceeded. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)


Chapter 17.36 GENERAL COMMERCIAL AND SHOPPING CENTER (C-2) DISTRICT
17.36.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the general commercial and shopping center (C-2) district is to provide for a wide range of facilities for the sale of goods and provision of personal services. When applied to shopping centers, the uses are generally conducted within a building but may include outdoor sales related to the principal use. The centers may have a supermarket as a principal tenant and may also include a department or variety store as a principal tenant, designed to function as a commercial shopping center. When applied to other commercial areas and strip commercial along thoroughfares, it will permit a variety of commercial uses including outdoor sales, fast food and take-out food service, restaurants, personal care services, repair of automobiles excluding heavy trucks, rental services, motels, auto sales and service, offices and similar uses. This district is consistent with the general commercial/shopping center and the commercial/light industrial general plan land use designations. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.36.020 Uses permitted within buildings.
     The following uses are permitted in a C-2 district if conducted within a building:

     A.    Antique or household appliance;

     B.     Bank or other financial institutions that provides a direct service to the public; insurance or real estate sales;

     C.     Barbershop or beauty shop;

     D.    Book store or pet shop;

     E.     Business, professional, government or medical office; medical, dental, or optical laboratory; blueprinting; photocopying and printing; business college or trade school;

     F.     Butcher shop or meat locker;

     G.    Computer sales and service;

     H.    Department or drug store;

     I.      Dry cleaners or laundry;

     J.      Employment agency;

     K.    Furniture or hardware store;

     L.     Any general retail commercial structure or shopping center under eighty thousand (80,000) square feet in size (includes all buildings within the shopping center);

     M.    Grocery store or supermarket;

     N.    Health spa or massage therapy;

     O.    Interior decorating;

     P.     Jewelry store;

     Q.    Liquor store;

     R.     Lodge, fraternal organization;

     S.     Mortuary;

     T.     Music store or vocal instruction;

     U.    News stand, newspaper office;

     V.    Nursery or garden supply;

     W.   Photo supplies or photo studio;

     X.    Pool or billiard hall;

     Y.    Radio or TV station;

     Z.     Repair shop for shoes, radios, televisions, or other domestic appliances;

     AA. Recycling facilities as set forth in Section 17.124;

     BB.  Standard restaurant;

     CC.  Studios;

     DD. Taxidermist;

     EE.  Theater, motion picture or live;

     FF.   Wedding chapel; and

     GG. Group care home with six or less persons in an existing single-family home. (Ord. 08-958 § 3, 2008; Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.36.030 Uses requiring use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the C-2 district if a use permit is issued:

     A     Service station, self-serve and nonself-serve or mechanical car wash, auto repair services, auto body and painting business, and equipment rental;

     B.     Automobile repair including tune-up, carburetor shop, transmission and radiator repair, electrical specialty, front end alignment, top and upholstery shop, wheel balancing and the installation of brakes, mufflers and tires;

     C.     Bar, nightclub or cardroom;

     D.    Commercial recreational uses, including but not limited to bowling alley, skating rink, video game center, miniature golf, kiddie rides, amusement center, driving range and sports auditorium;

     E.     Dealership for sales of new or used auto, boats, motorcycle, or mobile homes, including truck sales and incidental service and repair;

     F.     Fast food restaurant, including drive-in and drive-through restaurants, drive-through establishments, film processing booths and drive-up station for prescriptions;

     G.    Motel or hotel;

     H.    Bus terminal;

     I.      Veterinarian clinic, provided any kennels are located entirely within a building;

     J.      Day care center;

     K.    Outdoor storage or sales associated with any of the uses permitted in Section 17.36.020;

     L.     Emergency shelter;

     M.    Group care home with more than six persons;

     N.    A single-family residence, when included within or attached to the main building in which the commercial use exists, and residence will be inhabited by the owner or operator of the commercial use. Any use permit required for the commercial use must first be issued;

     O.    Single-family residences that exist as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are permitted and may be maintained and reconstructed if destroyed but no new single-family residences shall be constructed on vacant parcels;

     P.     Multifamily dwellings or residential units in mixed use developments with commercial or office uses or free-standing dwellings; the density for free-standing multifamily units shall not exceed twenty (20) dwelling units per acre; the density for mixed use developments shall be determined by the use permit;

     Q.    Church;

     R.     Recreation vehicle park;

     S.     Parking structures;

     T.     Any shopping center eighty thousand (80,000) square feet or larger in size (includes all buildings within the shopping center);

     U.    Recycling facilities as set forth in Section 17.124;

     V.    Full or partial conversion of a single-family home to a nonresidential use allowed in the district;

     W.   Private club, fraternity, sorority or lodge;

     X.    Townhouse. (Ord. 2020-1023 § 2, 2020; Ord. 08-958 § 4, 2008; Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.36.040 Other permitted uses.
     Other uses permitted in the C-2 district are uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.36.020 and 17.36.030 as determined by the community development director. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.36.050 Site development standards.
     The development standards for building site area and yards established by this section apply to all developments in the C-2 district. However, alternate standards may be approved for a commercial condominium project, as part of the use permit process, if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design, attractiveness and compatibility with its surroundings than would result if the routine development standards of this section were applied.

     A.    Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site requirement is ten thousand (10,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.010.

     B.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width requirement is as follows:

     1.     Interior lot, sixty-five (65) feet; and

     2.     Corner lot, seventy-five (75) feet.

     C.     Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.020:

     1.     Front, ten (10) feet; except where the district abuts a residential district, the front yard shall be the same as the residential district within twenty-five (25) feet of the residential district;

     2.     Interior side, none; except where the district abuts a residential district, the side yard shall be fifteen (15) feet;

     3.     Street side, ten (10) feet;

     4.     Rear, none; except where the district abuts a residential district, the rear yard shall be fifteen (15) feet;

     5.     The property development standards of the R-1 zone district shall apply to single-family residences and the R-4 property development standards for all free-standing multifamily residential uses. The property development standards of the C-2 zone district shall apply to all commercial uses and multifamily uses above stores or offices unless modified by a use permit. The use permit will set the standards depending on the circumstances of each case; and

     6.     Exceptions. If a use permit is issued, front yard exceptions may be permitted in established commercial areas in which the majority of the buildings existed before the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, and they do not meet the yard requirement. When this exception is made, the front yard shall be at least the distance equal to the average front yard of fifty (50) percent of the buildings farthest from the street.

     D.    Maximum Structural Height. Maximum permitted structural height is forty (40) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.030.

 

     E.     Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.040.

     F.     Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.050.

     G.    Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160.

     H.    Signs. Signs as permitted in Chapter 17.128.

     I.      Zone Walls. Zone wall requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.060.

     J.      Outdoor Trash Storage. All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container.

     K.    Architectural and Site Plan Review. An applicant for either a building permit or a use permit shall submit architectural drawings, including the elevations of all buildings, and a site plan which indicate how the standards listed in this section will be met. Development plans are also subject to the City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as may be amended. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development director and shall include such additional plans, drawings and information as the planning commission from time to time may require by resolution. Such drawings and site plans shall be considered by the planning commission at a public meeting. The planning commission must find that the architectural and general appearance of such buildings or structures and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the city. The planning commission may approve, 
conditionally approve or disapprove said plans. If a use permit is required, architectural and site plan review will be a part of the use permit process, and the director’s approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit.

     L.     Townhouses. Yard and building site standards may vary for townhouses through issuance of a use permit, provided the density permitted by the general plan is not exceeded. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.40 UPTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT (UBD) ZONE
17.40.010 Purpose.
     The UBD zone is intended to provide for the integration of residential, commercial, cultural and recreational land uses. It is intended to encourage conservation of land resources, the minimization of auto travel and an increase in pedestrian activity, and to provide for the location of employment and retail centers in close proximity to residential development of varying densities and uniqueness.

     The UBD zone is intended to encourage flexibility in architectural design and building bulk, while creating environments conducive to a higher quality life for residents, businesses, employees and institutions in an urban setting. This zone district is consistent with the mixed use (MU) general plan designation. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.40.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses shall be allowed in this zone:

     A.    Services uses:

     1.     Banks and similar financial institutions;

     2.     Data processing and computer centers, including service and maintenance;

     3.     Executive, administrative and professional offices;

     4.     Government office buildings and public facilities, utility offices, post offices, and parks;

     5.     Health and exercise centers/spas and massage therapy;

     6.     Medical offices;

     7.     Veterinarian offices;

     8.     Dry cleaners or laundry; and

     9.     Similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     B.     Retail:

     1.     Antique stores;

     2.     Appliance sales with incidental repair;

     3.     Bakery;

     4.     Barbershops;

     5.     Beauty shops;

     6.     Book stores, stationery;

     7.     Boutique shops;

     8.     Business service establishments, such as blueprinting and metal stamps, duplicating, accounting printing and photocopying services;

     9.     Confectionery;

     10.   Craft sales, including limited product assembly;

     11.   Florist shops;

     12.   Grocery;

     13.   Pet shops;

     14.   Pharmacies;

     15.   Photography studios;

     16.   Radio and television stations (excluding transmission facilities);

     17.   Restaurants, including those with roof gardens;

     18.   Sidewalk cafés (see Section 17.40.050);

     19.   Specialty clothing/leather goods;

     20.   Specialty/gourmet food items;

     21.   Tailor, dressmaking and millinery shops;

     22.   Toys/novelty stores; and

     23.   Similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     C.     Cultural uses:

     1.     Art galleries;

     2.     Museums;

     3.     Studios for professional work including photography, music, drama, dancing, sculpture, painting, ceramics, weaving and jewelry;

     4.     Theaters and cinemas;

     5.     Similar uses as determined by the community development director.

     D.    Residential uses:

     1.     Group care home with six or less persons;

     2.     Home occupation in conjunction with an allowed residential use;

     3.     Single-family home. (Ord. 08-958 § 5, 2008; Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.40.030 Uses requiring a use permit.
     A.    Assembly or concert halls;

     B.     Hotels/motels;

     C.     Nightclubs;

     D.    Nursery schools and day care centers;

     E.     Parking garages;

     F.     Private clubs and lodges;

     G.    Churches and related facilities;

     H.    Public or private schools and colleges for general or vocational education in a classroom setting;

     I.      Duplex, triplex, fourplex, multifamily dwellings or residential units in mixed use developments with commercial or office uses or free-standing dwellings; the density for free-standing multifamily units shall not exceed twenty (20) dwelling units per acre; the density for mixed use developments shall be determined by the use permit;

     J.      Automobile, or truck sales and service;

     K.    On-sale and off-sale alcoholic beverage sales;

     L.     Street vendors utilizing movable carts;

     M.    Thrift shops, secondhand shops and pawnshops;

     N.    Bed and breakfast inn (see regulations contained in Section 17.104.080);

     O.    Clinics and laboratories;

     P.     Farmer’s market;

     Q.    Large day care home in conjunction with a single-family home, subject to development standards in Section 17.104.070;

     R.     Skilled nursing/intermediate care facility. (Ord. 08-958 § 6, 2008; Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.40.040 Property development standards.
     Single-family residences shall comply with the property development standards of the R-1 zone district. New free-standing multifamily residential uses shall comply with the property development standards of the R-4 zone district. The property development standards of the C-2 zone district shall apply to all commercial uses and multifamily uses above or beside stores or offices unless modified by a use permit. The use permit will set the standards depending on the circumstances of each case. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.40.050 Development design standards—Special requirements.
     The following standards shall apply to new construction or to rehabilitation, remodeling or additions to existing structures which cost fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or more. In addition to these standards, new construction or rehabilitation shall comply with City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as amended. Compliance with these provisions shall not be required until such time as such modifications are proposed or building permits are sought.

     A.    Architectural Design Standards.

     1.     All design proposals shall be reviewed by an architectural review committee, which shall be appointed by the city council. The community development director and/or the planning commission and/or the historic building review committee shall function as the architectural review committee until such a committee is appointed by the city council or in the event the committee is not functioning for any reason. New building or exterior rehabilitation shall comply with the historic theme as developed for the UBD. Interior improvements shall be exempt from these standards.

     2.     All roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from abutting roadways and ground level residential areas. Screening elements shall be integrated with main structural or architectural features.

     3.     A uniform architectural design shall be provided with full treatments for all sides exposed to public view in accordance with the theme architectural standards adopted for the areas zoned UBD.

     4.     New commercial structures having no front yard setback shall have at least forty (40) percent of the linear frontage of the first story in glazing. New office and security-oriented uses may deviate through approval of the design review process.

     B.     Landscaping.

     1.     New buildings constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 17.96.040. For existing buildings, no additional landscaping is required.

     2.     Additions to existing buildings may meet the required landscaping as follows:

     a.     Landscaping credit will be given for additions by incorporating certain architectural features depicting the “Historic Uptown Susanville” theme. Such features may include but are not limited to:

     i.      Window boxes for flower planting;

     ii.     Theme glazing, such as stained glass, beveled glass, arched window openings, etc. in an historic context;

     iii.    Awnings;

     iv.    Enriched paving, such as cobblestone or decorative tile;

     v.     Entryway planting;

     vi.    Interior plantings in atriums or common areas;

     vii.   Theme lighting (antique light standards and lighting fixtures);

     viii. Neon lighting used as architectural ornamentation; and

     ix.    Urban sculpture of an appropriate scale.

     C.     Lighting.

     1.     All on-site lighting systems shall use theme-coordinated architectural standards and devices that provide down-lighting and lighting that is shielded from abutting public streets, residential areas, or adjoining properties. Decorative standards are encouraged.

     2.     Lighting levels at various locations (parking lots, walkways, etc.) used from dusk to dawn shall be provided as required in Section 17.96.050.

     D.    Walls and Fences.

     1.     Except for like uses abutting like uses and when deemed appropriate by the community development director, in new construction a minimum six-foot-high solid fence or masonry wall shall be required where any UBD zone directly abuts a residential zone.

     2.     Where required or provided, walls and fences shall be finished in textures and/or colors to match architectural features of the primary structure.

     E.     Parking and Access.

     1.     For new structures the number of parking spaces shall be provided as required in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160.

     2.     Structures or businesses that existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be exempt from providing additional parking and may be reconstructed if destroyed without providing additional parking.

     3.     Notwithstanding any other provisions of the city code, for new or expanded structures the number of required parking spaces shall be met by a combination of the following methods:

     a.     Within the subject property;

     b.     On-street immediately adjacent and contiguous to the property line;

     c.     Public parking lots within two thousand (2,000) feet of the nearest point of the subject property;

     d.     Public parking structure within two thousand (2,000) feet of the nearest point of the subject property;

     e.     Off-site private parking within one thousand (1,000) feet of the nearest point of the subject property.

     4.     The planning commission shall review and determine the appropriate mix of parking compliance when it is proposed to use on-street and/or public parking facilities. The applicant shall provide a parking study addressing the following elements:

     a.     Description of the project; including setting, required parking, demand of parking by type and special features of the proposed project;

     b.     Survey of existing public and private parking within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the proposed project;

     c.     Description of the proposed mix of parking;

     d.     Analysis of existing demand and survey use of proposed off-site public parking facilities and on-street parking;

     e.     Impact on existing public parking facilities and on-street parking as a result of the proposed development and use of proposed parking mix;

     f.      Analysis of the impact on the proposed development as a result of use of public parking facilities and on-street parking.

     5.     Notwithstanding any provisions of the city code, on-street parking, public parking lots, and structures, where provided, can be utilized to meet up to one hundred (100) percent of the total parking requirements for a given building and use. If off-site parking is utilized, it must be determined through a parking study.

     6.     Notwithstanding any provisions of the city code, existing commercial and residential buildings are not required to meet parking requirements unless there is a building addition exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of existing floor area or one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet whichever is less. A conditional use permit shall not be required for building addition within the above standard. New parking shall only be required when these standards are exceeded.

     F.     Sidewalk Cafés.

     1.     Location Requirements.

     a.     A sidewalk café, where permitted, may only be located on the public right-of-way adjacent to the restaurant from which it is served. A license for a sidewalk café shall be granted by the business license division after review by appropriate city departments and the issuance of an encroachment permit by the department of public works or CalTrans if in state right-of-way.

     b.     Clear Space. All sidewalk cafés must leave clear space for pedestrian movement between the outer edge of the café and the curb line. Sidewalk cafés located at street intersections shall provide corner clearance by providing a fifteen (15) foot clear space radial to the corner. If pedestrian traffic is especially heavy, the city may require additional clear space as required to ensure adequate pedestrian movements.

     c.     No sidewalk café can be located within fifteen (15) feet of a bus stop or bus shelter.

     2.     Physical Design Requirements.

     a.     All furnishings of the sidewalk café, including, but not limited to, tables, chairs and decorative accessories, shall be readily movable.

     b.     No part of a sidewalk café may be permanently attached to public space. The licensee shall be responsible for any repair of any damage done to public property. When a sidewalk café or the adjacent restaurant is occupied, no exit door shall be locked, bolted or otherwise fastened or obstructed so that the door is unable to be opened from the inside.

     c.     Chairs and tables shall be arranged so as to provide for clear access to an exit. No part of any aisle shall be used in any way that will obstruct its use as an exit or that will constitute a hazardous condition.

     d.     Sidewalk cafés shall not be arranged so as to restrict the use of emergency exits, fire escapes on adjacent buildings and access to fire hydrants.

     e.     Umbrellas must be kept in good repair and can only be used where space permits.

     f.      Lighting Provisions. Freestanding lamps are not permitted. Flashing or moving lights are not permitted. Table candles may be used. In no case should the public have to step on or over electric wiring.

     g.     Awnings must be kept in good repair; failure to do so shall be grounds for revocation of the permit.

     h.     Seating and accessories and other components of the sidewalk café shall be maintained in a neat and safe manner.

     i.      The height of a railing, fence, or planter (including plantings) used to establish boundaries of seating areas shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches in height but not higher than thirty-six (36) inches.

     j.      Plank-style picnic tables with bench seating are not permitted.

     k.     General and public liability insurance shall be provided, in an amount required by the city, and naming the city as additional insured. A certificate naming the city as additional insured shall be provided to the city and kept in full force and effect by licensee for the life of the use.

     3.     Café Operation Requirements.

     a.     Sidewalk cafés must be operated and maintained in accordance with applicant’s building plans approved by the community development director and the public works director.

     b.     The café owner shall ensure removal of all wrappings, litter and food. Similarly, thorough and sanitary cleaning each day after the café closes shall be the responsibility of the café owner.

     c.     Sidewalk cafés shall not operate earlier than eight a.m. nor later than twelve midnight.

     G.    On-Site Advertising Signs.

     1.     All signs as permitted in Section 17.128.060 and 070.

     2.     Canopies bearing signs are allowed, subject to the following:

     a.     For purposes of including signs on awnings in the UBD zone, awnings shall be considered as canopies as defined in Section 17.128.040, and

     b.     The following additional conditions shall apply to awnings in the UBD zone:

     i.      A building permit shall be obtained from the city building department prior to installation of any awning;

     ii.     Awnings shall have noncombustible frames and coverings to be flame retardant;

     iii.    Awnings may extend over public property in conformity with the historic theme established for the UBD but no portion shall extend nearer than two feet to the face of the nearest curb line measured horizontally, subject to the approval of an encroachment;

     iv.    All portions of any awning at the first floor level shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet in height, subject to review by the city design review committee.

     c.     Awnings on the ground floor level of a building may have no more than twenty (20) percent of the surface area covered by a sign. Awnings on any floor above ground floor may have ten (10) percent of their areas covered in signs. The total sign area of on awnings must be included when calculating the amount of sign area for the property according to provisions contained in Section 17.128.070 of the city sign ordinance.

     d.     Pedestrian identification signs shall be permitted perpendicular to the building five inches by twelve (12) inches which shall not be included in that total sign area.

     e.     The content, lettering, location, size, number, illumination, and color of awning signs shall be contemporary to the period in which the building or structure was built and/or complement the rest of the building facade improvements.

     f.      The content, lettering, location, size, number, color, material, and illumination of an awning sign must be reviewed and approved by the design review committee before a permit can be issued for the awning and sign.

     g.     Applications for sign permits shall comply with provisions of Section 17.128 of the city code and the following additional elements shall be required:

     i.      Color rendering of the sign;

     ii.     Location of the sign on the building by use of a full rendering or color photograph with the sign location outlined on it to scale;

     iii.    The size and dimensions of the sign and the materials to be utilized;

     iv.    An indication of whether the sign will be illuminated, and if so, whether illumination will be direct or indirect; and

     v.     Samples of materials to be used.

     h.     The approval or denial of the proposed sign (or modification of an existing sign) will be based on the following factors:

     i.      The sign’s compatibility with the building use and with other buildings and uses in the same vicinity;

     ii.     The proposed sign shall comply with the city code provisions regulating signs; and

     iii.    The sign’s compliance with the provisions of any redevelopment or area plan adopted for the area.

     i.      Sign review will be conducted by the design review committee and will be presented to that body by staff. Appeal of the committee’s decision may be made to the city council.

     j.      Refuse Enclosures and Containment.

     i.      All uses on individual lots shall provide refuse containers and enclosures in accordance with adopted public works department standards. All solid masonry or concrete enclosures shall be finished in textures and/or colors to match the major architectural features of the primary structure.

     ii.     All refuse containment areas shall be maintained in a sanitary manner, and enclosures and gates shall be maintained in good condition.

     H.    Architectural and Site Plan Review. An applicant for either a building permit or a use permit shall submit architectural drawings, including the elevations of all buildings, and a site plan which indicate how the standards listed in this section will be met. Development plans are also subject to the City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as may be amended. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development director and shall include such additional plans, drawings and information as the planning commission from time to time may require by resolution. Such drawings and site plans shall be considered by the planning commission at a public meeting. The planning commission must find that the architectural and general appearance of such buildings or structures and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the city. The planning commission may approve, 
conditionally approve or disapprove said plans. If a use permit is required, architectural and site plan review will be a part of the use permit process, and the director’s approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.44 COMMERCIAL OFFICE (C-O) DISTRICT
17.44.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the commercial office (C-O) district is to provide for well-designed professional, business and administrative offices, and business support services normally associated with such offices. This district is consistent with the commercial office, local/neighborhood, general commercial/shopping center and commercial/light industrial general plan designations. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.44.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted outright in the C-O district:

     A.    Professional, business and administrative offices, medical offices, pharmacy and clinics:

     1.     Accountant, bookkeeper, income tax consultant, credit agency, collection agency, finance company, stockbroker, data processing center,

     2.     Attorney, appraiser, advertiser, real estate, title insurance, insurance, employment agency, secretarial service, travel agency,

     3.     Architect, engineer, draftsman, landscape architect, surveyor,

     4.     Physician, dentist, chiropractor, psychologist, optometrist,

     5.     Government, charitable, cultural, educational, recreational and social organizations;

     B.     Medical, dental and optical laboratories or laboratories accessory to any use described in subsection A of this section;

     C.     Business support services that provide technical or clerical assistance to any use described in subsection A of this section, including direct mail advertising, blue printing, photocopying, duplicating and temporary help or telephone message service; and

     D.    Non-office commercial uses that are located in the main building or office complex of a permitted use and are primarily utilized by persons employed therein, including a standard restaurant, barbershop, beauty salon, and other incidental service uses. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.44.030 Uses requiring use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the C-O district if a use permit is issued:

     A.    Business college or trade school;

     B.     Office condominiums;

     C.     Church;

     D.    Day care center;

     E.     Skilled nursing/intermediate care facility;

     F.     Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges, excepting those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business;

     G.    Hospitals and convalescent hospitals;

     H.    Mortuaries;

     I.      A single-family residence, when attached or included within the main building in which the commercial use exists, and residence will be inhabited by the owner or operator of the commercial use. Any use permit required for the commercial use must first be issued;

     J.      Multifamily residential units from five to twenty (20) dwelling units per acre; and

     K.    Mixed uses (any mix of uses allowed in this zone district when any of the uses require a use permit). (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.44.040 Other permitted uses.
     Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.44.020 and 17.44.030 as determined by the community development director. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.44.050 Site development standards.
     The development standards for building site area and yards established by this section apply to all developments in the C-O district. Alternate standards may be approved for a condominium or a residential project, as part of the use permit process, if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design, attractiveness and compatibility with its surroundings than would result if the routine development standards of this section were applied.

     A.    Minimum Building Site. Newly created lots shall have a minimum building site requirement of ten thousand (10,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.010.

     B.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width requirement is as follows:

     1.     Interior lot, sixty (60) feet; and

     2.     Corner lot, seventy (70) feet.

     C.     Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.020:

     1.     Front, ten (10) feet;

     2.     Interior side, five feet;

     3.     Street side, ten (10) feet; and

     4.     Rear, ten (10) feet.

     D.    Maximum Structural Height. The maximum structural height is one story not to exceed twenty (20) feet, except additional stories may be permitted if location and height are approved by a use permit.

     E.     Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.040.

     F.     Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.050.

     G.    Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Sections 17.100.100—17.100.160.

     H.    Signs. Signs as provided for in Chapter 17.128.

     I.      Zone Walls. Zone wall requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.060.

     J.      Outdoor Trash Storage. All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container.

     K.    Architectural and Site Plan Review. An applicant for either a building permit or a use permit shall submit architectural drawings, including the elevations of all buildings, and a site plan which indicate how the standards listed in this section will be met. Development plans are also subject to the City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as may be amended. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development director and shall include such additional plans, drawings and information as the planning commission from time to time may require by resolution. Such drawings and site plans shall be considered by the planning commission at a public meeting. The planning commission must find that the architectural and general appearance of such buildings or structures and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the city. The planning commission may approve, 
conditionally approve or disapprove said plans. If a use permit is required, architectural and site plan review will be a part of the use permit process, and the director’s approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.48 COMMERCIAL-LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (C-M) DISTRICT
17.48.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the commercial-light industrial (C-M) district is to provide for selected retail sales and services that are considered inappropriate in other commercial areas due to size or operating characteristics, such as wholesale sales, warehousing, distributing and storage activities and light manufacturing. This district is not intended to satisfy the need for routine or typical retail sales commonly found in local shopping centers or general commercial retail areas. This district is consistent with the general commercial/shopping center, commercial/light industrial and the light industry or business park general plan designations. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.48.020 Uses permitted within buildings.
     The following uses are permitted in the C-M district if conducted within a building:

     A.    Wholesale and retail sales and service uses, including:

     1.     Building, electrical and plumbing materials, and furniture;

     2.     Farm or ranch feed and related supplies sales;

     3.     Janitorial or restaurant supplies;

     4.     Nursery or garden supply;

     5.     Auto or truck parts and supplies;

     6.     Household appliance or furniture repair or service, including radio or television repair or furniture upholstery shops;

     7.     Auction house;

     8.     Building maintenance services, such as pest examination, janitorial or grounds maintenance;

     9.     Business, professional, government or medical office, medical, dental or optical laboratory, blueprinting, photocopying, and printing, business college or trade school;

     10.   Communication services, such as telegraph, telephone and radio telephone businesses, or radio or television stations;

     11.   Printing, engraving, lithographing, or publishing;

     12.   Equipment rental;

     13.   Taxidermist;

     14.   Veterinarian clinic, provided any kennels are located within a building;

     15.   Trade school;

     16.   Warehouse, mini-storage, or other storage buildings or wholesale distribution facilities, except those storing flammable or explosive material;

     17.   Food storage lockers and ice-making facilities.

     B.     Light manufacturing activities, including:

     1.     Combining, assembly or packaging of products, including:

     a.     Pharmaceutical, drugs, toiletries, or cosmetics,

     b.     Small equipment, instruments or appliances, such as medical, dental or optical equipment; drafting instruments, watches, clocks, musical instruments, cameras, photographic equipment (except film), hair-curling machines or electric razors,

     c.     Electronic and light electrical equipment, including radios, televisions and computers,

     d.     Food products, excluding those that may create obnoxious odors or smoke;

     2.     Light manufacturing activities, including manufacturing of ceramic products such as pottery, figurines, or small glazed tile, using only previously pulverized clay, hand tools, cutlery, and kitchen utensils, electronic and light electrical equipment, including radios, televisions and computers, jewelry manufacturing, manufacturing of neon signs.

     C.     Uses accessory to the primary use and contained within the same building site, including offices, print shops cafeteria, etc. This does not include businesses open to the public.

     D.    Outdoor storage or sales in conjunction with a permitted use provided:

     1.     Storage is located on the rear portion of the lot;

     2.     Storage is completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence (with necessary solid gates) not less than six feet in height;

     3.     No material shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence enclosing the storage area.

     E.     Agricultural uses.

     F.     Caretaker’s or night watchman’s quarters.

     G.    Recycling facilities as set forth in Section 17.124. (Ord. 08-958 § 7, 2008; Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.48.030 Uses requiring use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the C-M district if a use permit is issued:

     A.    Businesses that provide support services to the primary uses or that primarily serve employees of the primary uses, including day care centers for children or adults, coffee shop or standard restaurant;

     B.     Auto or truck service station or wash;

     C.     Sales of autos, boats, trailers, mobile homes, agricultural equipment, trucks and construction equipment, and incidental repairs and services, truck terminal, truck yard;

     D.    Tire recapping, retreading or rebuilding;

     E.     Auto, boat, motorcycle or truck repair, auto body repair and painting;

     F.     Wholesale meat cutting and packing, providing there shall be no slaughtering, fat rendering or smoke curing;

     G.    Outdoor sales or outdoor storage areas in excess of the limits established in Section 17.48.020(D);

     H.    Carpet or rug cleaning plants, commercial laundries, such as those which provide a linen supply service, but not including personal laundromats;

     I.      Light metal fabrication, such as sheet metal and wrought iron fabrication, welding shops, machine shops, cabinet or furniture making;

     J.      Contractor’s yard, air conditioning supply and service yard, flea markets; and

     K.    Recycling facilities as set forth in Section 17.124. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.48.040 Other permitted uses.
     The following other uses are permitted in the C-M district: uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.48.020 and 17.48.030 as determined by the community development director. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.48.050 Site development standards.
     The development standards for building site areas and yards established by this section apply to all development in the C-M district. However, alternate standards may be approved for a condominium project, as part of the use permit process, if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design attractiveness, and compatibility with its surroundings than would result if the routine development standards of this section were applied.

     A.    Minimum Building Site. Newly created lots shall have a minimum building site of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.010.

     B.     Lot Width. The minimum lot width requirements are as follows:

     1.     Interior lot, sixty-five (65) feet;

     2.     Corner lot, seventy-five (65) feet.

     C.     Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided by Section 17.96.020:

     1.     Front, ten (10) feet; except where the district abuts a residential district the front yard shall be the same as required by the residential district within twenty-five (25) feet of the residential district;

     2.     Interior side yard, none, except where the district abuts a residential district the minimum shall be fifteen (15) feet;

     3.     Street side, ten (10) feet;

     4.     Rear yard, none, except where the district abuts a residential district the minimum shall be fifteen (15) feet; and

     5.     Exceptions. If a use permit is issued, front yard exceptions may be permitted in established commercial areas in which the majority of the buildings existed before the adoption of this ordinance and they do not meet the yard requirement. When this exception is made, the front yard shall be a distance equal to the average front yard of fifty (50) percent of the building furthest from the street.

     D.    Maximum Structural Height. The maximum structural height is forty (40) feet; except within forty (40) feet of any residential district, the maximum building height shall be one story not to exceed twenty (20) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.030.

     E.     Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.040.

     F.     Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.050.

     G.    Parking. Parking requirements are as specified on Sections 17.100.010 through 17.100.160.

     H.    Signs. Signs as provided for in Chapter 17.128.

     I.      Zone Walls. Zone wall requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.060.

     J.      Outdoor Trash Storage. All outdoor trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container.

     K.    On-site Performance Standards. On-site performance standards are as follows:

     1.     Odors. No use shall create objectionable odors readily detectable beyond the property line;

     2.     Dust and Smoke. No use shall create dust or smoke that is readily detectable beyond the property line (in addition to meeting all air pollution requirements);

     3.     Vibration. No use shall create vibration detectable without instruments at the property line;

     4.     Electromagnetic Interference. No use shall produce electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television service beyond the property line;

     5.     Glare. No use shall create intense light or glare that causes a nuisance or hazard beyond the property line; and

     6.     Applicable Standards. Noise, atmospheric emissions, toxic or noxious matter, radiation, heat and humidity, fire and explosive hazards, or liquid and solid wastes shall be regulated by applicable county, state or federal standards.

     L.     Architectural and Site Plan Review. An applicant for either a building permit or a use permit shall submit architectural drawings, including the elevations of all buildings, and a site plan which indicate how the standards listed in this section will be met. Development plans are also subject to the City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as may be amended. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development director and shall include such additional plans, drawings and information as the planning commission from time to time may require by resolution. Such drawings and site plans shall be considered by the planning commission at a public meeting. The planning commission must find that the architectural and general appearance of such buildings or structures and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the city. The planning commission may approve, 
conditionally approve or disapprove said plans. If a use permit is required, architectural and site plan review will be a part of the use permit process, and the director’s approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit.

     M.    Townhouses. Yard and building site standards may vary for townhouses through issuance of a use permit, provided the density permitted by the general plan is not exceeded. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.52 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (M-L) DISTRICT
17.52.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the light industrial (M-L) district is to provide suitable areas for a variety of low-intensity manufacturing, processing, assembly and distribution uses which utilize materials that generally are already in processed form and which do not emit unacceptable or harmful levels of noise, dust, odors, smoke, bright light, vibration or involve dangerous or explosive materials. This district also provides for a limited range of professional, business and administrative offices, commercial uses and other activities which are accessory to permitted industrial uses. This district is consistent with the commercial/light industrial, light industry or business park and heavy or general industry general plan designations. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.52.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted outright in the M-L district:

     A.    If conducted within a building:

     1.     Combining, assembly or packaging of the following:

     a.     Pharmaceuticals, drugs, toiletries and cosmetics,

     b.     Small equipment, instruments or appliances such as medical, dental and optical equipment, drafting instruments, watches, clocks, musical instruments, cameras, photographic equipment (except film), hair curling machines or electric razors,

     c.     Electronic and light electrical equipment, including radios, televisions and computers,

     d.     Food products, excluding those that may create obnoxious odors or smoke,

     e.     Products from the following previously prepared materials: bristles, bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horns, leather (excluding any melting or odorous process), rubber, shells, textiles, tobacco, wood or yarn,

     2.     Light manufacturing, including manufacturing of ceramic products, such as pottery, figurines, and small glazed tile using only previously pulverized clay, hand tools, cutlery and kitchen utensils, electronic and light electrical equipment, including radios, televisions and computers,

     3.     Professional, business, research or administrative offices, when part of a permitted industrial use,

     4.     Business college or trade school,

     5.     Research and development laboratories,

     6.     Printing, engraving, lithographing and publishing,

     7.     Data processing or computer services, not including retail sales or repair of equipment,

     8.     Wholesale business and sales, warehouses, mini and other storage buildings, and distribution facilities, except those storing or distributing flammable or explosive materials;

     B.     Wholesale nursery;

     C.     Agricultural uses;

     D.    Uses accessory to the primary use and contained within the same plant site, such as a cafeteria, blueprinting or printing (this does not include uses open to the general public);

     E.     Outdoor storage in conjunction with a permitted use, provided:

     1.     Storage is located on the rear portion of the lot,

     2.     Storage is completed enclosed by a solid wall or fence (with necessary solid gates) not less than six feet in height,

     3.     No material shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence enclosed the storage area;

     F.     Caretaker’s or night watchman’s quarters; and

     G.    Recycling facilities as set forth in Section 17.124. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.52.030 Uses requiring use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the M-L district if a use permit is issued:

     A.    Businesses that provide support services to light industrial uses or that will be primarily used by employees of the industrial uses, including blueprinting, photocopying, coffee shop or standard restaurant;

     B.     Television or radio stations;

     C.     Sales, rental and repair of truck tractors and trailers, or other heavy equipment;

     D.    Machine shop, welding shop, planting business or cabinet and woodworking shops not included as part of the routine and customary operation of an approved industrial use;

     E.     Contractor’s yards; outdoor storage when accessory to a permitted use that does not meet the criteria established in Section 17.52.020(E);

     F.     Commercial and industrial cleaning and dyeing plants, tire recapping;

     G.    Truck yard, truck service station, truck terminals, including accessory maintenance or repair activities, truck or heavy equipment wash facilities;

     H.    Collection and distribution functions for recycling businesses, excluding wrecking yards, metal salvage or storage yards and wet paper recycling activities; and

     I.      Recycling facilities as set forth in Section 17.124. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.52.040 Other permitted uses.
     other permitted uses in the M-L district are uses determined to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.52.020 and 17.52.030, as determined by the community development director.(Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.52.050 Site development standards.
     The development standards for minimum building site area and yards established by this section apply to all development in the M-L district. However, alternate standards may be approved for a condominium project as part of the use permit process, if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design, attractiveness and compatibility with its surroundings than would result if the routine development standards of this section were applied.

     A.    Minimum Building Site. Newly created lots shall have a minimum building site of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.010.

     B.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width requirements are as follows:

     1.     Interior lot, sixty-five (65) feet;

     2.     Corner lot, seventy-five (75) feet.

     C.     Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.020:

     1.     Front, ten (10) feet; except where the district abuts a residential district the front yard shall be the same as required by the residential district within twenty-five (25) feet of the residential district;

     2.     Interior side yard, none; except where the district abuts a residential district the minimum shall be fifteen (15) feet;

     3.     Street side, ten (10) feet;

     4.     Rear yard, none; except where the district abuts a residential district the minimum shall be fifteen (15) feet;

     5.     A landscaped buffer zone of at least twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be provided along the edge of (and on) the industrial parcel wherever the property abuts or is across the street from a property classified for any use other than “industrial or agricultural.”

     D.    Maximum Structural Height. Maximum permitted structural height is forty-five (45) feet, except within forty (40) feet of a residential district it shall be one story, not to exceed twenty (20) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.030.

     E.     Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.040.

     F.     Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.050.

     G.    Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160.

     H.    Signs. Signs as provided for in Chapter 17.128 of the Susanville Municipal Code.

     I.      Zone Walls. The requirement for zone walls are as specified in Section 17.96.060.

     J. Outdoor Trash Storage. All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container.

     K.    On-site Performance Standards. On-site performance standards are as follows:

     1.     Odors. No use shall create annoying odors readily detectable beyond the property line;

     2.     Vibrations. No use shall create vibrations detectable without instruments at the property line;

     3.     Electromagnetic Interference. No use shall produce electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television reception in residential districts or with the function of electronic equipment beyond the property line;

     4.     Glare. No use shall create intense light or glare that causes a nuisance or hazard beyond the property line; and

     5.     Applicable Standards. Noise, atmospheric emissions, toxic or noxious matter, radiation, heat and humidity, fire and explosive hazards, or liquid and solid wastes shall be regulated by the applicable city, state or federal standards.

     L.     Architectural and Site Plan Review. An applicant for either a building permit or a use permit shall submit architectural drawings, the elevations of all buildings and a site plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. Development plans are also subject to the City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as may be amended. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development director and shall include such additional plans, drawings and information as the planning commission from time to time may require by resolution. Such drawings and site plans shall be considered by the planning commission at a public meeting. The planning commission must find that the architectural and general appearance of such buildings or structures and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the city. The planning commission may approve, conditionally 
approve or disapprove said plans. If a use permit is required, architectural and site plan review will be a part of the use permit process, and the director’s approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)
Chapter 17.56 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (M) DISTRICT
17.56.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the general industrial (M) district is to provide areas for all types of industrial uses. This district is consistent with the light industry or business park and the heavy or general industry general plan designations. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.56.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted outright in the M district:

     A.    If conducted within a building:

     1.     Combining, assembling, packaging or manufacturing of materials that are generally in a processed form, which do not emit dust, odors, smoke or unacceptable levels of noise, including:

     a.     Pharmaceuticals, drugs, toiletries or cosmetics,

     b.     Small equipment, such as medical, dental or optical equipment, watches, clocks, photographic equipment or drafting equipment,

     c.     Radios, televisions or computers,

     d.     Food products, excluding those that may create obnoxious odors or smoke,

     e.     Products from the following previously prepared materials: bristles, bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horns, leather (excluding any melting or odorous process), rubber, shells, textiles, tobacco, wood or yarn;

     2.     Professional business, research or administrative offices when part of a permitted use;

     3.     Business college or trade school;

     4.     Research and development laboratory;

     5.     Printing, engraving, lithographing and publishing;

     6.     Wholesale businesses and sales, warehouses, mini and other storage buildings and distribution facilities, except those storing or distributing flammable or explosive materials.

     B.     Uses accessory to the primary use and contained within the same plant site, such as a cafeteria, blueprinting or printing. This does not include uses open to the general public.

     C.     Outdoor storage in conjunction with a permitted use, provided:

     1.     Storage is located on the rear portion of the lot;

     2.     Storage is completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence (with necessary solid gates) not less than six feet in height, unless the storage area abuts a residential district, in which case the screening shall be eight feet high;

     3.     No material shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence enclosing the storage area.

     D.    Agricultural uses.

     E.     Machine shop, welding shop, planing business, cabinet shop.

     F.     Recycling facilities as set forth in Section 17.124. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.56.030 Uses requiring use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the M district if a use permit is issued:

     A.    Businesses that provide support services to industrial uses or that will be used primarily by employees of the industrial uses, including blueprinting, photocopying, coffee shop or restaurant;

     B.     Repair of truck tractors and trailers and other heavy equipment;

     C.     Contractor’s yard or outdoor storage that does not meet the criteria established in Section 17.56.020(C);

     D.    Commercial and industrial cleaning and dyeing plants;

     E.     Truck yard, truck terminals;

     F.     Automobile wrecking yard;

     G.    Caretaker’s or night watchman’s quarters;

     H.    Manufacture or assembly of aircraft, automobiles, boilers, engines, motors and generators, mobile homes, railroad equipment, trucks, trailers, recreational vehicles or other products which require use of heavy machinery;

     I.      Manufacture of acids, alcohol, ammonia, asphalt, cellulose, cement, dyes, fertilizer, film, fireworks, fuel briquettes, gelatin, glass, glue, tar, paint, plaster, plastics, rubber, soap, vinyl floor covering, hazardous chemical products, including acetylene, carbide, caustic soda, chlorine, cleaning and polishing preparations, creosote exterminating agents, industrial gases or explosives;

     J.      Processing plants, including breweries, distillers, wineries; food processing plants and canneries not permitted in the M-L district; painting, sandblasting, incinerators, textile bleaching or dyeing; wood processing, including sawmills, planing mills, or pulp mills; metal smelting, alloying, foundries, drop forges, rolling or other types of ore reduction; rubber processing, power generation plants, petroleum refining, concrete or asphalt batch plants;

     K.    Storage of potentially objectionable materials, including explosives, fireworks, fuel, gas, manure, flammable liquids and gases, propane bulk and storage plants, garbage, trash dumps and piles, junk other salvage material, solid waste recycling and disposal facilities;

     L.     Animal keeping or processing, including dog kennels, stockyards, feeding pens, animal slaughter facilities, dead animal reduction, tannery or curing of raw hides, or bone distillation;

     M.    Race tracks for motorized and nonmotorized vehicles, including bicycles, motorcycles, automobiles, or similar vehicles;

     N.    All other industrial uses not previously listed;

     O.    Industrial condominiums; and

     P.     Recycling facilities as set forth in Section 17.124. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.56.040 Other permitted uses.
     Other permitted uses in the M district are uses determined to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.56.020 and 17.56.030, as determined by the community development director. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.56.050 Site development standards.
     The development standards for minimum building site area and yards established by this section apply to all development in the M district. However, alternate standards may be approved for a condominium project as part of the use permit process, if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design, attractiveness and compatibility with its surroundings than would result if the routine development standards of this section were applied.

     A.    Minimum Building Site. Newly created lots shall have a minimum building site of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.010.

     B.     Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width requirements are as follows:

     1.     Interior lot, sixty-five (65) feet;

     2.     Corner lot, seventy-five (75) feet.

     C.     Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.020:

     1.     Front, ten (10) feet; except where the district abuts a residential district the front yard shall be the same as required by the residential district within twenty-five (25) feet of the residential district;

     2.     Interior side yard, none; except where the district abuts a residential district the minimum shall be fifteen (15) feet;

     3.     Street side, ten (10) feet;

     4.     Rear yard, none; except where the district abuts a residential district the minimum shall be fifteen (15) feet. The minimum average lot width requirement is eighty (80) feet;

     5.     A landscaped buffer zone of at least twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be provided along the edge of (and on) the industrial parcel wherever the property abuts or is across the street from a property classified for any use other than “industrial or agricultural.”

     D.    Maximum Structural Height. Maximum permitted structural height is forty-five (45) feet, except within forty (40) feet of a residential district it shall be one story not to exceed twenty (20) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.030.

     E.     Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.040.

     F.     Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.96.050.

     G.    Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160.

     H.    Signs. Sign requirements as specified in Section 17.128.070 of the Susanville Municipal Code.

     I.      Zone Walls. The requirement for zone walls is as specified in Section 17.96.060.

     J.      Outdoor Trash Storage. All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container.

     K.    Architectural and Site Plan Review. An applicant for either a building permit or a use permit shall submit architectural drawings, the elevations of all buildings and a site plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. Development plans are also subject to the City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as may be amended. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development director and shall include such additional plans, drawings and information as the planning commission from time to time may require by resolution. Such drawings and site plans shall be considered by the planning commission at a public meeting. The planning commission must find that the architectural and general appearance of such buildings or structures and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the city. The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove said plans. If a use permit is required, architectural and site plan review will be a part of the use permit process, and the director’s approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.60 PUBLIC FACILITIES (PF) DISTRICT
17.60.010 Purpose.
     The public facilities (PF) district is intended to be applied to lands upon which public agencies operate public facilities. This district is consistent with all general plan land use designations. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.60.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted outright in the PF district:

     A.    Office;

     B.     Park and recreation area;

     C.     Public facilities not listed in Section 17.60.030 that do not emit dust, odor, smoke, bright light, vibration, or unacceptable levels of noise or which do not involve dangerous or hazardous materials;

     D.    School or college;

     E.     Facilities directly related to providing educational services;

     F.     Field stations, experiment stations and institutional research facilities;

     G.    Fire stations;

     H.    Public uses and buildings, including owned or managed by federal, state, county, city or districts;

     I.      Recycling facilities as set forth in Chapter 17.124;

     J.      Emergency shelters; and

     K.    All other uses similar to those enumerated above when determined by the planning commission, upon presentation of substantial evidence, to be of the same general character as the above-permitted uses. (Ord. 2020-1022 § 1, 2020; Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.60.030 Uses requiring use permit.
     The following use are permitted in the PF district if operated as a public use and a use permit is issued:

     A.    Solid waste disposal facility;

     B.     Wastewater treatment facility;

     C.     Correctional facility;

     D.    Hospitals;

     E.     Human cemetery;

     F.     Corporation yard;

     G.    Fairgrounds;

     H.    Rodeo arena and related facilities;

     I.      Recycling facilities as set forth in Section 17.124.; and

     J.      Other public facilities that do not meet the criteria established in Section 17.60.020(C). (Ord. 2020-1023 § 2, 2020; Ord. 2020-1022 § 2, 2020; Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.60.040 Site development standards.
     The following site development standards apply in the PF district:

     A.    Minimum Lot Size. None;

     B.     Yards. The yard requirements are as follows unless the facility is exempt from local zoning regulations:

     1.     Front, twenty (20) feet;

     2.     Street side, ten (10) feet;

     3.     Interior side, none, except where the district abuts a residential district, it shall be ten (10) feet;

     4.     Rear, none; except where the district abuts a residential district, it shall be ten (10) feet.

     C.     Maximum Structural Height. Thirty-five (35) feet; except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.030.

     D.    Parking as required in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.64 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICT
17.64.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the planned development (PD) district is to provide for developments that, because of a mix of building types, land uses or residential lot sizes, do not fit within the parameter of standard zone districts. Planned developments provide flexibility in types of uses allowed or site development standards to provide high-quality developments that otherwise could not be constructed. Generally, planned developments are under unified control, comprehensively planned and can provide a mix of uses that could otherwise create land use conflicts. Planned developments often provide common areas and other amenities not normally found in standard types of development. This district is consistent with all general plan designations that provide for substantial residential, commercial or industrial development, provided the proposed uses are consistent with the general plan designation(s) within which the project is located.

     As described in the general plan, the planned development designation is a separate land use category as well as an overlay district. As an overlay combining district, a planned development cannot increase the density over the underlying zone, although it can limit the density otherwise allowed. Also a planned development overlay cannot allow uses not allowed in the underlying zone district, but can limit the uses otherwise allowed. As an overlay district, planned developments can alter site development standards of the underlying zone district.

     As a general plan land use designation and/or a separate zone district without an overlay combining district, planned developments can determine appropriate uses of the parcel(s) and density as well as changing site development standards. These uses and density would be enumerated into the ordinance zoning the parcel to planned development. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.64.020 Uses requiring use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the PD district if a planned development use permit is issued: any use or combination of uses as specified in the ordinance which zones a parcel to a PD district. For existing planned developments without an ordinance or use permit that specifies particular uses or development standards, a new use permit is required to establish uses, density, intensity and site development standards. Uses shall be arranged and designated in such a manner as to result in a development which is internally compatible, provides effective buffers to protect surrounding uses and is consistent with the general plan. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.64.030 Application.
     A.    Applications for a PD district containing twenty (20) acres or less shall include development plan for the project site showing the approximate locations of buildings, building elevations, roads, walkways, parking and landscaping, the proposed uses of the buildings and grounds, staging of the development and other information which the community development director may require to properly evaluate and process the application. Applications for a PD district with more than twenty (20) acres may include only a conceptual development plan for the area on the same lot zoned for the planned development and adjoining lots, if desired. The conceptual plan shall contain sufficient information to determine general areas for land uses, access, open space, underlying zoning, provision for utilities and development standards, if different, and other information which the community development director may require to property evaluate and process the application.

     B.     All uses within a planned development district require the processing of a planned development use permit prior to or concurrent with architectural and site plan review. Prior to construction of site improvements in a PD district, detailed plans shall be submitted to the community development director for checking and approval to ensure reasonably close conformity with the approved development plans, site development standards established and with the intent of this section. The decision of the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission, as specified in Section 17.116.060.

     C.     A development plan shall be prepared and approved through the planned development use permit process for the parcel(s) involved prior to or concurrent with any other land use approval by the city. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.64.040 Site development standards.
     A.    The ordinance establishing the planned development zone on a particular parcel shall establish the types of uses permitted. All planned developments shall specify an underlying zoning with default standards of that zone unless otherwise defined in the ordinance or development plan and use permit. The specific standards of the underlying zoning shall apply when none such have been enumerated in the PD ordinance or on the approved development plan and use permit.

     B.     Minimum District Size. A minimum of one acre shall be required for a planned development unless the planning commission recommends, and the city council finds that a smaller site is appropriate for the development or redevelopment as a PD. In approving a planned development smaller than one acre, the planning commission and city council shall find that the proposed development:

     1.     Cannot be developed under conventional zoning;

     2.     Is adequately buffered from adjacent residential property;

     3.     Mitigates adverse impacts on adjacent properties; and

     4.     Is consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.64.050 Modifications.
     Modifications to approved plans and statements of detailed plans may be permitted in a PD district if a use permit is approved as long as the changes are consistent with the ordinance establishing the PD district. Modifications that are minor in nature may be altered by the community development director. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.64.060 Architectural and Site Plan Review.
     An applicant for either a building permit or a use permit shall submit architectural drawings, the elevations of all buildings and a site plan which indicate how the standards established in the PD development plan will be met. Development plans are also subject to the City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, as may be amended. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the community development director and shall include such additional plans, drawings and information as the planning commission from time to time may require by resolution. Such drawings and site plans shall be considered by the planning commission at a public meeting. The planning commission must find that the architectural and general appearance of such buildings or structures and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the orderly and harmonious development of the city. The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove said plans. Architectural and site plan review may be submitted as part of the use permit process or may be submitted separately. The director’s approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.68 UNCLASSIFIED (U) DISTRICT
17.68.010 Purpose.
     The unclassified (U) district is intended to be applied as a holding district until a precise principal zone district has been adopted for the property. All new uses in this district shall be consistent with all applicable policies of the general plan. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.68.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted outright in the U district:

     A.    One-family residence, or a manufactured home per Section 17.12.020(B), except in areas designated by the general plan as commercial, or industrial;

     B.     All agricultural uses permitted in the AE-20 district without a use permit. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.68.030 Uses requiring use permit.
     Other uses permitted in the U district if a use permit is issued are all other uses not otherwise prohibited by law and not inconsistent with any portion of the general plan. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.68.040 Site development standards.
     The following site development standards apply in the U district:

     A.    Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site requirement is the same as the minimum building site requirement by the appropriate zone district that would be used to implement the general plan designation applied to the lot; provided, in any case, no lot shall be less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet.

     B.     Yards. The yard requirements are the same as the yard requirements established by the appropriate zone district that would be used to implement the general plan designation applied to the lot.

     C.     Maximum Structural Height. The maximum structural height requirements are the same as the height requirements established by the appropriate zone district that would be used to implement the general plan designation applied to the lot.

     D.    Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.71 AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL (AR-1) DISTRICT
17.71.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the agricultural residential (AR-1) district is to provide an area where residential uses can be compatibly mixed with agricultural activities, allowing the raising of agricultural products, including crops, livestock and fowl. This district and uses permitted is consistent with the resource conservation, agricultural residential and single-family residential general plan designations. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 02-884 § 2, 2002)

 

17.71.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted outright in the AR-1 district:

     A.    Single-family dwelling, except that manufactured homes on foundation systems are subject to subsection B of this section;

     B.     A manufactured home certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) and installed on a foundation system and meeting other adopted development standards, in lieu of a frame-constructed dwelling, provided such unit is not more than ten (10) years old at the time it is installed;

     C.     Second unit, subject to the development standards in Section 17.104.040 of this title;

     D.    All agricultural uses including crop and tree farming, raising of livestock and fowl, except for the uses requiring a use permit under Section 17.71.040 of this chapter;

     E.     Accessory buildings and accessory uses, including, but not limited to, private garages carports, barns, stables, greenhouses, storage sheds and other farm outbuildings;

     F.     Publicly owned rodeo grounds and related facilities and other public uses such as parks and firehouses. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 02-884 § 2, 2002)

 

17.71.030 Uses requiring administrative permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the AR-1 district if an administrative permit is issued subject to the provisions of Section 17.104.060 of this chapter:

     Home occupation. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 02-884 § 2, 2002)

 

17.71.040 Uses requiring a use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the AR-1 district with a use permit:

     A.    Country clubs and golf courses;

     B.     Kennels for dogs and cats;

     C.     Veterinarian office and clinic;

     D.    Churches, private schools and public utility buildings;

     E.     Guest ranches, private stables, riding arenas and rodeo grounds open for public use;

     F.     Senior citizen residences, subject to development standards in Section 17.104.040 of this code;

     G.    Large day care home, subject to the development standards in Section 17.104.070 of this code;

     H.    Bed and breakfast guest facility, subject to the development standards in Section 17.104.080 of this code;

     I.      Stands for the sale of agricultural products grown on the premises. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 02-884 § 2, 2002)

 

17.71.050 Other permitted uses.
     A.    All other uses similar to those enumerated in this chapter when determined by the community development director, upon presentation of substantial evidence, to be of the same or similar character as the uses permitted in this chapter. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 02-884 § 2, 2002)

 

17.71.060 Site development standards.
     The following site development standards apply in the AR-1 district:

     A.    Minimum Building Site. The minimum permitted parcel size is one-half acre. Parcels in this district may be larger than the minimum and by use of Chapter 17.80 of this title, combining lot size “B” district when property is zoned, the minimum acreage for each parcel can be determined. Example: AR-1-B-5 acre parcel size, etc.

     B.     Building Height Limit. Thirty-five (35) feet.

     C.     Lot Coverage. Forty (40) percent.

     D.    Yards. The following yard requirements apply:

     1.     Front Yard Required. Front yard minimum required thirty (30) feet; provided, that open wire fences may be constructed on the front property line not to exceed six feet in height, solid fences shall maintain the same setback as the main building;

     2.     Side Yard Required. Thirty (30) feet;

     3.     Rear Yard Required. Thirty (30) feet.

     E.     Special Setback Required. Any residential dwelling must maintain a five hundred fifty (550) foot building setback from the boundaries of the Susanville Consolidated Sanitary District (SCSD) sewage treatment facility. This requirement does not include the SCSD access road to the facility.

     F.     Special Yards and Distance Between Buildings Required. Accessory buildings used as farm outbuildings (barns, stables etc.) shall not be less than thirty (30) feet from any side or rear property line and not less than fifty (50) feet from the front property line and not less than thirty (30) feet from any dwelling unit on the property.

     G.    Parking. In addition to parking requirements as specified in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160 of this title, each newly constructed single-family residence is required to provide two covered parking spaces in a carport or garage; each space shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in depth of unobstructed area. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 02-884 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 17.72 EXCLUSIVE AGRICULTURAL (AE-20) DISTRICT
17.72.010 Purpose.
     The AE-20 zone is an exclusive zone for intensive agricultural uses and for those uses which are a necessary and integral part of the agricultural operation. The purpose of this zone is to protect the general welfare of the agricultural community from encroachments of unrelated agricultural uses which, by their nature, would be injurious to the physical and economic well-being of the agricultural community. It is also the purpose of this zone to prevent or to minimize the negative interaction between various agricultural uses. A related purpose of this zone is to disperse intensive animal agricultural uses to avoid air, water, or land pollution otherwise resulting from compact distributions of such uses. This district and uses permitted is consistent with the resource conservation and agricultural residential general plan designations. The minimum parcel size permitted to be created in this zone is, with certain exceptions, twenty (20) acres. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.72.020 Permitted uses.
     No building or land shall be used, and no building shall be erected or structurally altered, except for the following uses:

     A.    One single-family residence or mobile home for the entire contiguous property owned by one person, firm, partnership or corporation or owned jointly by more than one person, firm, partnership, or corporation or any combination thereof. Such residence or mobile home shall be occupied only by an owner of the property and his or her family or a lessee of the property and his or her family;

     B.     In addition to the residence allowed under subsection A of this section, one additional residence or mobile home for each twenty (20) acres in the entire property. Such additional residences and mobile homes shall be occupied only by relatives of the owner or lessee or by employees who work on the property. However, if the property is less than twenty (20) acres in area and was of record at the time this zone became applicable to the property, one such residence or mobile home may be constructed and used as a dwelling by the persons designated herein above. In addition to the number of residences and mobile homes allowed under this subsection, additional residences and mobile homes for use by such relatives and employees may be allowed under the use permit procedures set forth in Sections 17.112.020—17.112.040;

     C.     Incidental and accessory structures and uses including barns, stables, coops, tank houses, storage tanks, wind machines, windmills, silos and other farm buildings, private garages and carports, storehouses, garden structures, greenhouses, recreation rooms, and storage and use of petroleum products;

     D.    The growing and harvesting of fruit and nut trees, vines, vegetables, horticultural specialties and timber, but excluding the growing of mushrooms which requires a use permit under Sections 17.112.020—17.112.040;

     E.     The growing and harvesting of field crops, grain and bay crops, and the growing of grass for pasture and grazing;

     F.     The raising and slaughter of poultry up to a maximum of three birds for each one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet in the entire property, and not to exceed a total of one hundred (100) birds in all, unless a use permit has been secured as provided in Sections 17.112.020—17.112.040;

     G.    The raising and slaughter of rabbits and other similar fur-bearing animals. The maximum number of mature animals allowed on any parcel shall not exceed sixty (60) unless a use permit has been secured as provided in Sections 17.112.020—17.112.040. Any offspring of the animals allowed under this subsection may remain on the property until they reach the normal age of weaning;

     H.    The raising of sheep, goats, horses, mules, swine, bovine animals and other similar domesticated quadrupeds; the total number of such animals shall not exceed two mature animals for each acre in the entire property, and not to exceed a total of twenty-five (25) animals in all, unless a use permit has been secured as provided in Sections 17.112.020—17.112.040. Any offspring of the animals allowed under this subsection may remain until they reach the normal age for weaning;

     I.      Fish farming operations for the raising and harvesting of fish as a crop, but not including fishing clubs or fishing for the general public on a commercial basis;

     J.      Game preserve, private or public, but not including hunting clubs or hunting for members of the public on a commercial basis;

     K.    Agricultural service establishments primarily engaged in performing agricultural animal husbandry services or horticultural services to farmers;

     L.     Services to farmers or farm-related activities in planting, harvesting, storage, hauling and equipment repair and maintenance;

     M.    Plant nursery;

     N.    Sale of agricultural products including sale at roadside stands, if more than one-half of the retail value of the agricultural products offered for sale at any time has been produced on the property where the sale is conducted or on other property owned by the same person;

     O.    Signs which pertain only to a permitted use on the property on which the sign is situated or which pertain to the sale, lease or rental of the property or a structure of personal property located on the property. In addition, signs which are no larger than four square feet in area and which pertain to produce and marking associations and organizations with which the owner or lessee is affiliated are allowed;

     P.     The curing, processing, packaging, packing, storage and shipping of agricultural products except those particular operations, uses and structures specified in Section 17.72.060;

     Q.    Open space uses, including, but not limited to, a scenic highway, corridor, wildlife habitat area, salt pond, managed wetland area or a submerged area, as defined as agricultural land by the Land Conservation Act of 1965, as amended; and

     R.     Greenhouses. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.72.030 Prohibition of subdivisions.
     No subdivision, as that term is defined in Title 16 of the city code may be created within this zone. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.72.040 Divisions of land.
     All real property, improved or unimproved, which is shown on the latest adopted county tax roll as a unit or as contiguous units and which is owned by the same person or persons, shall not be divided, after AE-20 zoning is applied to such property, except in compliance with this section. No such land may be divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, if any one parcel resulting from the division of land contains less than twenty (20) acres; provided, however, that the following transactions are not subject to this restriction:

     A.    Any conveyance made or required by court decree and intestate or testamentary dispositions of land;

     B.     Any conveyance to the state of California, any city or county, any political subdivision of the state of California, or any public utility subject to regulation by the State Public Utilities Commission. However, this exception does not apply to conveyances to any of such entities, including the State Department of Veterans Affairs, which are financing transactions;

     C.     Any conveyance of easements or oil, gas and mineral rights;

     D.    If a portion of a parcel of property is separated from the main portion of the property by a river, railroad, improved public road or a canal which is regularly used for the conveyance of water and the channel of which is six feet or more in width, such portion of the parcel may be conveyed as a single unit even though it contains less than twenty (20) acres;

     E.     If a person desires to convey a portion of his or her property to the owner of property contiguous to the property to be conveyed, he or she may do so even though the parcel being conveyed contains less than twenty (20) acres. However, the parcel being retained shall contain at least twenty (20) acres unless the transaction comes within one of the following provisions:

     1.     The conveyance to the contiguous owner is to convey property on which improvements, including growing improvements, owned by the contiguous owner have been constructed or planted in error,

     2.     The conveyance to the contiguous owner is to convey property to provide necessary yard areas as required for the zone in which the property is located,

     3.     If there is a residence or mobile home on the property to be retained by the person making the conveyance, he or she may retain the residence or mobile home with twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet or more and convey the remainder of the property to the contiguous owner;

     F.     If a person desires to construct a residence on his or her property for use in compliance with the provisions of this section, one parcel of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet or more may be divided for the purpose of financing a residency. Once a person has divided one parcel from his or her property pursuant to this subsection, he or she may not at any time thereafter cause a second parcel to be divided from the property pursuant to this subsection. However, if a person who has created one parcel pursuant to this subsection, conveys part or all of his or her property, his or her successors in interest shall also have the right to create one parcel pursuant to this subsection if they meet all the requirements of this subsection;

     G.    If a person desires to sell his or her property but wishes to retain a parcel of land containing a residence or mobile home which has been established in accordance with all applicable building and zoning regulations and which has existed on that property for at least three years, one parcel of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet or more may be divided for this purpose; and

     H.    If a person desires to sell a residence, other than a mobile home, which has existed on the property for at least ten (10) years, and retain the balance of the property, a parcel of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet or more may be divided for this purpose. If there is more than one such residence on the property, there may be more than one division of land pursuant to this subsection. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.72.050 Variances.
     Relief from the requirements may be granted by obtaining a variance. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.72.060 Use permits.
     Because of considerations of the city’s urban environment and the adverse effects of smoke, fumes, dust, odor and other hazards, regardless of the other provisions of this chapter, the establishment and operation of the following uses shall be permitted in this zone only if a use permit is first secured pursuant to the provisions of Sections 17.112.020—17.112.040:

     A.    Agricultural chemicals, storage, handling and manufacturing;

     B.     Agricultural dehydrator with more than a combined total of one hundred (100) horsepower in all motors used;

     C.     Fuel processing plants;

     D.    Hunting and fishing clubs and hunting and fishing on a commercial basis for members of the general public;

     E.     Lumber processing and manufacturing;

     F.     Mushroom growing;

     G.    Raising of sheep, goats, horses, mules, swine, bovine animals and other similar domesticated quadrupeds when more than two mature animals for each acre in the entire property are on the property at any time;

     H.    Residences or mobile homes in excess of those allowed under Section 17.72.020(B), for use by the persons specified in Section 17.72.020(B);

     I.      Seed cleaning and treating plant;

     J.      Sewage treatment plant and disposal area;

     K.    Temporary landing of aircraft engaged in agricultural uses. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.72.070 Fences, walls and hedges.
     Fences, walls and hedges shall be permitted. However, no solid fence, wall or hedge shall exceed three feet in height within the area contiguous to two intersecting streets which is described as follows: that area on the street side of diagonal line connecting points, measured from the intersection corner, fifty (50) feet on a minor street side of the property and seventy (70) feet on a major street side of the property. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.72.080 Yard requirements.
     A.    Front Yard. The minimum front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet except along those streets and highways where a greater setback is required by other ordinances of the city.

     B.     Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet except along those streets and highways where a greater setback is required by other ordinances of the city.

     C.     Side Yards. The minimum side yards shall be ten (10) feet except along dim streets and highways where a greater setback is required by other ordinances of the city.

     D.    Use. Required yard areas may be used for growing of agricultural crops. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.72.090 Height of structures.
     Height of structures shall be not more than fifty (50) feet to the uppermost part of the roof except that water tanks, silos, granaries, wind machines, barns and other agricultural accessory structures may exceed fifty (50) feet in height provided they do not project into the landing or takeoff zone, or other restricted areas of an airport. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.72.100 Distance between structures.
     The minimum distance between two structures used for human habitation shall be twenty (20) feet. The minimum distance between a structure used for human habitation and a pen, coop, stable, barn, corral or other structure housing livestock or poultry shall be seventy-five (75) feet. When structures are in existence at the time that AE-20 zoning is applied to the property which do not comply with the minimum distances set forth in this section, such structures may be structurally altered and additions made to such structures so long as the distance between the structures is not reduced. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.76 OPEN SPACE (OS) DISTRICT
17.76.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the open space (OS) district is to protect as open space, lots, or portions of lots, that are (1) most properly kept as open space, (2) needed as a greenbelt or buffer along significant river and creekside corridors or around important natural features, or (3) kept in open space for health or safety reasons. This district is consistent with the agricultural residential, resource conservation, and parks and recreation general plan designations. This district is also consistent and may be applied to any land use category to protect significant river or creekside corridor habitat areas or other important natural areas, or to properties where development should be limited due to health or safety reasons. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.76.020 Permitted uses.
     The following uses are permitted outright in the OS district:

     A.    Agricultural uses; and

     B.     Outdoor recreation areas, including parks, athletic fields, trails, and swimming pools, picnic shelters, preservation of outstanding scenic, historical and cultural sites and for structures and facilities necessary for the public use and enjoyment of the above. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.76.030 Uses requiring use permit.
     The following uses are permitted in the OS district if a use permit is issued:

     A.    Golf course;

     B.     Commercial riding stable;

     C.     Rodeo arena, grounds, stables, campgrounds and related facilities. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.76.040 Other permitted uses.
     Other uses permitted in the OS district are uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.76.020 and 17.76.030, as determined by the community development director. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.76.050 Site development standards.
     The following site development standards apply in the OS district:

     A.    Minimum Lot Size. If applied as a greenbelt or buffer, the lot size shall be as shown on a recorded parcel or final map, use permit or specific plan, or shall otherwise be indicated on the zoning map.

     B.     Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.020:

     1.     Front. Thirty (30) feet;

     2.     Side. Thirty (30) feet;

     3.     Rear. Thirty (30) feet.

     C.     Maximum Structural Height. The following structural height restrictions apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.96.030:

     1.     Main Building. Thirty-five (35) feet;

     2.     Accessory Building. One story not to exceed twenty (20) feet.

     D.    Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Sections 17.100.010—17.100.160. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.80 COMBINING LOT SIZE (B) DISTRICT
17.80.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the “B” combining lot size district is to establish compatible lot sizes in certain areas within the city as determined at the time a subdivision map or parcel map is recorded and the property is zoned to a specific zone district adding the “B” district to the basic zone district. With a combined lot size in square footage or acreage, for example R-1-B-7,000 requires a minimum lot size of seven thousand (7,000) square feet. This district is consistent with all general plan designations and zone districts. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.80.020 Site development standards.
     The site development standards of the basic zone district which is combined with the “B” district shall apply except for the minimum building site area which will be determined when the “B” district is combined. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.84 DESIGN REVIEW (DR) DISTRICT
17.84.010 Purpose.
     A.    The design review (DR) district is intended to be combined with any principal district for one or more of the following purposes:

     1.     To protect areas having unique environmental, physical, historical or scenic features;

     2.     To promote development which features a variety of amenities and design features;

     3.     To encourage creative approaches to use of land and related physical development;

     4.     To obtain the advantages of coordinated, flexible, comprehensive, long-range planning;

     5.     To ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses; and

     6.     To protect the public’s health and safety.

     B.     The regulations of this district prevail over any conflicting regulation of any principal district with which this district is combined. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.84.020 Uses requiring use permit.
     The uses permitted outright and those permitted with a use permit in the principal district are permitted in the DR district if a use permit is issued. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.84.030 Site development standards.
     Site development standards in the DR district shall, in the aggregate, meet or exceed the standards prescribed by the regulations for the principal district. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.84.040 Compatibility of use permits in the DR.
     In addition to the findings required by Section 17.112.020 for the approval of a use permit, the planning commission shall also find the proposed use to be compatible with the purposes of this section. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.88 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMBINING (H) DISTRICT
17.88.010 Purpose.
     The purposes of the historic preservation combining district are to:

     A.    Preserve historically significant structures, neighborhoods, sites and artifacts;

     B.     Promote and facilitate the restoration and rehabilitation of historically significant structures and neighborhoods maintaining its historic architectural style; and

     C.     Prevent the premature loss or destruction of historically significant or potentially significant structures, neighborhoods, sites or artifacts. The historic preservation combining (H) district is consistent with all general plan designations. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.88.020 Applicability.
     A.    The standards and requirements of the historic preservation combining district shall apply to the uptown area and the railroad depot neighborhood as shown on the city general plan map and zoning district map and as may be amended by the city council.

     B.     The standards and requirements of the historic preservation combining district shall apply to any building, neighborhood or site in the specified areas which is noteworthy for its:

     1.     Listing on a local, state or national register or survey;

     2.     Eligibility for listing on a local, state or national register or survey;

     3.     Significance in local, state, or national history or culture;

     4.     Architectural features or design;

     5.     Works of art or memorabilia;

     6.     Historical or pre-historical artifacts; or

     7.     Contribution to the aesthetic and/or economic vitality of the community.

     C.     Upon adoption of appropriate findings by the decision making body which are consistent with the purposes stated in Section 17.88.010, the planning commission may determine that the standards and requirements of this section shall apply to any structure, neighborhood or site, regardless of physical location.

     1.     No alterations or modifications shall be made to a structure, neighborhood or site while the planning commission determination as to the applicability of the standards and requirements of this chapter is pending.

     2.     The planning commission shall render a decision as to the applicability of the standards and requirements of this chapter within sixty (60) days after the determination proceedings have been initiated.

     3.     The community development director shall consult with the Lassen County historical society and the Lassen County/city of Susanville historic building review committee on all such determinations and report to the planning commission to enable it to make its decisions.

     D.    The standards and requirements of the historic preservation combining district shall supplement, and be used in conjunction with, the standards and requirements of the underlying primary zoning district and other applicable codes and regulations.

     E.     The standards and requirements of the primary zoning district may be superseded when applying the standards and requirements of this section when determined to be necessary and appropriate by the planning commission. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.88.030 Standards and requirements.
     A.    The owner, lessee and/or other person in actual charge or possession of structure(s) which are subject to the standards and requirements of this section, shall keep in good repair all exterior and interior portions of the structure(s) whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of the structure(s).

     B.     The owner, lessee and/or other person in actual charge or possession of a site or property which is subject to the standards and requirements of this section, shall maintain the site or property in such condition so as to preserve and protect its noteworthy qualities and attributes.

     C.     An application for architectural design review shall be required prior to any alterations, modifications or construction of any type which affects the exterior appearance of a structure, neighborhood or site which is subject to the standards and requirements of this section.

     1.     The planning commission shall consider all such applications for architectural design review and may request comments and/or recommendations from the Lassen County historical society prior to taking action on an application.

     2.     When evaluating architectural design review applications, the planning commission shall consider the architectural style, design, arrangement, texture, materials, colors, compatibility with the site and its surroundings, neighborhood character, architectural and/or aesthetic interest, contribution to the aesthetic and/or economic vitality of the community, effects on major interior architectural features, the city design guidelines, and any other pertinent factors.

     D.    A demolition permit from the planning commission and the building official shall be required for the dismantling or destruction of any structure which is subject to the standards and requirements of this section.

     E.     Demolition and/or construction permits may be issued without the review and approval of the planning commission for buildings posing an immediate threat to the public health, safety and general welfare, as determined by the building official.

     F.     Unless more restrictive sign regulations apply, the design, style and size of all new, modified and/or altered sign(s) shall be reviewed by the architectural review committee and the community development director for consistency with the standards, requirements and purposes of the sign ordinance as provided for in Chapter 17.128 prior to installation or display. If new sign regulations are adopted for the historical district they shall take precedence over the signs permitted in Chapter 17.128. Any sign determined to be a part of the historical significance of the area shall be permitted to remain in place, repaired and maintained without compliance with the nonconforming provisions of the sign ordinance (i.e., roof signs, marquee signs, old theater signs, etc.). (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.92 RESTRICTIVE FLOOD (F-2) DISTRICT
17.92.010 Purpose.
     The restrictive flood (F-2) district is intended to be combined with any principal district to minimize or avoid hazards to life and property from flooding in the regulatory flood zone (one hundred (100) year flood areas) as established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, pursuant to the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, and in other areas of significant flood hazard. These regulations apply in all districts combined with this district, provided that in case of conflict between the regulations of the principal district and this district, the more restrictive regulations control. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.92.020 Permitted uses.
     All uses permitted in the principal zone district which is combined with the F-2 zone district are permitted subject to the approval of a use permit and provided that the requirements of Chapter 15.40 of the Susanville Municipal Code, entitled “Floodplain Management,” are complied with, including any amendments or modifications thereto. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.96 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
17.96.010 Building sites —Lot size.
     The following general development standards apply to building sites or lot sizes in the city:

     A.    Substandard Lot Sizes. A legally created lot that contains less area than is required by the applicable district, and is not merged pursuant to the state Subdivision Map Act and/or local ordinance, shall be considered a building site if one of the following criteria is met:

     1.     All other development standards of the district in which the lot is located and all other applicable city development standards, except lot size and lot width, are met; or

     2.     A variance is approved for the building.

     B.     Building sites with a density of 0.5 or greater shall be rounded up to the next whole number as long as the minimum lot size is maintained.

     C.     Exceptions—Public Uses. The minimum building site required in any district shall not apply to lots created for a public utility for which a use permit is required. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.96.020 Yards.
     A.    General. The regulations for yards shall apply in all districts unless different yards are shown on a recorded parcel map or final map. Except as otherwise provided herein, no building or structure shall be permitted within any required yard area.

     B.     Measurement from Roads. Yards, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be measured from existing property lines, or road right-of-way lines, except that lots fronting on roads designated in the city general plan as either an arterial or collector shall meet one of the following ultimate right-of-way criteria:

     1.     If a plan line has been established for any street, as provided for in Section 17.112.050, required yards shall be measured from such line; and

     2.     If no plan line exists, the yard shall extend from the centerline of the road and shall extend a distance equal to one-half the distance of the ultimate right-of-way, as designated in the general plan, plus the yard required by the appropriate district.

     C.     Pre-Existing Buildings. Buildings which existed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which do not comply with all of the yard requirements of the district in which they are located or as provided in this chapter, may be enlarged or modified, provided the proposed modification or expansion conforms to all applicable yard, lot coverage and other permit requirements.

     D.    Residential Main Buildings.

     1.     Architectural Features. Cornices, eaves, canopies and similar architectural features may extend into any required yard not more than two and one-half feet.

     2.     Structural Appendages. Uncovered porches, stairways, fire escapes or landing places may extend into any required front or rear yard not more than six feet, and into any required side yard not more than three feet.

     3.     Dwellings Facing Side Yards. A dwelling which is to be located with the main entrance facing any side property line shall have a minimum ten (10) foot side yard on the main entrance side.

     4.     Corner/Key Lots. For corner/key lot situations, the required street side yard of the corner lot shall be as follows:

     a.     Within twenty-five (25) feet of the side line of the key lot, the side yard shall be equal to the front yard required on the key lot;

     b.     Beyond twenty-five (25) feet of the side line of the key lot, the side yard shall be fifty (50) percent of the front yard required on the key lot;

     c.     Rear and side yard fences erected on corner lots of corner/key lot situations may be placed along a triangular line between the front setback of the key lot and the street side yard setback of the reverse corner lot, as shown on the diagram in Exhibit “A.”

 

EXHIBIT ‘A’

 



 

     5.     Flag Lots. Front yards on flag lots shall be located on either the side in which the property line is a continuation of the driveway lot line or the lot line nearest and perpendicular to the driveway, or in an alternate location as determined by the community development director and shown on the recorded map for the subdivision.

     E.     Residential Accessory Buildings. Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, it shall be made structurally a part of and have a common roof with the main building, and shall comply with all setbacks and other requirements of this title applicable to the main building.

     1.     Detached accessory buildings shall be located behind the front line of the main building and at least six feet from the main building unless such placement is impractical as determined by the community development director; then detached accessory buildings may be placed in alternate locations on the lot as long as they do not conflict with required yards. Such accessory building shall not be located within five feet of any alley, interior side lot line or rear lot line or ten (10) feet from the street side of the corner lot, except in the case of a reversed corner lot which abuts a key lot the street side yard setback shall be as defined in subsections (D)(4)(a) and (b) above. Garages or carports attached or detached which have vehicle access from the corner side yard or alley shall have a minimum of a twenty (20) foot setback.

     2.     Front Yard. Detached accessory buildings shall not encroach upon a required front yard.

     3.     Agricultural Buildings. Where allowed, barns, stables, chicken houses, and similar agricultural and residential accessory buildings that house animals shall not be closer than fifty (50) feet from the front property line or road right-of-way line, ten (10) feet from side and rear property lines and seventy-five (75) feet from any door or window of any dwelling unit in the same or adjacent property.

     4.     Exceptions—Topography. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, if the elevation of the front half of a lot at fifty (50) feet from the centerline of the traveled roadway is seven feet above or below the grade of the centerline, a private garage, attached or detached, may be built to a minimum of five feet from the front line of the lot. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.96.030 Height limits—Exceptions.
     The following general height regulations apply:

     A.    Fences. The following shall apply, unless otherwise provided:

     1.     The height of any fence, wall, hedge, screen planting or other dividing structure placed, grown or maintained in any residential or nonresidential district shall not exceed three feet within any required front yard or within any side yard on the street side of a corner lot from the required front setback line to the front property line;

     2.     The height of any fence, wall or other dividing structure placed in any residential or nonresidential district shall not exceed six feet in any rear yard, or in any side yard from the required front setback line to the rear property line. A fence may exceed this height limit if a use permit is first secured. For fence placement on corner/key lot situations, refer to Section 17.96.020 (D)(4)(c) and Exhibit A of Section 17.96.020;

     3.     The height limits of this subsection do not apply to open wire or chain link type fencing material used as a fence not exceeding five feet in height and may be located in the required front or street side yard.

     B.     Height Limit—Exceeding. The following exceptions apply to height regulations:

     1.     Roof Structure. Roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, solar equipment or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, silos, cupolas, wireless masts, radio and television antennas or similar structures may be erected above the height limits specified in this title, but no roof structure or any space above the height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space or living area provided a use permit is secured in each case;

     2.     Slope. Where the average grade under any dwelling exceeds fifteen (15) percent, the maximum height limit may be increased by fifteen (15) feet on the downhill side of the building;

     3.     Transmission Lines. Height limitations provided in this title shall not apply to electronic transmission lines or towers;

     4.     Use Permit. Except as otherwise provided in this section, any structure, building or fence in any district may be erected to a greater height or number of stories than the limit established for the district in which the structure is to be located, provided that a use permit is issued.

     C.     Fire Safety. Whenever the lowest portion of the roof is greater than twenty (20) feet from the ground, roof access for fire safety shall be provided as required by the local fire authority. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.96.040 Landscaping.
     The following general landscaping requirements apply:

     A.    Areas Requiring Landscaping.

     1.     Parking Areas. Open parking areas containing five or more required vehicle spaces which abuts a public street shall be landscaped to a depth of ten (10) feet, measured from the abutting street right-of-way line, with openings for walkway and/or driveway purposes, in accordance with city standards. Street trees at a rate of one tree per thirty (30) feet of frontage and shrubs at a rate of one shrub per twenty five (25) square feet shall be planted in this area. Grass may be substituted for shrubs on a per square foot basis;

     2.     Large Parking Areas. Open parking areas, excluding underground or structural parking, which contain twenty (20) or more spaces, shall be landscaped to a minimum of ten (10) percent of the gross lot area used for off-street parking and access thereto, exclusive of any landscaped strip abutting the street right-of-way or area used for walkways or driveways. This required landscaping shall be located within or adjacent to the parking lot and shall include one tree, of a species suited to the area climate zone, for every eight parking spaces. One landscaped planting area at least one hundred forty (140) square feet in size, parallel to parking spaces, is required for each twelve (12) parking spaces unless approved otherwise by the community development director;

     3.     Parking Next to Residential Areas. A minimum three-foot-wide landscaped strip shall be planted and maintained along the edge of parking areas that abut residential districts. This shall be counted as a part of the ten (10) percent landscaped area described in subsection (A)(2) of this section if adjacent to a parking area, if applicable;

     4.     Commercial, Industrial and Multifamily Yard Area. For commercial, industrial or multifamily residential uses, required yards adjoining public streets shall be landscaped to a depth of ten (10) feet. The landscaped area shall include one tree for each thirty (30) feet of frontage and one shrub for each twenty five (25) square feet. Yards (building setbacks) adjacent to interior property lines shall be similarly landscaped unless approved otherwise by the community development director.

     B.     Landscaping Materials. Required landscaping may consist of a combination of plant and non-plant material, provided no less than fifty (50) percent of the required landscaped area shall be living plant material, based on mature plant size. Trees shall be from at least fifteen (15) gallon size containers and shrubs shall be from at least two gallon size containers, except for uses requiring a use permit seventy-five (75) percent of trees shall be at least 1.5 inches in caliper and seventy-five (75) percent of shrubs shall be at least from five gallon size containers. Tree sizes may be increased for areas where larger trees are removed from a site or additional screening is needed. All disturbed areas of the parcel not included under roof or for vehicular areas shall be covered with concrete, asphalt, or landscaping with an appropriate weed mat; where appropriate, native plants, xeriscaping, or other drought resistant plants are encouraged.

     C.     Watering. All required planted areas shall be served with adequate and permanent watering systems, except where native plants are used, a temporary watering system may be used until plants are well established. All plants shall be maintained in a healthy, living condition.

     D.    Border Materials. Except where abutting a sidewalk, all required landscaped areas shall be enclosed by either a concrete curb having a minimum height of six inches or a wooden frame constructed from materials such as railroad ties or other heavy lumber materials which measure no less than six inches in diameter.

     E.     Maintenance. All required landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition.

     F.     Sight Distance. In order to provide safe sight distance at driveways and street intersections, all plant material within a thirty (30) foot triangle at the intersection of streets, and a fifteen (15) foot triangle at the intersection of driveways and streets, shall be no more than two feet in height above the curb level, except for trees which are trimmed so that no branches extend lower than six feet above the curb;

     G.    Exceptions. Any portion of this section may be modified to achieve an equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design or attractiveness than would be realized by the normal standards of this section if a use permit is obtained.

     H.    Landscaping Plan. All landscaping required by this section shall be installed and maintained in accordance with a landscaping plan. The plan shall be submitted to and approved by the community development director prior to issuance of a building permit or use permit, and shall show the location, size and variety of all plants, water supply and other pertinent improvements. This plan may be combined with a parking plan. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.96.050 Lighting.
     All lighting, exterior and interior, shall be designed and located so as to confine direct lighting to the premises. A light source shall not shine upon or illuminate directly on any surface other than the area required to be lighted. No lighting shall be of the type or in a location such that constitutes a hazard to vehicular traffic, either on private property or on abutting streets. Lighting plans shall show the location, height, type, spread and intensity of exterior lighting on the site. All exterior lighting for nonresidential uses shall be downward directional and shall include full cut-off fixtures to provide security while protecting the Susanville night sky. All exterior lighting for residential uses, except parking lot lighting which must have full cut-off fixtures, is encouraged to be downward directional and include full cut-off fixtures. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.96.060 Zone walls.
     Requirements for zone walls are as follows:

     A.    Urban Areas. A use proposed in a commercial or industrial district that abuts an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or MHP district, or a proposed multifamily residential use in a R-3, R-3A or a R-4 zone district that abuts an R-1 district or a single-family home, shall have a solid masonry concrete wall, a high-quality permanent, treated wood fence with decorative block pillars or other material(s) found by the community development director to have significant sound deadening qualities or a planted berm six feet in height, constructed along the rear and/or interior side lot line, except for the twenty (20) feet nearest the front lot line, the wall or berm shall be only three feet high. The fence, wall or berm shall be maintained in good condition, free of warping, cracking, peeling and graffiti and/or weeds, for the life of the project.

     B.     Unclassified District. If a proposed commercial or industrial use or abutting property is in a U district, the criteria of subsection A above shall be applied, as appropriate.

     C.     Height Measurements and Location. The height of the wall, berm or fence shall be determined by the vertical distance measured from the top of the wall, berm or fence on the commercial or industrial property. The wall, berm or fence shall be constructed on or immediately adjacent to the line dividing the residential and commercial or industrial properties.

     D.    Exceptions. If a use permit is issued, exceptions to the zone wall regulations may be made, in whole or part, if it is found that there is a topographic or natural vegetative barrier that will serve to divide the potentially incompatible uses, or if there is a significant distance between the uses that will provide the same buffering. (Ord. 08-958 § 8, 2008; Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.96.070 Swimming pools.
     Swimming pools in residential districts shall be constructed on the rear one-half of the lot or fifty (50) feet from the front property line, whichever is the less; such pools shall not be located closer than five feet to any rear yard lot line or side lot line. On the street side of any corner lot, where the rear lot line abuts a side lot line, no pool shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to such side lot line.

     Filter and heating systems for such pools shall not be located closer than thirty (30) feet to any dwelling other than the owner’s unless enclosed in a sound proof enclosure.

     No pool shall occupy over forty (40) percent of the required rear yard. Coverage by a swimming pool shall not be considered in measuring maximum lot coverage.

     Fencing around all swimming pools shall be installed in compliance with the California Building Code. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.96.080 Pedestrian access.
     All commercial uses with structures over two thousand five hundred (2500) square feet in size shall provide pedestrian access from the public right-of-way to the main door of the main structure that is separate from and does not conflict with vehicular access areas. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.100 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
17.100.010 Purpose.
     This chapter specifies off-street parking and loading spaces for all land uses. The following standards are intended to minimize street congestion and traffic hazards; provide safe and convenient access to residences, businesses, public services and places of public assembly; and make the appearance of parking areas aesthetically pleasing and compatible with surrounding land uses. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.020 Application.
     All uses shall be provided with regularly maintained off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.030 When required.
     Every building or mobile home hereafter installed, constructed, enlarged or structurally altered, and every use of property hereafter inaugurated or expanded, shall be required to provide off-street parking and loading facilities, as specified by this section.

     The spaces shall be improved and installed prior to final building inspection or occupancy. When justified, a deferral of the required parking improvements may be approved, as set forth in the city development standards. All required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be maintained in good condition for the duration of the use that they are intended to serve. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.040 Parking facilities location.
     Required parking shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the use which the spaces serve, except as otherwise provided in this section. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.050 Joint use.
     The joint use of off-street parking areas may be authorized by use permit for the following uses or activities under the following conditions:

     A.    The joint use of off-street parking for “nighttime” uses, such as theaters, bowling alleys, bars or restaurants, may count the parking area provided for “daytime” uses, such as banks, offices, retail and personal services establishments provided the hours of operation do not conflict;

     B.     Up to fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking for “daytime” uses may be supplied by the parking area provided by “nighttime” uses;

     C.     Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking for churches or auditoriums may be supplied by the parking facilities provided by “daytime” uses;

     D.    Parking in commercial or industrial zones may be located offsite, but must be located within five hundred (500) feet of the uses which it serves; and

     E.     A use permit application for joint use of off-street parking shall contain information which will substantiate that there will be no conflict between the principal operating hours of the buildings or uses for which joint parking or off-street parking is proposed and that all other requirements of this section will be met. In addition, a conveyance or an agreement shall be signed by the affected landowners or their duly authorized agents guaranteeing that joint parking or off-street parking will be available for the use which it serves during the term of the permit. The agreement or conveyance shall be approved as to form by the city attorney, recorded with the county recorder, and a copy submitted to the community development department, prior to issuance of the use permit. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.060 Compact car parking.
     Compact vehicle parking may be provided at the following rate:

Total Parking Spaces

Maximum Compact Spaces

 

 

1 to 10 spaces

None

11 to 30 spaces

10 percent of all spaces

31 to 100 spaces

30 percent of all spaces

101 or more spaces

30 percent plus 40 percent of all in excess of 100

 

(Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.070 Parking within front and street side yards.
     Off-street parking spaces for one-family and two-family residences and residential accessory uses shall not be located in required front or street side yard areas. Off-street parking spaces for other uses may be located in front or street side yard areas, except in required landscape areas. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.080 Parking within interior side and rear yards.
Interior side and rear yards may be used for vehicle parking and access, except in required landscape areas. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.090 Tandem parking.
     Except in mobile home parks, or as provided by a use permit, tandem parking (parking where a car or cars have to be moved in order to allow a car to back from a parking space) shall count only as one parking space. To meet off-street parking requirements, each car must be able to enter and exit a parking space independently of the movement of any other vehicle. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.100 Surfacing.
     All parking areas and driveways shall be paved in accordance with city development standards unless modified or delayed by issuance of a use permit. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.110 Controlled access.
     Except for a one-family or two-family residence and residential accessory uses, access to required parking spaces shall be designed in such a manner that vehicles leaving a parking space do not back directly onto any public street. Parking lots shall be designed and improved to prevent entrance or exit at any point other than designated driveways. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.120 Off-street loading spaces.
     Loading space requirements are as follows:

     A.    No building or part thereof having a floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, which will be occupied by a hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial use or other similar uses shall be erected, structurally altered or allowed to house a change in use unless at least one off-street loading space, plus one additional loading space for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area is provided;

     B.     Each off-street loading space shall not be less than twelve (12) feet in width, thirty (30) feet long (exclusive of driveways and maneuvering areas), and, if covered, a minimum of fifteen (15) feet high;

     C.     A loading space which does not adjoin a street or alley shall have a minimum twenty (20) foot-wide access; and

     D.    Loading space(s) shall be improved to the same standard as required for parking areas.

     E.     Loading space(s) for any retail commercial structure in excess of thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet shall be screened from view from adjacent properties or a public right-of-way. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.130 Parking plan.
     All parking required by this section shall be installed and maintained in accordance with a parking plan. The plan shall be submitted to and approved by the community development director prior to issuance of a building permit or a use permit, and shall show the layout of the parking stalls, access, interior aisles and other pertinent improvements. This plan may be combined with a landscaping plan. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.140 Off-street parking standards.
     The following parking schedule applies in all zone districts. The required parking spaces are in addition to company operated vehicles. When computing the required number of off-street parking or loading spaces, a remaining fraction of one-half or more shall be deemed a whole unit of measurement; a remaining fraction of less than one-half will be disregarded.

     A.    Parking Requirements:

 

 

 

Use

Off-Street Parking Space
Requirements

 

 

Animal care facility

Five spaces per doctor

 

 

Automobile service, including repair, body shop or service station

Five parking spaces exclusive of service bays, pumping areas or auto storage areas

 

 

Bowling alley

Five parking spaces for each bowling lane, plus one parking space for each 200 square feet devoted to accessory uses

 

 

Business college or trade school

One parking space per three students, plus one space per employee

 

 

Card room

One parking space for each two seats in the play area, plus restaurant and bar parking as required.

 

 

Church, social hall, club, lodge, community center, theater or other place of public assembly

One parking space for each four seats in principal seating area, or one parking space for every 40 square feet in the principal seating area, whichever is greater, plus one passenger loading space

 

 

Condominiums or town-houses

See multifamily residences

 

 

Convalescent hospital

One parking space for each three beds

 

 

Day care center

One space for each ten children, plus two other spaces, plus one passenger loading space

 

 

Day care home, large

Required residential parking, plus one parking space and one passenger loading space

 

 

Emergency shelter

One parking space per each three employees on shift, plus one space per four beds.

 

 

Flea market

One parking space for each 500 square feet of sales or display area, plus one per sales both

 

 

Golf course

Four parking spaces per hole, plus required parking for accessory uses

 

 

Guest house, servants’ quarters or senior citizen residence

One space in addition to that required for the main residence

 

 

Group care home

One parking space per each employee on shift with a minimum of two spaces

 

 

Hospital

One parking space per patient bed, plus one parking space per visiting doctor, plus one parking space per employee on a major shift

 

 

Hotel, motel, boarding house or bed and breakfast guest facility

One parking space per guest room, plus one space per two employees, plus required parking for accessory uses

 

 

Industry

One parking space for each 1,000 square feet of manufacturing or warehousing area, or per employee, whichever is greater, plus one parking space for each 300 square feet of office area, plus one parking space for each 250 square feet of retail floor area, if retail sales are allowed

 

 

Medical offices and clinic

One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area

 

 

Mobile home park

Two parking spaces per unit (tandem parking permitted), plus one guest parking space for each four units, plus one recreational vehicle parking space for each four units

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mortuary

One parking space for each four seats in the principal seating area, plus three spaces, or one space for each 45 square feet in the principal seating area, whichever is greater

 

 

Multifamily or group residence, condominiums or town houses

1.5 parking spaces per one-bedroom or studio unit, two parking spaces per unit for two or more bedroom units, plus one guest parking space for each five units, plus one recreational vehicle parking space for each ten units

 

 

Personal services

One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area

 

 

Professional office, including bank and other financial institution

One parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area

 

 

Research and development

One parking space for each two employees

 

 

Group care home 7+ (for the elderly)

One-half parking space per unit, in addition to parking for other types of residences

 

 

Restaurant (fast food)

One parking space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area

 

 

Restaurant (standard) or bar

One parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area or one space for every four seats based upon the capacity of the fixed or movable seating area, whichever is greater

 

 

Retail: enclosed—General retail

One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Retail: enclosed—furniture, large appliance, carpet, piano, auto showroom or similar use

One parking square for each 500 square feet of retail floor area

 

 

Retail: open lot, including auto, boat, recreation vehicle, and/or mobile home (does not include flea market or similar uses)

One parking space for each 5,000 square feet, not to exceed five spaces, plus one space for each two employees

 

 

Retail: shopping center

One parking space for each 275 square feet of gross floor

 

 

School: Grades K-8

One parking space per employee, plus ten spaces

 

 

School: Grades 9—12

One parking space per five students, plus one space per two employees

 

 

Senior citizen residence

One parking space per residence

 

 

Single-family or two-family residence

Two parking spaces per dwelling unit

 

 

Skilled nursing or intermediate care facility

One parking space for each three beds

 

     B.     Drive-Up Facilities. In addition to the required off-street parking, drive-up facilities shall provide twenty (20)-foot-long stacking or vehicle reservoir spaces, in addition to the space where the service is being provided, in accordance with the following schedule:

 

Use

Off-Street Parking Space Requirements

 

 

Car wash

Two reservoir spaces per rack

 

 

Drive-in bank

Seven reservoir spaces for one teller; drive-up, four reservoir spaces per window for tellers, and three reservoir spaces per window for three or more tellers

Drive-up restaurant

Six reservoir spaces per window

 

 

Photo drop

One reservoir space per window

 

 

Service station

Two spaces per aisle/lane

 

(Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.150 Parking lot design and striping standards.
     Parking lot design and striping standards for this section are set out in Figures 17.100.150(A) and 17.100.150(B). (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.160 Exceptions.
     Any portion of Sections 17.100.030—17.100.150 may be modified for a particular use if a use permit is obtained. The approving body must find, based upon data submitted by the applicant, that the proposed arrangement and design will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design or attractiveness than would be realized by the normal standards of this section. Exceptions to Section 17.100.140(A) may be made if a use permit is first obtained for a facility that existed before the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, and it is not feasible, due to space constraints, to provide the required parking. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.100.170 Transitional parking standards.
     Unstructured parking for passenger cars may be permitted in an R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 zone district subject to the approval of a use permit when such parking is incidental to a commercial or industrial use, and where the objectives of this section and the minimum development standards set out in this section can be met as follows:

     A.    The property for transitional parking abuts the commercial or industrial property or is across a standard alley from such property;

     B.     The principal orientation of the commercial or industrial use is not altered;

     C.     The design and construction of the parking lot shall conform to the standards as required in Sections 17.100.060—17.100.150, unless modified by the planning commission in the approval of a use permit;

     D.    Where parking lot lighting is provided, it shall comply with the provisions of Section 17.96.050;

     E.     Landscaping for such parking lot shall conform to the provisions of Section 17.96.040, unless modified by the planning commission in the approval of a use permit;

     F.     The parking lot shall meet the required front yard setbacks of the zone district in which a parking lot is approved; said front yard shall be landscaped;

     G.    Parking lots in residential districts which serve a commercial or industrial project shall be fenced along all abutting property lines by a solid fence of wood, masonry or other solid materials as approved by the use permit. The height of such fence shall be a minimum of six feet except in the front yard setback which shall be three feet in height; and

     H.    Required parking which is provided off-site in accordance with this section shall be permanently secured to the commercial or industrial use which it serves by a covenant approved by the city and recorded in the county recorder’s office. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.104 GENERAL PROVISIONS, CONDITIONS, EXCEPTIONS AND SPECIAL USES
17.104.010 Regulations generally.
     There are certain land uses that are an integral part of the city which, because of their reliance on the city’s natural resource base, must necessarily operate where the resource is located. There are other types of uses which depend on varying geographic conditions or locational requirements that do not fit within a standard zone district and therefore must be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. The uses described in the following sections may be located in most or all zone districts, subject to the specified limitations and requirements, unless the use directly conflicts with a specific district regulation subject to the approval of a use permit unless otherwise provided for in a zone district. All regulations in this chapter pertaining to the districts established in Chapters 17.12 through 17.92 of this title are subject to the general provisions, conditions, exceptions and special uses contained in this chapter. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.104.020 Public uses and public utilities.
     Public uses and public utilities are permitted if a use permit is issued, provided the use is found to be compatible with, and will not adversely impact, surrounding land uses, except that public utility transmission lines, towers, distribution poles and lines, regardless of height, and gas pipelines are permitted uses. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.104.030 Uses permitted with a residence or in selected residential districts.
     There are certain land uses which, because of their characteristics, are permitted in residential areas, provided they meet appropriate standards. The uses described in this chapter may be permitted in conjunction with residential uses, subject to the criteria and limitations specified herein. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.104.040 Senior citizen residence “granny” housing.
     A senior citizen residence may be constructed on a lot, in addition to a permitted single-family residence, provided:

     A.    It shall be attached to or detached from, a primary residence on a parcel zoned for a single-family residence;

     B.     The area of the attached unit shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the floor space of the existing living area;

     C.     If detached, it shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of floor space;

     D.    It shall not be a mobile home, nor shall the senior citizen residence be attached to a mobile home;

     E.     Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in Section 17.100.140(A);

     F.     All site development standards required by the district in which the unit is located shall be met;

     G.    There shall be an existing dwelling unit, and only one dwelling unit, on the lot prior to construction of the senior unit; and

     H.    The sole occupancy of the dwelling unit shall be for one adult or two adult persons who are sixty-two (62) years of age or over. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.104.050 Second dwelling units.
     A second single-family dwelling unit may be constructed in the R-1, R-2 and R-3(A) zone districts provided:

     A.    The second unit shall not be sold or offered for sale separately from the primary residence but may be rented;

     B.     The lot contains an existing single-family dwelling and there are no other dwellings on the lot;

     C.     The second unit is either attached to the existing dwelling and located within the living area of the existing dwelling or detached from the existing dwelling and located on the same lot as the existing dwelling. For purposes of this chapter, a second unit shall be considered a residential accessory building. If the second unit is not attached to the main building, it shall be considered to be a detached accessory building;

     D.    The increased floor area of an attached second unit shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the existing living area, unless a use permit is obtained;

     E.     The total area of floor space for a detached second unit shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet;

     F.     The height, setbacks, lot coverage, architectural review, site plan review, fees, charges, and other zoning requirements generally applicable to residential construction in the zone district in which the property is located shall be met;

     G.    Only one second unit shall be permitted on any one lot;

     H.    Establishment of a second unit shall not add to, increase, or create a nonconforming use or structure, unless a use permit is obtained;

     I.      The primary residence and proposed second unit must be located on a lot containing a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet;

     J.      The second unit must be constructed on a permanent foundation;

     K.    The applicant for a second unit shall be an owner-occupant of the primary dwelling unit unless a use permit is obtained;

     L.     Required parking for a second unit shall be one space per bedroom, not to exceed two spaces per second unit. Parking spaces for detached second units shall be covered. Parking for attached second units may be uncovered;

     M.    Applications for second units shall be reviewed in accordance with standard procedures of an architectural and site plan review and approved with an administrative permit with a fee set by city council resolution. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.104.060 Home occupations.
     A.    Statement of Intent. Recognizing that unrestricted use of residential properties for purposes of an occupational nature other than that normally associated with home living has a detrimental effect on both the residential area in which the occupations are conducted and the areas properly designated for such uses, and further recognizing that this detrimental effect results in the depreciations of value, welfare, happiness and morale of the entire community, it is the purpose of this section to eliminate this detrimental effect by creating criteria for the establishment of, and conditions for the continuance of, home occupations.

     B.     General Requirements. The establishment and conduct of home occupations shall comply with the following criteria:

     1.     Electrical or mechanical equipment which creates noise in excess of that normally associated with residential uses is prohibited. Except as noted in this subsection, electrical or mechanized equipment shall be used and stored only within a completely enclosed building. One piece of mechanized equipment, which may include a trailer with several pieces of equipment and/or a motorized vehicle with the equipment placed thereon, for off-site use that is only stored at the residence is allowed if it does not interfere with required parking and does not create a visible nuisance to the neighborhood;

     2.     A home occupation shall not create greater vehicular or pedestrian traffic beyond that which is normal in a residential district nor in any case require the parking of more than one additional vehicle at any time;

     3.     Storage or display of goods and materials shall be inside an enclosed building, not visible from the public right-of-way and shall not include flammable, combustible or explosive materials other than those customary to household uses;

     4.     A home occupation shall not occupy more than forty-nine (49) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit or one room, whichever is greater; (this provision also applies to home occupations located in an attached or detached accessory building;)

     5.     A home occupation shall be conducted only within an enclosed area of the dwelling unit, garage or accessory building and shall not be permitted out-of-doors on the property or in any space utilized to satisfy the off-street parking requirements for the primary use of the property;

     6.     In no way shall the appearance of the structure be so altered or the conduct of the occupation within the structure be such that the structure may be reasonably recognized as serving a nonresidential use (either by color, materials or construction, lighting, signs, sounds, odors, noises, vibrations, etc.);

     7.     There shall be no use of utilities or community facilities beyond that normal to the use of the property for residential purposes as defined in the district;

     8.     Except as provided above, not more than one commercial vehicle, together with equipment, tools and stock-in-trade maintained therein, is permitted where such motor vehicle is used as the owner’s means of transportation;

     9.     There shall be no signage allowed on the site for the advertising of the home occupation, except as may be permitted in Chapter 17.128, except that a commercial vehicle permitted herein may have signs affixed which identifies the business name;

     10.   The following examples are of uses that would be acceptable as home occupations as long as they conform to the home occupation general requirements as listed above: low volume office, beauty shop, seamstress, instruction, word processing and other computer applications, door-to-door sales, cottage food operation, and contractor’s office where equipment and materials are chiefly stored at a separate location;

     11.   The following trades, uses and occupations, by way of example, but not limitation, would not be acceptable as homes occupations in residential districts:

     a.     Motor vehicle repair, restoration or conversion, engine repair or similar uses,

     b.     Building contractor, unless the dwelling is used for an office only,

     c.     Medical facilities for animals including animal care or boarding facilities,

     d.     Machine shop/metal working,

     e.     Cabinet making,

     f.      Sawmill or lumber yard,

     g.     Body piercing and/or painting and/or tattoos,

     h.     Escort services,

     i.      Bail bonds,

     j.      Any use or activity prohibited by local, state, and/or federal law;

     12.   A home occupation permit may be issued in any zone district where a residential dwelling unit exists, unless specified otherwise in this code, as long as the criteria listed above is met.

     C.     Procedure.

     1.     Application. An application for maintaining a home occupation shall be filed with the finance director on forms provided by the finance department. Anyone desiring to make a formal application for a home occupation shall include the following information:

     a.     The location and address of the proposed occupation;

     b.     The nature of the home occupation; and

     c.     Signatures of five households in immediate vicinity that would be most affected.

     2.     Filing Fees. When the application for a home occupation is filed, a uniform fee shall be paid to the city for the purpose of defraying the costs incidental to the proceedings; filing fee shall be set from time to time by council resolution.

     3.     Review and Investigations (Decisions). The city community development director shall review the application, shall consult with those departments of the city which might have interest in, or jurisdiction over, some phase of the proposed occupation, shall make any necessary investigation, and shall grant or deny a certificate therefore provided the conditions and criteria set forth in this section are met. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the finance director.

     4.     Decision Final. The decision of the community development director shall be final and shall become effective ten (10) days after the date the decision is mailed or personally delivered to the applicant, unless an appeal is filed with the planning commission.

     5.     Appeals. Any person or body, public or private, may appeal the decision of the city community development director to the planning commission. Such appeal shall be filed with the finance director within ten (10) days after the date the decision is mailed or personally delivered to the applicant. Upon the receipt of such an appeal, the finance director shall forward the appeal application to the community development department to be placed on the next possible planning commission agenda for consideration.

     6.     The decision of the planning commission shall be final.

     7.     At such time as a home occupation certificate has been granted, the community development director shall notify the finance director of such fact, stating in such notification the effective date of the certificate.

     D.    Nontransferable. A home occupation permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be transferred, assigned, or used by any person other than the permittee, nor shall such permit authorize such home occupation at any location other than the one for which the permit is granted.

     E.     Whenever the community development director determines that one or more grounds exist for revocation of a home occupation permit, the planning commission may set the matter for hearing before it by resolution of intention to revoke the home occupation permit, in accordance with Section 17.112.040.

     F.     Home occupations which do not meet the criteria set forth in this section may be permitted subject to the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.112; provided, however, that the fee for such conditional use permit for a home occupation shall be double the amount set by city council resolution for a home occupation permit, and the decision shall be made by the community development director. A conditional use permit for a home occupation will not be granted if the community development director finds that the proposed use is objectionable or incompatible with the character of the neighborhood due to noise, dust, odors, traffic congestion or other undesirable characteristics. If a conditional use permit for a home occupation is granted, the community development director may waive or modify any of the requirements of this section and may impose such other conditions as it deems necessary or proper to implement the purposes of this chapter. Notification of the request shall be made by the applicant to property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the external boundaries of the subject property. A determination shall be made by the director within thirty (30) days after the application is filed. In determining a home occupation conditional use permit, the director may approve, conditionally approve, or deny a home occupation permit. The decision of the director may be appealed to the planning commission, and then to the city council, if applicable, in accordance with subsection (C)(5) of this section. (Ord. 13-989 § 1, 2013; Ord. 08-957 § 2, 2008; Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.104.070 Large day care home.
     A large day care home use may be established in addition to a permitted residential use, provided:

     A.    It provides care for nine to fourteen (14) children with the maximum number of children at any time being fourteen (14). This includes the licensee’s children under the age of ten (10) and all other children under the age of eighteen (18);

     B.     It may be located in a single-family residence or mobile home;

     C.     No signs are permitted;

     D.    All fire safety requirements shall be met, including a fire safety clearance by the State Fire Marshal;

     E.     A parking and loading area shall be provided. The loading area may be located in a front or side yard that typically is used as a driveway that leads to a garage or parking area. The parking and loading area shall be paved;

     F.     A fence or wall subject to the height limitations of Section 17.96.030 may be required to provide appropriate buffering, security or safety considerations, as determined by the planning commission; and

     G.    A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the lot area shall be useable open space. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.104.080 Bed and breakfast guest facility.
     A bed and breakfast guest facility may utilize a portion of a single-family residence, provided:

     A.    Neither the principal residence nor the guest rooms shall be a mobile home;

     B.     The owner shall occupy the primary residence;

     C.     The guest rooms shall not have individual kitchen facilities;

     D.    Meals shall be limited to breakfast only for overnight guests;

     E.     One sign as provided for in Section 17.128.060 shall be permitted;

     F.     Off-street parking shall be provided as specified by Chapter 17.100. The parking area shall be located in an inconspicuous area and shall be surfaced to city standards;

     G.    The facility shall not interfere with or adversely impact surrounding residential use;

     H.    No employees are permitted other than those residing in the principal or primary dwelling unit; and

     I.      The maximum length of stay shall be thirty (30) days. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.104.090 Temporary permits for one-day retail sales, Christmas tree lots, fireworks sales and short-term shopping center parking lot activities and sales.
     Permits for the following:

     A.    One-day retail sales, such as sidewalk sales;

     B.     Christmas tree sales;

     C.     Fireworks sales;

     D.    Activities that:

     1.     Are a less intense use than those identified in Section 17.104.100 (and it is specifically determined that a small-scale “kiddie carnival” is not of the substantial use indicated in Section 17.104.100); and

     2.     That take place on nonresidential property; and

     3.     That continue for four days or less shall be obtained from the office of the city clerk, and application therefore shall be made in writing on a form for such purpose, to be accompanied by a fee to be set by resolution of the city council. If the permit is for activities mentioned in subsection D of this section, then a certificate of insurance in the sum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) shall also be provided to the city as evidence of public liability insurance for the activity. Approval or denial of the permit shall be made by the city clerk. All permits require the signature of the city clerk. The permits shall contain limitations on operating hours and limitations on light and noise when appropriate. The permit shall contain a prohibition against alcohol being served during the activity unless written authorization from the State Alcohol and Beverage Control Board authorizing same is provided to the city. The city clerk shall give the original permit with his or her signature thereon to the permittee, and the permittee shall post same at the premises where the permit activity takes place. A copy of the permit shall be kept in the city clerk’s office records. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.104.100 Special uses—Use permit required.
     All of the uses listed in this section, and all matters directly related thereto, are declared to be uses possessing characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical their inclusion in any class of use set forth in the various districts defined in this title, and therefore the authority for and location of the operation of any of the uses designated herein shall be subject to the issuance of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.112 hereof. In addition to the criteria for determining whether or not a use permit should be issued as set forth in Chapter 17.112, the planning commission shall consider the following additional factors to determine that the characteristics of the listed uses will not be unreasonably incompatible with uses permitted in surrounding areas:

     A.    Damage or nuisance from noise, smoke, odor, dust, or vibration;

     B.     Hazard from explosion, contamination or fire;

     C.     Hazard occasioned by unusual volume or character of traffic or the congregating of a large number of people or vehicles. The uses referred to herein are as follows:

     1.     Airports, heliports and landing fields,

     2.     Cemeteries,

     3.     Establishments or enterprises involving large assemblages of people or automobiles as follows:

     a.     Amusement parks and race tracks,

     b.     Circus or carnivals,

     c.     Public buildings, parks, and other public recreational facilities,

     d.     Recreational facilities, privately operated;

     D.    The mining of natural mineral resources including the exploration, extraction and processing of minerals, rock, sand, gravel, topsoil or steam for commercial purposes and accessory buildings and uses may be allowed, provided a use permit is issued in each case except that gravel crushing and asphalt and cement batch plants shall be located only in industrial districts. This provision shall not apply to: the onsite excavation or removal of materials preparatory to building construction, or where such removal is motivated by land leveling as its prime objective; nor to the area within the designated floodway of waterways in which gravel removal is prohibited. The provisions of the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act shall apply to all mineral extraction activities. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.104.110 Multifamily development standards.
     Multifamily dwellings including fourplexes that contain four or more dwellings per structure or more than six dwellings per lot shall conform with the following development standards. These standards may be modified to achieve a better design if a use permit is issued:

     A.    Site Layout and Design.

     1.     Multifamily development shall comply with City of Susanville Design Guidelines, adopted July 17, 2002, and as may be amended.

     2.     Where practical, site plans for multifamily development shall show the location and placement of existing buildings and features, including architectural design and form on adjacent lots to assist in determining compatibility between uses.

     3.     Multiple story buildings shall be designed, located and oriented to preserve significant views through the site as much as practical to natural features.

     4.     Front yard setbacks along a street right-of-way shall reflect the average setback of existing adjacent residential structures within two hundred (200) feet, which may be greater than those set in each particular zone district. Modulated or varied building setbacks shall be considered if they avoid the creation of a monotonous streetscape.

     5.     Multifamily dwellings greater than one story or twenty (20) feet in height, whichever is greater (measured from average finished grade to roof peak), shall be set back from property lines with structures containing single-story residential dwellings at least one times the height of the multifamily building.

     6.     Except for carports, accessory structures shall be architecturally consistent with the main structures and other site development.

     B.     Parking, Landscaping and Lighting.

     1.     Where practical, private sidewalks separate from driveways and parking lots shall be provided between dwellings and parking areas, on-site amenities and public sidewalks.

     2.     Bicycle parking areas at a rate of 0.5 spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided.

     3.     Site design and landscaping shall provide functional recreational spaces and/or community site amenities. Functional recreational spaces shall exclude areas required for zoning setbacks and shall include at least two hundred (200) square feet per dwelling.

     4.     Landscaping compatible with building design is required. Trellises, arbors, cascading landscaping, vines, tree groupings, boulders interspersed with shrubbery and perimeter garden walls are encouraged.

     5.     Landscaping shall be incorporated around trash enclosures to provide for more effective screening.

     6.     At least one covered parking space (carport or garage) shall be provided for each dwelling unit unless approved otherwise by the planning commission.

     7.     Surface parking lots shall be located away from adjacent public roadways, to the rear of buildings where possible.

     8.     To break up long expanses of parking, one landscaped planting area shall be provided for each twelve (12) parking spaces. Landscaped planting areas shall be at least one hundred forty (140) square feet.

     9.     One tree and groundcover shall be included in each landscaped planting area in parking lots. Ground cover shall include a weed mat and rock, mulch, wood chips, bark or live plant material.

     10.   At least seventy-five (75) percent of trees planted on-site shall be 1.5 inch caliper in size.

     11.   At least seventy-five (75) percent of shrubs shall be planted from five-gallon size containers.

     12.   All disturbed areas shall be covered with an appropriate groundcover to prevent weed and unwanted vegetative growth. Groundcover shall include a weed mat and rock, mulch, wood chips, bark or live plant material.

     13.   Total number of trees planted on an entire site shall not be less than one tree per each dwelling unit.

     14.   Each dwelling unit shall have a usable outdoor space designed for the exclusive use of that dwelling unit at grade or in the form of a balcony for upper story dwellings, unless approved otherwise by the planning commission.

     15.   All outdoor lights mounted on poles, buildings or trees that are lit between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. shall use full cut-off fixtures.

     16.   Pole mounted lighting shall be spaced for maximum efficiency and shall be no taller than sixteen (16) feet in height.

     17.   Landscaping requirements in this section shall be in addition to those required in Section 17.96.040, Landscaping, unless approved otherwise by the community development director. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006)

 

17.104.120 Medical marijuana dispensaries.
     A.    “Medical marijuana dispensary” means any facility or location where medical marijuana is made available to and/or distributed by or to three or more of the following: a primary caregiver, a qualified patient, or a person with an identification card, in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses are otherwise regulated by this code or applicable law: a clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, as long as any such use complies strictly with applicable law including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq.

     B.     Medical marijuana dispensary is a prohibited use in all zones. Furthermore, no conditional use permit, or temporary permit or permit of any nature, shall be issued for such prohibited use. (Ord. 05-919 § 2, 2005)

 

17.104.130 Garage conversions.
     An existing residential garage may be converted to an alternate use allowed by zoning if the following requirements are met:

     A.    An administrative permit and a building permit are issued;

     B.     The equivalent number of parking spaces being converted to nonparking uses shall be provided elsewhere on the lot. These spaces may be covered or uncovered and shall be located on a paved or graveled surface. This area can include an existing driveway or parking pad but cannot include conversion of landscaped areas between the primary dwelling and the street in the front yard setback. Tandem or side-by-side parking is allowable;

     C.     The conversion must be designed to be architecturally compatible with the rest of the residential structure, as determined by the building official;

     D.    All applicable building codes apply to the conversion;

     E.     Exceptions to these requirements require a residential use permit. (Ord. 10-973 § 1, 2010)

 

17.104.140 Cultivation of marijuana.
     A.    Applicability.

     1.     Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall be construed, to burden any defense to criminal prosecution under the CUA.

     2.     All cultivation of medical marijuana within the city shall be subject to the provisions of this section.

     3.     Any medical marijuana cultivation that legally occurred prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section does not have nonconforming rights provided in Chapter 17.108.

 

     B.     Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

     1.     “Cultivate” or “cultivation” means the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, or processing of one or more marijuana plants or any part thereof in any location, indoor or outdoor, including within an allowable structure.

     2.     “Marijuana” has the same definition as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.

     3.     “Medical marijuana” means marijuana used for medical purposes in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act (California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5) and the Medical Marijuana Program Act (California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq.).

     C.     Prohibition of Medical Marijuana Cultivation. No person may engage in the cultivation of medical marijuana in the city of Susanville. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person or persons owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any legal parcel or premises within any zoning district in the city to cultivate medical marijuana or to permit the cultivation of medical marijuana on property under their control.

     D.    Enforcement.

     1.     In the case of a continuing violation, each day’s violation shall be deemed a separate violation.

     2.     Upon written notice, any violation of this section shall be abated within thirty-six (36) hours.

     3.     Violations of this section are declared to be public nuisances and may be abated in accordance with the procedures and remedies specified in Chapters 8.36 and 8.40 of this code.

     4.     Any person who violates any provision of this section is also guilty of an infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this code.

     5.     In addition to any other remedies provided by law, the city council or its authorized representative acting for and on behalf of the council may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate civil proceedings to prevent or temporarily or permanently enjoin or abate the violation of any provisions of this section.

     6.     Whenever a judicial action or proceeding is brought to abate or enjoin any violation of this section, the city may recover in that action or proceeding all costs and expenses incurred in detecting, investigating, abating and prosecuting the violation.

     E.     Remedies Cumulative. All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and the election of one or more remedies shall not bar the city from the pursuit of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. (Ord. 15-1002 § 3, 2015)

Chapter 17.108 NONCONFORMING USES
17.108.010 Generally.
     A     Intent. Within the districts established by this title or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist structures, buildings, mobile homes and uses that were lawful when established, but which do not conform to subsequently established or amended districts or regulations. Such structures, buildings, mobile homes and uses are declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses in the districts and are, therefore, nonconforming. The intent of this chapter is to control and improve such nonconforming uses as long as they exist, until they are brought into conformity, or until they are removed or terminated. For the purpose of this chapter, any reference to a structure also includes any building or mobile home; any reference to building permits includes mobile home installation permits.

     B.     Use Permit Required. Any structure, building, mobile home or use for which a use permit is required by the terms of this title shall be considered nonconforming and shall not be enlarged, altered or extended to occupy a greater land or building area unless and until a use permit is obtained in accordance with Sections 17.112.020 through 17.112.040. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.108.020 Nonconforming buildings and structures.
     The following provisions apply to nonconforming buildings and structures in the city:

     A.    Health and Safety. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any additions or alterations to a nonconforming structure, building or mobile home as may be reasonably necessary to comply with any lawful order of any public authority made in the interest of the public health, safety, welfare or morals.

     B.     Previously Approved Building Permits. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in plans, construction or designed use of any structure for which a building permit has been issued and upon which actual construction or preparation for placement was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of the ordinance or amended ordinance codified in this title which makes the structure, building or mobile home nonconforming. Actual construction is hereby defined to be the actual placing of construction materials in their permanent position, fastened in a permanent manner; actual work in excavating a basement; or the demolition or removal of an existing structure, building or mobile home begun preparatory to rebuilding; provided, in all cases, actual construction work shall be diligently carried on until the completion of the building, mobile home or structure involved.

     C.     Maintenance and Repairs. Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be made to any nonconforming structure, provided no structural alterations are made, and provided the work does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the assessed value thereof, according to the assessor’s records, in any one-year period. Any repair necessary to bring a nonconforming building, structure or mobile home into compliance with city codes, shall also be allowed, regardless of whether the repairs exceed the twenty-five (25) percent of assessed value. Floor area of the building, structure or mobile home shall not be increased by any repairs.

     D.    Enlargements. A nonconforming structure may not be added to or enlarged unless the nonconforming structure, the additions or enlargements thereto, and the use thereof are all made to conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.

     E.     Relocation. A nonconforming structure, building or mobile home shall not be moved to any other lot or to any other portion of the lot on which it is presently located unless, as a result of the move, it shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it will be located after the move.

     F.     Reconstruction. A nonconforming structure, building or mobile home damaged or partially destroyed by any reason, to the extent of not more than seventy-five (75) percent of the appraised value at that time, may be restored and the occupancy or use of such structure or part thereof, which existed at the time of the partial destruction, may be continued or resumed, provided the total cost of such restoration does not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the assessed value of the structure at the time of such damage, and that the restoration is started within a period of one year of the damage and is diligently carried on to completion. In the event the damage or destruction exceeds seventy-five (75) percent of the appraised value of the nonconforming structure, building or mobile home, no repair or reconstruction shall be made unless every portion of such structure, building or mobile home is made to conform to all of the regulations in the district in which it is located.

     G.    Nonconforming Historic Structure. Repairs, alterations and additions necessary for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation or continued use of a nonconforming historic structure may be made when authorized by the community development director (or designee) and building official (or designee), provided:

     1.     The structure has been designated by official action of the city council, state of California or United States Government as having special historical or architectural significance;

     2.     Any unsafe conditions are corrected; and

     3.     The use(s) therein shall be in conformance with all applicable provisions of this section. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.108.030 Nonconforming uses of buildings, structures or mobile homes.
     The following provisions apply to nonconforming use of buildings, structures or mobile homes in the city:

     A.    Change to a Conforming Use. The use of a nonconforming building, structure or mobile home may be changed to any other use which is permitted in the district in which the structure is located, except as provided in this chapter;

     B.     Change to Same or More Restrictive Nonconforming Use. The nonconforming use of a building or structure may be changed to a use of the same or more restricted nature, provided a use permit is issued;

     C.     Expansion of a Nonconforming Use. The nonconforming use of a portion of a building, structure or mobile home may not be expanded to other portions thereof; and

     D.    Abandonment. Any nonconforming building, structure or mobile home for which a use is discontinued for a continuous period of more than one year shall not thereafter be occupied unless the nonconforming building, structure or mobile home is brought into conformance with the district in which it is located and the new use conforms to the regulations for the district in which it is located.

     Note: Abandonment shall not include those uses which have been discontinued for reasons beyond the owner’s control such as illness, death, extended leave of absence due to family or emergency where it was not the owners intent to abandon the use. The determination for abandonment may be reviewed by the city council at the request of the property owner where he or she can present evidence that it was never his or her intent to abandon the use. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.108.040 Nonconforming uses of land.
     The following provisions apply to nonconforming use of land in the city:

     A.    Continuation. A nonconforming use of land may be continued, provided:

     1.     The use shall not be expanded or extended in any way on the same or adjoining land;

     2.     The use shall not be changed, except to a use which conforms to the regulations of the district in which said land is located;

     3.     If the use is discontinued for a period of six months or more, it shall not be reestablished thereafter. Any new use shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.108.050 Nonconforming off-street parking.
     Where off-street parking or loading facilities do not conform to the provisions of this title, or where no such facilities have been provided for buildings, structures or mobile homes constructed or installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, the building, structure or mobile home shall not be altered or enlarged to create additional dwelling units, seating capacity, floor area or guest rooms, nor may additional facilities be provided within the building, structure or mobile home until after the requirements for off-street parking and loading space have been met. These provisions shall not apply to members of a duly formed parking district.

     Nonconforming buildings or structures which do not comply with off-street parking and loading requirements and have been vacant for more than one year may be reoccupied provided a use permit is issued. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.108.060 Nonconforming uses public nuisance.
     It is declared that maintenance of a nonconforming use is a violation of this chapter and is a public nuisance and a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.108.070 Nonconforming residential structures destroyed by fire.
     Residential structures that existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which are destroyed by fire by more than seventy-five (75) percent of their appraised value may be replaced to the same square footage. No new residences may be constructed unless they are permitted in the specific zone district. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.112 APPLICATIONS AND PROCEDURES
17.112.010 Variances.
     Variances from the terms of any regulation established by the zoning plan shall be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of this zoning title deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification.

     Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated.

     A variance shall not be granted for a parcel of property which authorizes a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zone regulation governing the parcel of property. Any variance granted must be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the zoning laws. The provisions of this section shall not apply to conditional use permits. (Section 65906, Planning and Zoning Law).

     A.    An application for a variance shall be made to the community development department on a form prescribed by the city, and shall be accompanied by a variance application fee, a statement, plans or other evidence showing that the application complies with the above requirements of this section. Fees for variance applications shall be set by resolution of the city council.

     B.     No application shall be accepted as complete unless and until all fees, the application form and related information are filed with and accepted by the planning department. Failure of any applicant to respond, within thirty (30) days of mailing, to any notice that the application is incomplete or to any request to clarify, amplify, correct or otherwise supplement the application shall be deemed an abandonment of the variance application, and no further action shall be taken upon it.

     C.     All applications shall be reviewed pursuant to and for compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) under state law and any procedures established by the city council. Conditions of approval shall include any measures required pursuant to the CEQA review.

     D.    All applications shall be reviewed by the appropriate members of the city staff. The report of the staff members, including any recommended conditions of approval, shall be coordinated and forwarded to the planning commission, as appropriate by the community development director, prior to the hearing on the application.

     E.     The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each application after the application is accepted as complete. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, shall be given by publication, as required by Government Code Section 65090, and by mail, as required by Section 65091. Failure to receive the notice required by Government Code Section 65091 shall not invalidate any action on the application. The city council may, by resolution, provide for additional notice. Any hearing may be continued to a specific time, date and place without further public notice.

     F.     The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny approval of the application by resolution. A resolution approving a variance application shall clearly describe the variance, set forth all conditions of approval, and identify which conditions, if any, must be met prior to use of the variance. No variance shall be granted unless findings of fact are made that all of the criteria in subsection A of this section apply. The planning commission may require security it deems reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with any conditions imposed.

     G.    The granting of any variance may be conditioned to require the dedication of land or the posting of a bond to guarantee the installation of public improvements, provided the dedication or public improvements are reasonably related to the use for which the variance is granted. No variance shall be granted unless conditions are imposed that assure that the variance will not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone district in which the subject property is located. No variance shall be granted which authorizes a use or activity which is not expressly authorized by the zone district regulations. Every variance granted under this section is revocable; revocation proceedings shall require notice and public hearing the same as for a variance.

     H.    After the time for filing an appeal has expired, or if an appeal is timely filed, after the decision on the appeal, the community development director shall mail or deliver to the applicant or designee a copy of the executed resolution on the decision. A resolution approving or affirming the approval of or reversing the disapproval of a variance application shall permit the applicant to vary from the applicable zoning regulations to the extent authorized in the resolution, provided any precedent conditions imposed therein have first been met.

     I.      No building permit or mobile home installation permit for which a variance is required shall be issued until the time to appeal approval of the variance has expired, or in case of appeal, until the approval has been affirmed or the disapproval has been reversed by the city council. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.112.020 Use permits.
     Conditional use permits and planned development use permits may be approved as set forth in this section for any of the uses or purposes for which use permits are required by the zoning ordinance codified in this title.

     A.    An application for a use permit shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the city, and shall be accompanied by an application fee, a clear and concise description of the use and accompanying activities, and shall contain plans or maps showing the details of the proposed use, building or facilities. Fees for use permit applications shall be set by resolution of the city council.

     B.     No application shall be accepted as complete unless and until all fees, the application form and related information are filed with and accepted by the community development department. Failure of any applicant to respond, within thirty (30) days of mailing, to any notice that the application is incomplete or to any request to clarify, amplify, correct or otherwise supplement the application shall be deemed an abandonment of the use permit application and no further action shall be taken upon it.

     C.     All applications shall be reviewed pursuant to and for compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) under state law and any procedures established by the city council. Conditions of approval shall include any measures required pursuant to the CEQA review.

     D.    All applications shall be reviewed by appropriate members of the city staff. The report of the staff members, including any recommended conditions of approval, shall be coordinated and forwarded to the planning commission, as appropriate by the community development director prior to the hearing on the application.

     E.     The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each application after the application is accepted as complete. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, shall be given by publication as required by Government Code Section 65090, and by mail, as required by Government Code Section 65091. Failure to receive the notice required by Government Code Section 65091 shall not invalidate any action on the application. The city council may, by resolution, provide for additional notice. The planning commission may continue any hearing to a specific time, date and place.

     F.     The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny approval of the application by resolution. A resolution approving a use permit application shall clearly describe the uses permitted, set forth all conditions of approval, and identify which conditions, if any, must be met prior to use of the use permit. No use permit shall be granted unless findings of fact are made that the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use, building or facilities applied for will not, under the circumstances of the particular use, be detrimental to or contrary to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city; provided, if any proposed use, building or facility is necessary for the public health, safety or general welfare, the findings shall so state. The planning commission may require security it deems reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with any conditions imposed.

     G.    The granting of any use permit may be conditioned to require the dedication of land or the posting of a bond to guarantee the installation of public improvements, provided the dedication or public improvements are reasonably related to the use for which the use permit is granted. Every use permit granted under this section is revocable. Any use permit granted under this section may be limited by the planning commission to a term set when the use permit is granted. The establishment, maintenance or operation of any use under this section shall cease at the end of the term, if any, of the use permit. No use permit granted under this section may be renewed, but a new use permit may be granted upon terms and conditions appropriate at the time of such grant. Revocation proceedings shall require notice and a public hearing the same as for the use permit.

     H.    After the time for filing an appeal has expired, or if an appeal is timely filed, after the decision on the appeal, the community development director shall mail or deliver to the applicant or designee a copy of the executed resolution on the decision. A resolution approving or affirming the approval of or reversing the disapproval of a use permit application shall constitute the use permit and shall permit the applicant to engage in the use or undertake the activity described provided any conditions imposed therein have first been met.

     I.      No building permit or mobile home installation permit for which a use permit is required shall be issued until the time to appeal approval of the use permit has expired, or, in case of appeal, until the approval has been affirmed or the disapproval has been reversed by the city council. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.112.030 Variance and use permit—Appeals.
     A.    Any interested person may appeal a decision of the planning commission to approve, conditionally approve or deny an application for a variance or use permit, or to amend or add conditions, or to revoke a variance or use permit by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within five calendar days of the decision. The notice of appeal shall identify, by application number, the variance or use permit which is the subject of the appeal, shall state the action, finding or determination, and the date thereof, from which the appeal is taken; and shall specifically set forth the grounds upon which the appeal is based. No appeal shall be deemed to be filed unless any required fee is submitted to the city clerk with the notice of appeal.

     B.     The city clerk shall furnish copies of the notice of appeal to each city council member, the community development director, city attorney and the applicant, permittee or holder of the affected variance or use permit.

     C.     The city council shall set the matter for public hearing and the city clerk shall give notice of the hearing in the same manner as notice of the hearing was given before the planning commission. The city clerk shall notify the appellant and all persons to whom the notice of appeal is to be furnished of the date, time and place of the hearing. Any hearing shall be limited to the grounds specifically stated in the notice of appeal.

     D.    The record on appeal shall consist of a copy of the application and all related documents, the environmental assessment, including any environmental impact report, if one has been prepared; the staff report to the planning commission and recommendation; the minutes of the hearing before the planning commission, including a fair summary of all testimony received, and all other documentary, pictorial or other physical evidence received at the hearing.

     E.     The city council shall review the record on appeal and any additional relevant information which may be received at the hearing before it. Whenever the evidence before the city council supports any findings or determination which prohibits approval under Sections 17.112.010(F) or 17.112.020(F) the city council shall not affirm the approval or reverse the disapproval of a variance or use permit unless appropriate conditions sufficient to overcome all such findings are included in the decision. The city council may continue any hearing to a specific time, date and place without requiring further public notice; provided, however, it shall render its decision no later than fifteen (15) days after it first hears the matter. The city council may, at its discretion, refer any application back to the planning commission for further review and report. The city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, determination or condition appealed. The action of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.112.040 Variance, use permit and home occupation permit—Revocation, expiration and surrender.
     A.    Whenever the community development director determines that one or more grounds exist for revocation of a variance, use permit or home occupation permit, the planning commission may set the matter for hearing before it by resolution of intention to revoke the variance or use permit. The holder of the variance or the permittee shall be given notice by mail of the grounds, time and place of the hearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing.

     B.     Grounds for revocation include, but are not limited to:

     1.     Noncompliance with conditions of approval;

     2.     Violation of any law in connection with the variance use or permit;

     3.     Expansion of the use, variance or permit without a new variance, use permit or home occupation permit or amendment to the existing variance, use permit or home occupation permit;

     4.     Exercising the variance or conducting the use or permit in a manner that threatens or is injurious to public health or safety or constitutes a nuisance;

     5.     False or erroneous information in the record as to a material matter or significant issue regarding the variance, use permit or home occupation permit.

     C.     The planning commission may revoke or decline to revoke the variance, use permit or home occupation permit. In lieu of revocation, the planning commission may amend existing conditions of approval or impose additional conditions, as appropriate.

     D.    Every variance, use permit or home occupation permit expires and is null and void without further action by the city if the activity or the use for which the variance, use permit or home occupation permit was granted has not been actively and substantially commenced within one year of the date of its approval, or the date the approval was affirmed or the disapproval was reversed on appeal. The community development director has the authority to declare, based on length of time and operation of law, that the variance, use permit or home occupation permit has been abandoned and is, therefore, null and void.

     E.     The planning commission may extend the time for commencement of the use or activity when the variance, use permit or home occupation permit is approved, or during the year following approval or affirmation of approval of the variance, use permit or home occupation permit, if an application for an extension of time is made to the planning department prior to expiration of the variance, use permit or home occupation permit. The decision on an application for an extension of time is ministerial and a public hearing on the application is not required. An extension of time shall be approved if the permittee shows reasonable cause for the extension. Reasonable cause exists if the applicant shows that circumstances beyond his or her control have prevented him or her from taking sufficient action. The decision on an application may be appealed to the city council under the provisions of Section 17.112.030, but a public hearing is not required on the appeal.

     F.     The time limitations imposed under subsections D and E of this section shall not include any period during which litigation is pursued challenging the validity of the approval of a variance, use permit or home occupation permit.

     G.    The holder of a variance, use permit or home occupation permit may surrender it to the community development department at any time and thereafter shall cease to engage in, operate or maintain the use. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.112.050 Plan lines.
     A.    Plan lines (i.e., future road width lines) shall be established in order to do the following:

     1.     Reduce damage to property values resulting from inadequate provisions for traffic thoroughfares;

     2.     Promote the public welfare and convenience;

     3.     Serve as a guide for the development of streets and highways;

     4.     Provide a guide for capital outlay of street and highway improvements to the city;

     5.     Provide a source of information for residents and developers in the city.

     B.     Plan lines shall be initiated by adoption of a resolution of intention by the city council or planning commission.

     C.     Plan lines shall be designated on maps that show all property lines and buildings within and adjacent to the project area, and shall show all existing and proposed right-of-way widths, as well as a cross section of the proposed road. Plan lines shall define or show the land areas required for future streets, street extensions, realignments or street widening by lines dimensioned from existing right-of-way lines, actual or established street center lines, or by ties to existing monuments, property lines or corners.

     D.    All proposed plan line maps shall be reviewed pursuant to and for compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act under procedures established by the city council. The community development department shall prepare an analysis of the consistency or inconsistency of the proposed plan line with the general plan. The community development department shall also prepare an analysis of the effect of the proposed plan line on any specific plan applicable to the real property to which the plan line is proposed to apply.

     E.     The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each plan line initiated under this section. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, shall be given by publication, as required by Government Code Section 65090, and by mail, as prescribed by Government Code Section 65090. Failure to receive the notice required by Government Code Section 65091 shall not invalidate any action on the proposed plan line. Any hearing may be continued. If a hearing is continued to a specific time, date and place, no further notice of the hearing is required, unless the community development director determines otherwise.

     F.     Additional notice of any plan line map may be given if the community development director deems it necessary or desirable, and shall be given if the city council so directs.

     G.    After the hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision in the form of a written resolution which shall include a recommendation to the city council for action on the proposed plan line maps, the reasons for the recommendation, and the relationship of the proposed plan line maps to the general plan and any applicable specific plan. The community development director shall cause a copy of the resolution to be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) working days after its adoption.

     H.    Following the planning commission’s recommendation on a plan line map, the city council shall set the matter for a public hearing before it. After the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may adopt the proposed plan line map or any part thereof, in such a form or with such modifications as the city council may deem to be appropriate.

     I.      No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, altered, replaced or added to within adopted plan lines. Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and results inconsistent with the general purposes of this section may result from the strict application of this section, variances may be granted, as provided in Section 17.112.010. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.112.060 Zoning plan amendments.
     A.    The regulations of any zone district established pursuant to this chapter may be amended by changing the boundaries of districts, reclassifying land from one district to another district or districts or combinations thereof, or by changing any other provisions thereof whenever the amendments would further the public necessity, convenience and general welfare.

     B.     An amendment is initiated by:

     1.     The city council or the planning commission by adoption of a resolution of intention to make the amendment; or

     2.     An application for amendment made in writing on a form prescribed by the city. An application shall be accompanied by statements, plans or maps required to show the necessity for and scope of the proposed amendment as may be described by the community development director.

     C.     No application shall be accepted as complete unless and until all fees, the application form and related information are filed with and accepted by the community development department. Failure of any applicant to respond, within thirty (30) days of mailing, to any notice that the application is incomplete or to any request to clarify, amplify, correct or otherwise supplement the application shall be deemed an abandonment of the amendment application, and no further action shall be taken upon it.

     D.    All applications shall be reviewed pursuant to and for compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) under procedures established by the city council. The results of the CEQA review shall be transmitted to the appropriate members of the staff.

     E.     All applications shall be reviewed by the appropriate staff members. The staff report shall be coordinated by the community development director and forwarded to the planning commission prior to the hearing on the application.

     F.     The community development department shall prepare an analysis of the consistency or inconsistency of the proposed amendment with the general plan, and any applicable specific plan.

     G.    The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each proposed amendment. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, shall be given by publication, as required by Government Code Section 65090, and by mail, as required by Government Code Section 65091. Failure to receive the notice required by Government Code Section 65091 shall not invalidate any action on the proposed amendment. Any hearing may be continued. If a hearing is continued to a specific time, date and place, no further notice of the hearing is required. Additional notice of any amendment may be given if the community development director deems it necessary or desirable, and shall also be given if the city council so directs.

     H.    After the hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision, in the form of a written resolution, which shall include a recommendation to the city council for action on the proposed amendment, the reasons for the recommendation, and the relationship of the proposed ordinance or amendment to the general plan and any applicable specific plan. The community development director shall cause a report of the planning commission’s action to be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) working days after the planning commission’s decision.

     I.      If the planning commission has recommended approval of the proposed amendment, the city council shall set the matter for public hearing before it. If the proposed amendment would change property from one district to another, and the planning commission has recommended against adoption of the amendment, the city council need take no further action on the amendment unless an interested person files a written request for a hearing with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the commission’s recommendation is filed with the city clerk. The notice provisions of subsection G of this section apply to hearings held under this subsection.

     J.      The city council may approve or disapprove any recommendation of the planning commission, provided any modification of the proposed ordinance or amendment by the city council, which was not considered by the planning commission during its hearing, shall first be referred to the planning commission for its recommendation. The planning commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing on the proposed modification. If the planning commission fails to make its recommendation within forty (40) days after the city council refers it to the planning commission, the modification shall be deemed approved by the planning commission.

     K.    The city council or the planning commission may, by resolution, abandon any proceedings for an amendment initiated by its own resolution of intention, provided the proposed amendment is then pending before it for consideration and provided that any public hearing on the amendment for which notice has been given is first held. An applicant may withdraw his or her application at any time, provided any public hearing on the amendment, for which notice has been given, is first held, and the amendment is not required as a condition of approval of a development project. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.112.070 General plan amendments.
     Any amendments to the general plan map or text shall be conducted as described in Section 17.112.060, with the following exception:

     Notice of public hearings as required in Government Code Section 65091.a.3 shall include notice to owners of real property within six hundred (600) feet or greater, as determined by the community development director, of the real property that is the subject of the hearing. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 17.116 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
17.116.010 General plan consistency.
Where any regulations specified in this chapter and any portion of any element of the general plan are inconsistent, the general plan shall prevail. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.116.020 Zone district boundary interpretation.
     Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the zoning maps, the following rules shall apply:

     A.    Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines, such lines shall be construed to follow the center of the street or alley or along the lot line if the lot line is not also a street boundary;

     B.     Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverts shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street or alley;

     C.     For property described by a district boundary, the locations of such boundaries, unless indicated by boundary dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map; and

     D.    In all other cases where any uncertainty exists, the planning commission shall determine the location of boundaries. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.116.030 Zone district land use interpretation.
     A.    Where a proposed land use is not specifically listed by the applicable zone district within which the property proposed for the use is located, the community development director may determine that the use is a permitted use, or the use is permitted if a use permit is first secured, if the following findings are made:

     1.     The proposed unlisted use is similar in character and impact to a listed use; and

     2.     The proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use including determining where it is allowed, what permits are required, and what standards affect its establishment.

     B.     The decision of the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with subsection C of Section 17.116.060. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.116.040 Combining uses.
     More than one permitted use may be permitted on one lot in any zone district, provided there is no conflict between the uses, and further provided that the applicable zone requirements and city development standards are met. Each use must meet the lot area requirements without using the lot area requirements of another use. For lots for which a use permit has been approved, the only uses allowed are those specifically described by the use permit. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.116.050 Exemption from solar energy and shade control.
     Pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 25985, the city declares itself exempt from the provisions of Chapter 12 (commencing with Section 25980) to Division 15 of the Public Resources Code (Solar Shade Control Act) relating to solar energy and shade control. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

 

17.116.060 Administrative enforcement.
     A.    General Prohibitions. No person shall use any real property in violation of the regulations of this division that are applicable to the property. The erection, construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, movement, maintenance, establishment or operation of any building, structure, premises or use contrary to the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a violation of this code.

     B.     Administrative Limitations. All city officers, departments and employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, licenses or other entitlement shall do so subject to the requirements of this chapter. No permit, license or other entitlement shall be issued or approved for any purpose or in any manner which conflicts with the provisions of this chapter. Any permit, license or other entitlement issued in conflict with any provision of this chapter is null and void as of the date of issuance or approval.

     C.     Enforcement Authority.

     1.     The community development director (or designee) is the enforcing officer for the provisions of this chapter;

     2.     Any administrative decision of the community development director regarding the interpretation of the provisions of this title or any condition of approval imposed pursuant to this title shall be made in writing whenever requested by any person interested in the interpretation. The written interpretation shall be delivered personally or by mail to that person; and

     3.     The director’s decision may be appealed to the planning commission within ten (10) days of the date of delivery or mailing of the decision by filing a written appeal with the community development department. The appeal shall specifically set forth the grounds upon which it is based. The commission shall hear the appeal and the appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard and to present evidence at the hearing. The commission shall render its decision in writing to the community development director and shall concurrently mail a copy of its decision to the appellant. A public hearing is not required for any appeal heard under this subsection.

     D.    Violations as an Infraction or Misdemeanor.

     1.     A violation of any regulatory or prohibitory provision of this title is an infraction, unless any provision of law establishes the violation as a misdemeanor;

     2.     A separate offense is committed for each and every transaction, event or occurrence in violation of any regulatory or prohibitory provision of this title. A separate offense is committed for each and every day or part of a day during which any such violation is caused, committed, continued or permitted. Each offense is punishable separately from every other offense. Every violation of any regulatory or prohibitory provision of this title is expressly declared to be a public nuisance.

     E.     Enforcement Procedure:

     1.     Every enforcing officer may use administrative processes, such as notices of noncompliance, warning letters, stop orders or cease and desist orders, in lieu of or prior to enforcing any provision of this code, if the officer determines that the process may result in compliance with this code at less expense to the city; and

     2.     Pursuant to Penal Code Section 19d and the provisions of Section 836.5 and Chapter 5c (commencing with Section 853.5) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code, every enforcing officer may cite any person for violation of this code whenever the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has caused, committed, continued or permitted any violation of this code.

     F.     Right of Entry. In the performance of their functions, planning agency personnel may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys, provided that the entries, examinations and surveys do not interfere with the lawful use of the land by those persons lawfully entitled to the possession thereof, and further provided that no entry shall be made where an administrative search warrant is required.

     G.    Enforcement Costs. Whenever a judicial action or proceeding is brought to abate or enjoin any violation of this title, the city may recover in that action or proceeding all costs and expenses incurred in detecting, investigating, abating and prosecuting the violation. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006; Ord. 00-866 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 17.120 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
17.120.010 Purpose.
     The following findings are made regarding the establishment of adult entertainment businesses within the city of Susanville:

     A.    Certain uses of real property for adult entertainment businesses variously described as adult bookstores, adult motion picture facilities, figure model studios, adult cabarets, adult motels and massage parlors have serious objectionable operational characteristics which, if such uses were allowed to become concentrated in certain areas of the city, may have adverse and deleterious effects upon the character of such areas and adjacent neighborhoods, and may contribute to blight and skid-row atmospheres.

     B.     Permitting the concentration of adult entertainment businesses may tend to create and foster a blighted and/or downgraded atmosphere in surrounding neighborhoods and areas within the city, leading to reduction of property values.

     C.     Permitting adult entertainment businesses in residential zones, or in zones adjacent to schools, regular school bus stops, churches, or public recreational areas, or within close proximity to such uses, may expose minors to such facilities, and this may adversely affect such minors due to their immaturity.

     D.    Special locational regulation of adult entertainment business uses is necessary to insure that such uses do not become incompatible land uses and further, will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of zones in which they are permitted, thereby adversely affecting property values and deterring or interfering with the development and operation of other businesses within the city.

     E.     There is a higher incidence of crime, especially crimes against the person, in areas in which adult entertainment businesses are permitted to cluster or become concentrated, and that such crimes and the incidence thereof increase in the late evening and night hours, requiring increased effort on the part of public and safety personnel to police such activities, with resultant costs to the city.

     F.     The city has reviewed studies from the cities of Austin, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Los Angeles, California; Phoenix, Arizona; and Saint Paul, Minnesota which document the secondary impacts of adult entertainment businesses and determined that the findings of these studies support the concerns of the city of Susanville. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 15.1)

 

17.120.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Adult bookstore” means any commercial establishment in which fifteen (15) percent or more of its titles offered or to which fifteen (15) percent or more of the actual display area of the store is devoted to books, magazines, photographs, drawings, motion pictures, films or other visual representations which describe or depict sexual intercourse, homosexual acts, masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus, bestiality, sodomy, sadomasochistic abuse or other sexual excitement or sexual conduct, sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section.

     “Adult entertainment business(es)” means adult bookstore, adult motion picture facility, figure model studio, adult motel, adult cabaret, or massage establishment.

     “Adult cabaret” means an establishment which features topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers.

     “Adult motels” means any establishment designated as, or having the characteristics of, a hotel, motel, or other transient lodging facility which has, or proposes to have as a feature or service offered to its customers, the presentation or entertainment in the form of motion picture film, video tape, cartridges, closed circuit television, or any other viewing system or device which is substantially similar thereto, fifteen (15) percent or more of the number of which show or whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction of any specified sexual activities as described herein, and/or specified anatomical areas as described herein, for observation or viewing by persons who are customers of such establishments. This section shall apply whether charge is made or consideration exchanged for the use of rooms within such establishments for overnight accommodations or for short-term admission to view the material above-described.

     “Adult motion picture facility” or “adult theater” means a commercial facility used for presenting, whether by way of motion picture projection or television or video equipment, or peep show device, fifteen (15) percent or more of the number of which show or whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction of any specified sexual activities as defined in this section, and/or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein, whether in one or more auditoriums, drive-in theaters, booths or rooms within the facility.

     “Figure model studio” means any commercial premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing, providing or procuring figure models who pose for the purpose of being observed, conversed with, or viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise similarly depicted in the nude or seminude for persons who pay a fee, or other consideration, compensation, or gratuity, for the right or opportunity to converse with or so depict a figure model, or for admission to, or for permission to remain upon as a condition of remaining upon the premises.

     Figure model studio does not include, for purposes of this definition, any studio which is operated by any state college, junior college, community college, public or private school, or any governmental agency wherein the person, firm, association, partnership or corporation so operating has met the requirements established by the state for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma or honorary diploma.

     “Massage” means any method of pressure on, friction against, or stroking, rubbing, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating, the external parts of the human body with the hands or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, or with or without the aid of such supplementary materials as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage.

     Massage does not include, for purposes of this definition, the methods of practice or the legitimate techniques of physicians, chiropractors, physical therapist, massage therapist or athletic trainers, licensed or certified by the state of California.

     “Massage establishment” means any commercial establishment having a fixed place of business where any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of individuals, engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, massage, baths, or health treatments involving massage or baths as the principal functions, but does not include the methods of practice or the legitimate techniques of physicians, chiropractors, physical therapists, massage therapists or athletic trainers, licensed or certified by the state of California.

     “Specified anatomical areas” means less than completely and opaquely covered:

     1.     Mature human genitals;

     2.     Pubic region;

     3.     Mature human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;

     4.     Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.

     “Specified sexual activities” means:

     1.     Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct, buggery, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, zooerasty; or

     2.     Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or

     3.     Use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation; or

     4.     Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, nude pubic region, or nude female breast; or

     5.     Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented (i) torture, (ii) beating, or (iii) infliction of pain; or

     6.     Erotic or lewd (i) touching, (ii) fondling, or (iii) other contact with an animal by a human being. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 15.2)

 

17.120.030 Separation.
     No adult entertainment business shall be located within a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet from any of the following:

     A.    A public or private school attended primarily by minors;

     B.     A church or other place of worship;

     C.     A public park or other recreational facility frequented or utilized by minors, including, but not limited, to public parks, playgrounds, pools and recreational centers;

     D.    Any other adult entertainment business;

     E.     Any property zoned for residential purposes (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or MHP zoning districts); or

     F.     Regular school bus stops:

     G.    Any residential use in a nonresidential zone district.

     The one thousand (1,000) foot distance referred to herein shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures, topography, or zoning. The reference for computing the distance from property zoned for residential purposes shall be the official zoning map. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 15.3)

 

17.120.040 Home occupation.
     No adult entertainment business shall be allowed as a home occupation. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 15.4)

 

17.120.050 Conditional use permit.
     A conditional use permit is required prior to the establishment or operation of an adult entertainment business, as defined in this chapter, within the city of Susanville, and is only conditionally permitted in the C-M Commercial-Light Industrial and M General Industrial zoning districts. An adult entertainment business is a prohibited use in all other zoning districts. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 15.5)

 

17.120.060 Conditional use permit procedure.
     The conditional use permit procedure shall be the same as set forth in Chapter 17.44; provided, however, that a public hearing before the Susanville planning commission shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days from the date the application and use permit application fee is received by the city. The planning commission shall issue a conditional use permit where the information presented by the applicant and/or presented at the public hearing for the conditional use permit substantiates the findings required by Chapter 17.44 and the following findings:

     A.    The requested use at the proposed location is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter;

     B.     The requested use at the proposed location will not be contrary to the public health, safety, and general welfare of persons residing or working in the zone or neighborhood in which it is proposed;

     C.     The requested use at the proposed location is sufficiently buffered in relation to residentially zoned areas within the immediate vicinity so as not to adversely affect said areas;

     D.    The exterior appearance of the structure in which the requested use will be located will not be inconsistent with the external appearance of commercial structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood so as to cause blight deterioration, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood;

     E.     The requested use at the proposed location will not result in creating a skid-row atmosphere in the zone or neighborhood in which it is proposed;

     F.     The requested use at the proposed location will not be contrary to any neighborhood revitalization program, nor interfere with any economic development programs or activities in the zone or neighborhood in which it is proposed;

     G.    The requested use at the proposed location will be substantially consistent with the adopted general plan for the area;

     H.    The proposed location of the requested use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, fences, parking lot, landscaping and other development features prescribed in this title, or as is otherwise required in order to integrate said use with the uses in the surrounding area; and,

     I.      The proposed location of the requested use is adequately served by:

     1.     Highways or streets of sufficient width and improved as necessary to carry the kind and quantity of traffic such use would generate, and

     2.     Other public or private service facilities as are required. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 15.6)

 

17.120.070 Development and performance standards.
     Adult entertainment businesses shall comply with all of the following development and performance standards:

     A.    Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials depicting or describing “specified anatomical areas,” or “specified sexual activities,” or displaying instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with “specified sexual activities” shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible from other areas open to the general public.

     B.     All building openings, entries and windows for an adult entertainment business shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior of an adult entertainment business from any area open to the general public.

     C.     All entrances to an adult entertainment business shall be clearly and legibly posted by a notice indicating that minors are prohibited from entering the premises.

     D.    No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by an adult entertainment business for the amplification of sound to a level discernable by the public beyond the walls of the building in which the adult entertainment business is conducted.

     E.     No residential structure or any other nonconforming structure shall be converted for use as an adult entertainment business after enactment of the provisions of this chapter.

     F.     All off-street parking areas, walkways and building entries serving the adult entertainment business shall be illuminated during all business hours with a lighting system designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of greater than one footcandle of light on the parking surface and/or walkway. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult entertainment business for personal safety of its patrons.

     G.    All exterior areas of adult entertainment businesses, including buildings, landscaping and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 15.7)

 

17.120.080 Display of materials harmful to minors.
     Display of materials which are harmful to minors (see California Penal Code Section 313.1(d)), other than in a public place from which minors are excluded, shall be restricted by placement of blinder racks in front of the material, so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 15.8)

 

17.120.090 Nonconforming uses.
     Any legally established adult entertainment business in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be considered an existing nonconforming use. Such nonconforming use shall be subject to the specific regulations contained elsewhere in the Susanville Municipal Code and this title. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 15.9)

 

17.120.100 Amortization period.
     A.    Within thirty-six (36) months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all nonconforming adult entertainment businesses shall either be discontinued or made to conform to the provisions of this chapter, except that such nonconforming uses may be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed an additional twenty-four (24) month period upon the granting of a conditional use permit, provided the conditional use permit application is submitted ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the original thirty-six (36) month period.

     B.     In addition to the findings required by Chapter 17.44, the planning commission must find the following when approving or conditionally approving a conditional use permit to extend the amortization period of an adult entertainment business:

     1.     The use, if continued, will not create a public nuisance, as defined in Sections 3479 and 3480 of the California Civil Code;

     2.     The tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, owner or other person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation who owns or operates such use is obligated under a lease or other binding rental agreement for the premises, which obligation was entered into before March 1, 1994, for a period exceeding five years; and

     3.     The use represents an investment of money in leasehold and other improvements to such an extent that denial of such permit would result in undue financial hardship. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 15.10)

Chapter 17.124 RECYCLING
17.124.010 Definitions.
     The following terms and accompanying definitions shall apply to this chapter.

     “Recyclable material” means reusable material, including, but not limited to, metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Sections 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code, and any subsequent amendment thereto.

     “Recycling facility” means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processing facility means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986 and any subsequent amendment thereto. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities may include the following:

     1.     Collection Facility. A center for the acceptance by donation, redemption or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public. Such a facility does not use power-driven processing equipment except as indicated in Section 17.124.040 herein. Collection facilities may include the following:

     a.     Reverse vending machine(s);

     b.     Small collection facilities which occupy an area of not more than five hundred (500) square feet, and may include:

     i.      A mobile unit,

     ii.     Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than fifty (50) square feet,

     iii.    Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures,

     iv.    Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials;

     c.     Large collection facilities which may occupy an area of more than five hundred (500) square feet and may include permanent structures.

     2.     Processing Facility. A building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. “Processing” means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user’s specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the following:

     a.     A light processing facility occupies an area of under forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and has up to an average of two outbound truck shipments per day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers;

     b.     A heavy processing facility is any processing facility other than a light processing facility.

     “Reverse vending machines” means an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers, including but not limited to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value as determined by the state. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically, provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all three container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary.

     A bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than fifty (50) square feet; is designed to accept more than one container at a time; and will pay by weight instead of by container.

     “Mobile recycling unit” means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also means the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 14.1)

 

17.124.020 Permits required.
     No person shall permit the placement, construction or operation of any recycling facility without first obtaining a permit pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter and in regulations adopted by resolution of the city council. Recycling facilities may be allowed as set forth in the following table.

 

Types of Facility

Zones Allowed

Permits
Required

 

 

 

Reverse vending machines

C-1, C-2, C-M, M-L M, P-F

Administrative

 

 

 

Small collection

C-1, C-2, C-M, M, P-F

Administrative

 

 

 

Large collection

C-1

Conditional use

 

C-2,C-M, M-L, M, P-F

Administrative

 

 

 

Light processing

C-2, C-M, M-L, M, P-F

Conditional use

 

 

 

Heavy processing

C-M. M-L, M

Conditional use

 

     In addition to the permits described in the above table, a reverse vending machine(s) or a small collection facility may also be allowed in special zones which allow uses permitted in commercial or industrial zones with an administrative permit; and a large collection facility or processing facility may be allowed in agricultural zones with a conditional use permit. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 14.2)

 

17.124.030 Permits for multiple sites.
     A single administrative permit may be granted to allow more than one reverse vending machine(s) on different sites under the following conditions:

     A.    The operator of each of the proposed facilities is the same;

     B.     The proposed facilities are determined by the community development director to be similar in nature, size and intensity of activity; and

     C.     All of the applicable criteria and standards set forth in Section 17.124.040 are met for each proposed facility. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 14.3)

 

17.124.040 Criteria and standards.
     Those recycling facilities permitted with an administrative permit shall meet all of the applicable criteria and standards listed. Those recycling facilities permitted with a conditional use permit shall meet the applicable following criteria and standards, provided that the planning commission may impose stricter standards as an exercise of discretion upon a finding that they are reasonably necessary in order to implement the general intent of this section and the purposes of this chapter.

     A.    Reverse vending machine(s) located within a commercial structure do not require additional parking spaces for recycling customers and are allowed in accordance with Section 17.124.020, provided that they comply with the following standards:

     1.     Shall be established in conjunction with a commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city;

     2.     Shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the entrance to the commercial structure and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;

     3.     Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use;

     4.     Shall occupy no more than fifty (50) square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight feet in height;

     5.     Shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material;

     6.     Shall be clearly marked to identify the types of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative;

     7.     Shall have a sign area of a maximum of four square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions;

     8.     Shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis;

     9.     Operating hours shall be at least the operating hours of the host use;

     10.   Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn.

     B.     Small collection facilities may be sited in accordance with Section 17.124.020, provided they comply with the following conditions:

     1.     Shall be established in conjunction with an existing commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city;

     2.     Shall be no larger than five hundred (500) square feet and occupy no more than five parking spaces not including space that will be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers;

     3.     Shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any street line and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;

     4.     Shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers and reusable items. Used motor oil may be accepted with permission of the local public health official;

     5.     Shall use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines;

     6.     Shall use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule;

     7.     Shall store all recyclable materials in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and shall not leave materials outside of containers when attendant is not present;

     8.     Shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and mobile facilities, at which truck containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day;

     9.     Shall not exceed noise levels of sixty (60) dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, otherwise shall not exceed seventy (70) dBA;

     10.   Attended facilities located within one hundred (100) feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use shall operate only during the hours between nine a.m. and seven p.m.;

     11.   Containers for the twenty-four (24) hour donation of materials shall be at least thirty (30) feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless there is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use;

     12    Containers shall be clearly marked so as to identify the type of material which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers;

     13.   Signs may be provided as follows:

     a.     Recycling facilities may have identification signs with a maximum of twenty (20) percent per side or sixteen (16) square feet, whichever is larger, in addition to information signs required in subsection (B)(12) of this section; in the case of a wheeled facility, the side will be measured from the pavement to the top of the container,

     b.     Signs must be consistent with the character of the location,

     c.     Directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the community development director to facilitate traffic circulation, or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way,

     d.     The community development director may authorize increases in the number and size of signs upon findings that it is compatible with adjacent businesses;

     14.   The facility shall not impair the landscaping required by local ordinances for any concurrent use by this chapter or any permit issued pursuant thereto;

     15.   No additional parking spaces will be required for customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking lot of a host use. One space will be provided for the attendant, if needed;

     16.   Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present;

     17.   Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use unless all of the following conditions exist:

     a.     The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation,

     b.     A parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site,

     c.     The permit will be reconsidered at the end of eighteen (18) months.

     A reduction in available parking spaces in an established parking facility may then be allowed as follows:

     For a commercial host use:

 

Number of Available
Parking Spaces

Maximum Reduction

*0—25

0

26—35

2

36—49

3

50—99

4

100+

5

 

     A maximum five spaces reduction will be allowed for a community facility host use when not in conflict with parking needs of the host use;

     18.   If the permit expires without renewal, the collection facility shall be removed from the site on the day following permit expiration.

     C.     Large collection facility(ies) is one that is larger than five hundred (500) square feet, or is on a separate property not appurtenant to a host use, and which may have a permanent building. A large collection facility is allowed in accordance with Section 17.124.020, provided the facility meets the following standards:

     1.     Facility does not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use;

     2.     Facility will be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building or:

     a.     Within an area enclosed by an opaque fence at least six feet in height with landscaping,

     b.     At least one hundred fifty (150) feet from property zoned or planned for residential use, and

     c.     Meets all applicable noise standards in this title;

     3.     Setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located;

     4.     All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, secured and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the fire chief. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing;

     5.     Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis;

     6.     Space will be provided on site for six vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate and to deposit recyclable materials, except where the planner determines that allowing overflow traffic above six vehicles is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety;

     7.     One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility. Parking requirements will be as provided for in the zone, except that parking requirements for employees may be reduced when it can be shown that parking spaces are not necessary, such as when employees are transported in a company vehicle to a work facility;

     8.     Noise levels shall not exceed sixty (60) dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned property, or otherwise shall not exceed seventy (70) dBA;

     9.     If the facility is located within five hundred (500) feet of property zoned, planned or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in operation between seven p.m. and seven a.m.;

     10.   Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least fifty (50) feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials;

     11.   Donation areas will be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material, and the containers will be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited; facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers;

     12.   Facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; identification and informational signs will meet standards of the zone; and directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the planner, if necessary, to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way;

     13.   Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be approved through a conditional use permit process or at the discretion of the planner if noise and other conditions are met.

     D.    Processing Facilities. A light or heavy processing facility is allowed in accordance with Section 17.124.020, provided that they comply with the following standards:

     1.     Facility does not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use;

     2.     In a commercial or light manufacturing zone, processing facilities will operate in a wholly enclosed building except for incidental storage, or:

     a.     Within an area enclosed on all sides by an opaque fence or wall not less than eight feet in height and landscaped on all street frontages,

     b.     Located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from property zoned or planned for residential use;

     3.     Power-driven processing shall be permitted, provided all noise level requirements are met. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials;

     4.     A light processing facility shall be no larger than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet and shall have no more than an average of two outbound truck shipments of material per day and may not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers;

     5.     A processing facility may accept used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with Section 25250.11 of the California Health and Safety Code and any subsequent amendments thereto;

     6.     Setbacks and landscaping requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located;

     7.     All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures which are covered, secured and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the fire chief. No storage excluding truck trailers and overseas containers will be visible above the height of the fencing;

     8.     Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis and will be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present;

     9.     Space shall be provided on-site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. If the facility is open to the public, space will be provided for a minimum of ten (10) customers or the peak load, whichever is higher, except where the community development director determines that allowing overflow traffic is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety;

     10.   One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing facility. Parking requirements will otherwise be as mandated by the zone in which the facility is located;

     11.   Noise levels shall not exceed sixty (60) dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, or otherwise shall not exceed seventy (70) dBA;

     12.   If the facility is located within five hundred (500) feet of property zoned or planned for residential use, it shall not be in operation between seven p.m. and seven a.m. The facility will be administered by on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open;

     13.   Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least fifty (50) feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use; shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction; shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected; and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials;

     14.   Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. Facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers;

     15.   Sign requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located. In addition, facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation;

     16.   No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odor above ambient level may be detectable on neighboring properties. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 14.4)

 

17.124.050 Allowed uses.
     Title 17 listing allowed uses in commercial, industrial and any other applicable zones is amended to add recycling facilities as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 06-932 § 1, 2006: amended during 12-00 supplementation; zoning ordinance § 14.5)

Chapter 17.128 SIGNS
17.128.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known and designated as the sign ordinance of the city of Susanville. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.1)

 

17.128.020 Purpose.
     The city recognizes the need for signs as a means to identify businesses within the community. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish regulations to ensure that the design and placement of signs meet the needs of the business community as well ensure their continuity, consistency and harmony with the architectural quality of individual developments and with the city as a whole. Through the regulations established in this chapter, it is the intent of the city to ensure the community is attractive to residents, visitors, and commercial, industrial and professional businesses while maintaining economic stability through an attractive sign regulation program designed with the following objectives in mind:

     A.    To direct persons to various activities and enterprises, in order to provide forte maximum public convenience;

     B.     To provide a reasonable system of controls for signs and the development of a high quality visual environment;

     C.     To encourage signs which are well designed and pleasing in appearance and to provide incentive and latitude for uniformity of signs in commercial and industrial developments, good design relationship in scale and spacing;

     D.    To encourage a desirable urban character free of overhead clutter;

     E.     To enhance the economic value of the community and each area thereof through the regulation of such things as size, number, location, design and illumination of signs;

     F.     To encourage signs which are compatible with adjacent land uses;

     G.    To reduce possible traffic hazards through good signing;

     H.    To protect the general health, safety and public welfare. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.2)

 

17.128.030 Generally.
     All signs erected, placed, established, or created, in the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall conform with the standards, procedures, exemptions and other requirements of this chapter. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.3)

 

17.128.040 Definitions.
     Unless otherwise provided, whenever the words or terms listed in this section are used in this chapter, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.

     “Animated sign” means any sign that uses movement or change of lighting, either natural or artificial, to depict action or create a special effect or scene.

     “Banner” means any sign printed or displayed upon cloth or other flexible material, with or without frames.

     “Building frontage” means the length of the building elevations which face upon a road or parking area between the building and the street.

     “Building marker” means any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.

     “Building sign” means any sign that shall be affixed parallel to the wall or printed on the wall of any building in such a manner as to read parallel to the wall on which it is mounted; provided, however, said building sign shall not project above the top of the wall or beyond the end of the building. For the purpose of this chapter, any sign display surface that is affixed flat against the sloping surface of a mansard roof shall be considered a wall sign. Any sign that is affixed to the building marquee, building awning, or a building canopy (not an under-canopy sign) shall be considered a wall sign.

     “Canopy sign” means any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.

     “Commercial message” means any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service, sale or sales event or other commercial activity.

     Directional Sign, Noncommercial. “Noncommercial directional sign” means a sign of a noncommercial nature which directs the reader to the location of public or educational institutions, or to the location of historical structures or areas, or to the location of public parks or buildings.

     “Director” means the community development director of the city or his or her designee.

     “District” or “zoning district” means a section or sections of the incorporated area of the city for which the then effective zoning ordinance governing the use of buildings and land are uniform for each class of use permitted therein.

     “Flashing sign” means an illuminated sign on which artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use.

     “Freestanding sign” means a sign which is attached to or a part of a completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure whether portable or stationary. “Freestanding sign” means any sign permanently supported by one or more uprights, braces, poles or other similar structural components when utilizing earth, rock, the ground or any foundation set in the ground as a primary holding base, and not attached to or enclosed by any building.

     “Ground sign” means a sign placed upon a foundation or a slab and not supported by uprights, beams poles or other similar structural components.

     “Group sign” means a sign which advertises two or more businesses located on the same or two or more zone lots under the same or different ownership.

     “Illuminated sign” means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tube, as long as light and tubes are located within the interior of the sign, as a part of the sign proper.

     “Incidental sign” means a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as “no parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” “telephone,” and other similar directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental. Sometimes also referred to as directional signs.

     “Lot” means any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of record, that is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership.

     Lot, Zone. “Zone lot” means a lot or group of lots in single ownership that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use, and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning regulations.

     “Mansard roof” means any roof that has an angle greater than forty-five (45) degrees and which derives part of its support from the building wall it is attached to (but not necessarily a part thereof) and which extends along the front building wall or along the side building wall.

     “Marquee” means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.

     “Nonconforming sign” means a sign existing on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter became effective that does not meet the requirements of this chapter if it were built on or after said date.

     “Off-site sign” means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction sold, offered, or existing elsewhere than upon the same zone lot where such sign is displayed. Off-site sign does not include outdoor advertising signs (billboards). Off-site sign includes group signs and freestanding signs identifying two or more businesses when located in the same zone district and sharing adjoining zone lots for parking and/or access.

     “On-site sign” means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction sold, offered or existing on the same zone lot where such sign is displayed.

     “Outdoor advertising sign, (billboard)” means a sign other than on off-site sign which advertises a business, products, services rendered or goods produced or sold on property other than which such advertising sign is placed.

     “Political sign” means a placard, banner, sign or other device or medium erected prior to an election to advertise or identify a candidate, campaign issue, election proposition or other related matters. A political sign shall be regulated by those provisions herein pertaining to a “temporary sign,” and to a “window sign.”

     “Principal building (principal structure)” means the building in which is conducted the principal use of the zone lot on which it is located. Zone lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.

     “Projecting sign” means any sign that shall be affixed at an angle or perpendicularly to the wall of any building in such a manner to read perpendicularly or at an angle to the wall on which it is mounted.

     “Real estate sign” means a temporary sign placed upon property for the purpose of advertising to the public the sale, lease, or rental of said property.

     “Roof sign” means any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.

     “Shopping center” means two or more retail stores and/or service establishments, or one retail store and one service establishment, sharing customer parking areas, regardless of whether said stores and/or establishments occupy separate structures or are under separate ownerships.

     “Sign” means and includes every device, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, logo, stroke, stripe, trademark, or reading matter, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information for advertising purposes when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public; in addition, any of the foregoing when not placed out of doors, but which is illuminated with artificial or reflected light, or is located near the inside surface of a window in such a way as to be in view of the general public.

     Sign Area, Computation. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a building sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself.

     Sign Height, Computation. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of (1) existing grade prior to construction or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is lower.

     “Street frontage” means the distance for which a lot line of a zone lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street.

     “Temporary sign” means any sign that is used for a temporary purpose and is not permanently mounted. A temporary sign shall be regulated only by those provisions herein pertaining to a “temporary sign.”  Where “temporary noncommercial sign” appears in this code, it shall have the same meaning as “temporary sign.”

     “Window sign” means any sign, picture(s), symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale or service, that is placed, painted, attached, glued or otherwise affixed to the inside or outside of a window. (Ord. 08-952; Ord. 01-880 §§ 1, 2; Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.5)

 

17.128.050 R-1 low density residential district— R-2 medium density residential district—R-3 high density residential district.
     A.    Signs for single-family residences and/or home occupations are not permitted.

     B.     For uses subject to approval of a use permit: one on-site ground sign per zone lot for each permitted use, provided that no ground sign shall exceed fifty (50) square feet in area (twenty-five (25) square feet per face if double-faced) and forty-two (42) inches in height, except the sign height may be six feet if located thirty-five (35) feet or more from the center of a driveway or a curb return at a street intersection. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.5)

 

17.128.060 C-1 retail commercial district.
     The requirements for signs within the C-1 retail commercial district are as follows:

     A.    Building Signs. Building signs shall not exceed a combined size of one square foot in area for each lineal foot of building frontage.

     B.     Freestanding Signs, On-Site, Off-Site.

     1.     If there is one hundred (100) lineal feet or more of street frontage, one freestanding sign per zone lot, not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size and fifteen (15) feet in height, shall be permitted. For a double-faced sign, each face shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. The sign shall be set back a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the front or street side property line or road right-of-way, and shall be located within a landscaped island equal in area to a minimum of one-half the total sign area of the free-standing sign. A portion of the permitted on-site freestanding sign area may be allocated to combine off-site signs identifying two or more establishments which are located within this district and which share adjoining zone lots for parking and/or access.

     2.     If there is less than one hundred (100) lineal feet of street frontage, one ground sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in size (twenty-five (25) square feet per face if double faced) and forty-two (42) inches in height shall be permitted, except the sign height may be six feet if located thirty-five (35) feet or more from the center of and driveway or a curb return at a street intersection.

     C.     Projecting Signs. If there is no freestanding sign or ground sign on a zone lot pursuant to subsection B of this section, one projecting sign not to exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in size (eighteen (18) square feet per face maximum) shall be permitted. A projecting sign may not project more than six feet from the wall it is constructed on and may not project above the top of the wall. Projecting signs shall have at least eight feet of clearance between the bottom of the sign and the ground. If a sign is proposed to project into a public right-of-way, an encroachment permit shall be obtained prior to installation. No freestanding sign or ground sign shall be allowed on a zone lot with a projecting sign. (Ord. 01-880 § 3; Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.5.4)

 

17.128.070 C-2 general commercial district—C-3 commercial-light manufacturing district—M general industrial district.
     The requirements for signs within the C-2 general commercial district and C-3 commercial-light manufacturing district and M general industrial district are as follows:

     A.    Building Signs. Building signs shall not exceed a combined size of one-and-one-half square foot in area for each lineal foot of building frontage.

     B.     Freestanding Signs, On-Site, Off-Site.

     1.     If there is one hundred (100) lineal feet or more of street frontage, one freestanding sign per zone lot, not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in size and fifteen (15) feet in height, shall be permitted. For a double-faced sign, each face shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet. The sign shall be set back a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the front or street side property line or road right-of-way, and shall be located within a landscaped island equal in area to a minimum of one-half the total sign area of the freestanding sign. A portion of the permitted on-site freestanding sign area may be allocated to combine off-site signs identifying two or more establishments which are located within this district and which share adjoining zone lots for parking and/or access. An additional freestanding sign, with the same size and height restrictions, is permitted if there is three hundred (300) feet of street frontage.

     2.     If there is less than one hundred (100) lineal feet of street frontage, one ground sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in size (twenty-five (25) square feet per face if double faced) and forty-two (42) inches in height shall be permitted, except the sign height may be six feet if located thirty-five (35) feet or more from the center of and driveway or a curb return at a street intersection.

     C.     Projecting Sign. If there is no freestanding sign or ground sign on a zone lot pursuant to subsection B of this section, one projecting sign not to exceed thirty (30)  square feet in size (fifteen (15) square feet per face maximum) shall be permitted A projecting sign may not project more than five feet from the wall it is constructed on and may not project above the top of the wall. Projecting signs shall have at least eight feet of clearance between the sign and the ground. If a sign is proposed to project into a public right-of-way, an encroachment permit shall be obtained prior to installation. No freestanding sign or ground sign shall be

 

allowed on a zone lot with a projecting sign. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.5.5)

 

17.128.080 A agricultural district.
     The requirements for signs within the A agricultural district are as follows:

     On-Site Sign. One sign not over twenty (20) square feet in area pertaining to the principal use of the property. If said sign is a freestanding sign, the maximum height of the sign shall be twelve (12) feet. An additional sign, with the same size and height restrictions, is permitted if there is over five hundred (500) feet of street frontage. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.5.6)

 

17.128.090 U unclassified district.
     Signs shall be of the same quantity, size, and type as signs permitted in the zone district consistent with the general plan for the subject area unless otherwise specified in a use permit. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.5.7)

 

17.128.100 OS open space district.
     The requirements for signs within the OS open space district are as follows:

     On-Site Sign. One Sign not over twenty (20) square feet in area pertaining to the principal use of the property. If said sign is a freestanding sign, the maximum height of the sign shall be twelve (12) feet. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.5.8)

 

17.128.110 PD planned development district.
     Signs shall be of the same quantity, size and type as signs permitted for the use in its respective district unless otherwise specified in the development plan. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.5.9)

 

17.128.120 I institutional district.
     The requirements for signs within the I institutional district are as follows:

     A.    Building Signs (On-Site). Building signs shall not exceed a combined size of one square foot in area for each lineal foot of building frontage.

     B.     Freestanding Signs, On-Site, Off-Site.

     1.     If there is one hundred (100) lineal feet or more of street frontage, one freestanding sign per zone lot, not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size and fifteen (15) feet in height, shall be permitted. For a double-faced sign, each face shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. The sign shall be set back a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the front or street side property line or road right-of-way, and shall be located within a landscaped island equal in area to a minimum of one-half the total sign area of the free-standing sign. A portion of the permitted on-site freestanding sign area may be allocated to combine off-site signs identifying two or more establishments which are located within this district and which share adjoining zone lots for parking and/or access.

     2.     If there is less than one hundred (100) lineal feet of street frontage, one ground sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in size (twenty-five (25) square feet per face if double faced) and forty-two (42) inches in height shall be permitted, except the sign height may be six feet if located thirty-five (35) feet or more from the center of and driveway or a curb return at a street intersection.

     C.     Projecting Signs. If there is no freestanding sign or ground sign on a zone lot pursuant to subsection B of this section, one projecting sign not to exceed thirty (30) square feet in size (fifteen (15) square feet per face maximum) shall be permitted. A projecting sign may not project more than five feet from the wall it is constructed on and may not project above the top of the wall. Projecting signs shall have at least eight feet of clearance between the sign and the ground. If a sign is proposed to project into a public right-of-way, an encroachment permit shall be obtained prior to installation. No freestanding sign or ground sign shall be allowed on a zone lot with a projecting sign. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.6.1)

 

17.128.130 General on-site sign standards.
     In addition to the sign requirements specified for individual districts, the following shall also apply for each district:

     A.    Other Signs Permitted. In addition to the signs permitted in individual districts, the following signs are permitted in all districts unless otherwise indicated by this section:

     1.     Under-Canopy Signs (On-Site). In any commercial or industrial district, an under-canopy sign may be permitted with a sign permit for each business, provided it shall not exceed five feet in length and one foot in height. Under-canopy signs shall be located perpendicular to the face of the building under the canopy, and shall have a minimum eight-foot clearance between the bottom of the sign and the sidewalk or other pedestrian way.

     2.     Gasoline Price Signs. Gasoline price signs shall be allowed on freestanding signs with a sign permit if made integral with the design of the freestanding sign or placed on-site as per state law.

     3.     Signs in the Public Right-of-Way. No sign shall be allowed in the public right-of-way unless an encroachment permit is issued by the department of public works.

     B.     Exempt Signs. The following signs shall be exempt from the application, permit and fee requirements of this chapter. An electrical or building permit may, however, be required under this chapter:

     1.     Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance.

     2.     Window signs may be permitted in any commercial or industrial district without a sign permit if the signs are placed entirely within the building. Signs may also be painted without a permit on the interior or exterior surfaces of windows or doors. None shall be permitted above the ground floor.

     3.     Works of art that do not include a commercial message, such as a mural on the side of a building; provided, however, murals are regulated at Chapter 12.28 of this code.

     4.     Holiday lights and decorations, including decorations on windows, are not construed as signs.

     5.     Incidental and traffic control signs on private property, such as stop, yield, and similar signs, the face of which meets city standards and which contain no commercial message of any sort.

     6.     Building address markers or name of property owners or tenants.

     7.     Real estate signs for sale or lease of residential property are permitted uses provided there are not more than two signs per zone lot, each sign not to exceed six square feet in area and not more than six feet in height. If there are five or more lots for sale, one real estate sign, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and ten feet in height shall be permitted.

     8.     Real estate signs for sale or lease of industrial or commercial property are permitted provided there are not more than one sign per street frontage not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area to advertise the sale, lease or rent of such property. No such sign shall exceed eight feet in overall height and shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet from any property line. Where a property has in excess of six hundred (600) lineal feet of frontage, an additional sign for every six hundred (600) lineal feet is allowed.

     9.     Contractor or construction sign: one directory sign shall be permitted on the construction site for all contractors (may include bank, realtors, subcontractors, etc.) not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet unless legally required by government contracts to be larger. No sign shall exceed eight feet in overall height and shall be located no less than ten (10) feet from any property line. Such sign shall be removed upon completion of the project.

     10.   Future Tenant Identification Sign. Future tenant identification signs may be placed on vacant or developing property to advertise the future use of the property and where this information may be obtained. Such signs shall be limited to one per parcel and to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight feet in overall height. Further, such signs shall be placed no less than ten (10) feet from any property line. Any such sign shall be removed upon completion of the project.

     11.   Signs of public utility companies indicating danger or which serve as an aid to public safety, or which show locations of underground facilities or public telephones.

     12.   Safety Signs on Construction Sites.

     13.   Sandwich board signs two feet wide by three feet in height or less. Said signs shall be located near the curb, shall not obstruct pedestrian movement on the sidewalk and shall not obstruct traffic movement/sight distance at intersections.

     C.     Color, Lighting and Noise. The following color, lighting and noise requirements shall apply to all signs allowed by this chapter:

     1.     No blinking, flashing, rotating, revolving or animated signs, or signs that change color or intensity or emit odors, fluids, noise, smoke, etc., shall be permitted on the exterior of any building, except that a portion of a sign used to display time, date or weather information may contain blinking or flashing information related thereto.

     2.     Lights used to illuminate signs or advertising structures shall be installed so as to concentrate the illumination on the sign or advertising structure and minimize glare or direct illumination upon a public street or adjacent property.

     3.     No red, green or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such positions that they could reasonably be expected to interfere with or be confused with an official traffic control device or traffic signal or official directional guide signs.

     D.    Placement on Buildings.

     1.     Roof signs shall not be permitted in any zone.

     2.     All building signs projecting more than twelve (12) inches from the building face, wall or canopy upon which it is displayed shall have at least eight feet of clearance between the sign and the ground.

     E.     Location Requirements.

 

     1.     There shall be no lighted, freestanding sign within fifty (50) feet of a residential district.

     2.     No sign shall be permitted in or over a public right-of-way without first obtaining an encroachment permit. Any such sign shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet above such right-of-way.

     F.     Exceptions. Exceptions may be made to the size, height, location and numbers of signs as specified in any district, or this section, if a use permit is approved by the planning commission. The burden of proof to justify an exception shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that practical difficulties or hardships would otherwise be caused and the exception applied for is the most suitable and effective in relation to the location or terrain of the site or from the standpoint of the intended viewer. (Ord. 01-880 § 4; Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.7)

 

17.128.140 Sign permits to construct or modify signs.
     No sign shall be erected, installed, created or modified without a duly issued and valid sign permit unless otherwise provided for by this chapter. If this chapter allows a sign without a sign permit or exempts a sign from this chapter, such sign is allowed without prior permit approval. In addition to a sign permit, when a building permit is required by the city’s adopted building code, said building permit must be obtained prior to erection, installation, or creation. Such permits shall be issued in accordance with the following:

     A.    Permit for New Sign or for Sign Modification. An application for construction, creation or installation of a new sign or for modification of an existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to show the dimensions, design, structure, and location of each particular sign. One application and permit may include multiple signs on the same zone lot.

     B.     Expiration of Permits. Any permit granted in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall expire within one hundred eighty (180) days following date of issuance, the building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days on request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the applicants control have prevented completion. No application shall be extended more than once. In order to renew an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit and pay new permit fees. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.8)

 

17.128.150 Fees.
     Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by payment of the applicable fees, which shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.9)

 

17.128.160 Temporary noncommercial signs.
     A.    All temporary noncommercial signs shall comply with the following:

     1.     Permission Required. Such temporary signs may be erected or placed on private property or in the public right-of-way, consistent with integrity and location of state and federal utilities, and provided that the permission of the owner or tenant in possession of that property or the owner or tenant in possession of that property immediately adjacent to the public right-of-way where the sign is placed, is first obtained. Said signs shall not require a sign permit and shall be allowed in all zone districts.

     2.     Temporary signs are not allowed on public property.

     3.     Temporary signs shall not be placed on, attached to, or placed to interfere with utility poles, street trees, traffic control devices, fire hydrants, meter boxes, utility poles, private or publicly owned signs, street pavement, paved or unpaved public walkways or median strips between traffic lanes.

     4.     Public Safety. Temporary signs shall also not obstruct pedestrians or motorists’ view of oncoming or crossing vehicular or pedestrian traffic at street intersections, alleys and driveways.

     5.     Term. A temporary sign shall be removed no later than ninety (90) days after it is erected, or ten (10) days following the date of the event, campaign, promotion, election or other activity to which the sign pertains, whichever first occurs. Consecutive periods are not allowed.

     6.     Sign Removal Required. The owner of a temporary sign shall be responsible for its removal. Should the owner of the temporary sign fail to remove the sign within the time requirements of this section and should the sign be on private property not belonging to the owner of the sign or in the public right-of-way it shall be the responsibility of the owner or tenant in possession and who granted permission for placement to the owner of the sign to remove the sign within the time requirements of this section.

     7.     Removal for Noncompliance. The city reserves the right to remove any sign that does not comply with this section.

     B.     All temporary noncommercial signs on private property shall comply with the following:

     1.     Temporary signs, other than those within the public right-of-way, shall not exceed the size limits set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 5405.3 which is that such a sign shall be no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet in size. Such temporary sign shall not be placed within the right-of-way of any highway.

     C.     All temporary noncommercial signs in the public right-of-way shall comply with the following:

     1.     Temporary signs, any portion of which are located within the public right of way, shall be limited in size to four square feet and shall not exceed three feet in height from the highest point on the ground on which the sign is placed to the top of the sign and be limited to one sign per candidate per fifty (50) feet of roadside linear footage. (Ord. 08-952; Ord. 01-880 § 5: Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.10)

 

17.128.170 Nonconforming signs—Continuance of existing signs.
     A.    All signs, billboards or commercial advertising structures within the city which existed prior to October 17. 1998, the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and on said date failed to conform to the requirements of this chapter as it existed on that date, may be continued in place; provided, however, that if any repair or modification is made to any such nonconforming sign, billboard or commercial advertising structure other than change of copy, which exceeds one-half the replacement value thereof, such sign, billboard or commercial advertising structure shall at that time be made to conform with the requirements of this chapter.

     B.     The replacement value of a sign for purposes of this section shall be the full cost of replacement of such sign at the same site with new materials of like kind and quality without deduction for depreciation. Said valuation shall be based on a reasonable cost estimate established by the building official. Time of Compliance: Nonconforming Signs and Signs Without Permits. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.11)

 

17.128.180 Appeal process.
     The decision of the planning director shall be final unless appealed to the planning commission within ten (10) calendar days. Such an appeal may be made by the applicant, any member of the city council or any other interested person.

     A.    An appeal of a planning director decision shall be made in the following manner:

     1.     Filing with the planning department a completed application for appeal;

     2.     Payment of the appropriate appeal fee.

     B.     After accepting an application for appeal, the planning department shall set a date for the planning commission to hear the appeal within thirty (30) days following acceptance of the application. Notices of the appeal shall be given to the applicant and the appellant.

     C.     The planning director shall submit a report to the planning commission containing the reasons for the director’s decision.

     D.    The planning commission shall hear the appeal and make its own determination regarding the application and its consistency with this title. Upon such determination, the planning commission shall uphold, modify or reverse the planning director’s decision.

     E.     The planning commission’s determination may be appealed to the city council per the procedure established above except no additional fee is required. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.12)

 

17.128.190 Enforcement.
     It shall be the responsibility of the city’s code enforcement officer to enforce all the provisions of this chapter. Signs installed which do not conform with the provisions of this chapter will be considered a zoning violation and enforcement proceedings will be initiated by the code enforcement officer. Additionally, illegal signs placed within the public right-of-way or on public property may be summarily abated by the city and held, pending notification of the owner by the city. The owner may obtain the sign from the city upon payment to the city of any storage and removal charge that may have been incurred by the city. (Amended during 12-00 supplementation; Ord. 98-852 § 1(C); zoning ordinance § 16.13)


