CITY OF SHASTA LAKE - MUNICIPAL CODE 1998 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Shasta Lake, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 8, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
> 
PREFACE 
The Shasta Lake, California, Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1998, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 8, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of the city attorney. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 8, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance Number 18-273, passed March 5, 2018. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 8, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 8, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 8, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 8, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 8, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
There is adopted the "City of Shasta Lake Municipal Code," as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 98-107 § 1)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "Municipal Code," and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the City of Shasta Lake Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision of this code or in any proceeding at law or equity. It is sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion of this code as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "City of Shasta Lake Municipal Code." References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "City of Shasta Lake Municipal Code." References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "City of Shasta Lake Municipal Code," and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they may appear in the code. 
(Ord. 98-107 § 2)  
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "City of Shasta Lake Municipal Code," or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Shasta Lake codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 98-107 § 3)  
1.01.040 - Title, chapter, and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section in this code. 
(Ord. 98-107 § 4)  
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number, and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 98-107 § 5)  
1.01.060 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance CC98-102, passed January 20, 1998. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance CC98-102, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances CC98-103 through CC98-106. 
(Ord. 98-107 § 6)  
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 98-107 § 7)  
1.01.080 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. 98-107 § 8)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Shasta Lake, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
"City" means the city of Shasta Lake, or the area within the territorial limits of the city, and such territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
"Council" means the city council of the city of Shasta Lake. "All its members" or "all councilmembers" means the total number of councilmembers holding office. 
"County" means the county of Shasta. 
"Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
"May" is permissive. 
"Month" means a calendar month. 
"Must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
"Oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
"Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
"Person" includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
"Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
"Preceding" and "following" means next before and next after, respectively. 
"Property" includes real and personal property. 
"Real property" includes land, tenements and hereditaments. 
"Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
"Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
"Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
"Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 97-82 § 1)  
1.04.020 - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 97-82 § 2)  
1.04.030 - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
A.  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neutral genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Ord. 97-82 § 3)  
1.04.040 - Acts by agents. 
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 97-82 § 4)  
1.04.050 - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 97-82 § 5)  
1.04.060 - Computation of time. 
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 97-82 § 6)  
1.04.070 - Construction. 
The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 97-82 § 7)  
1.04.080 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 97-82 § 8)  
Chapter 1.08 - CORPORATE SEAL 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - Established. 
The seal used by and for the city, the inscription on which, on the upper portion thereof, is the "City of," and the central portion thereof the words and figures "Founded July 2, 1993," and, on the lower portion thereof, is "Shasta Lake," and shall be and is established, adopted and declared to be the official seal of the city. 
(Ord. 93-06 § 1)  
Chapter 1.12 - ADOPTION OF SHASTA COUNTY AND SHASTA DAM AREA PUBLIC UTILITY DISTRICT CODES 
Sections: 
 
1.12.010 - Continuation of county ordinances and Shasta Dam Area Public Utility District Code. 
All ordinances of the county of Shasta applicable before incorporation and all of the Shasta Dam Area Public Utility District Codes shall remain in full force and effect until this section is repealed or the city of Shasta Lake enacts an ordinance superseding the ordinances of the county of Shasta or the Shasta Dam Area Public Utility District Code. 
(Ord. 96-71 § 1)  
1.12.020 - Continuation of county resolutions, rules and regulations. 
All resolutions, rules and regulations of the county of Shasta which have been applicable to implementation of the aforesaid ordinances of the county of Shasta and the Shasta Dam Area Public Utility District to the extent that they applied before incorporation shall remain in full force and effect as resolutions, rules and regulation, respectively, of the city of Shasta Lake. 
(Ord. 93-01 § 2)  
1.12.030 - Declaration of intent. 
Certain provisions of the county and public utility district enactments referred to in Sections 1.12.010 and 1.12.020 of this chapter reflect the county or public utility district governmental structure and contain references to officials, official titles, commissions, and other designations which are not a part of the structure of this city's government. In order to effectively and intelligently administer the county and public utility district enactments to the extent that they are continued in effect by this chapter, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the substitution of the appropriate city official, title, or designation in county enactments. 
In the event of a conflict or dispute regarding the applicability of a county or public utility district ordinance or resolution, rule or regulation the city manager will make a recommendation concerning applicability and the final decision will be made by the city council. 
(Ord. 93-01 § 3)  
1.12.040 - Amendments. 
The following amendments are made to the county of Shasta ordinances and Shasta Dam Area Public Utility District's Code referenced herein: 
A.  Whenever "board of supervisors" or "board" or whenever "board of directors" is used in the code or ordinance, it means the Shasta Lake city council. 
B.  Whenever "district" is used in the ordinance, it means the geographical limits of the city of Shasta Lake unless a different geographical area is clearly indicated by the context. 
C.  Whenever "county," "county of Shasta," "district," "Shasta Dam Area Public Utility District," or "unincorporated territory of the county of Shasta" is used, it means the city of Shasta Lake. 
(Ord. 93-01 § 4)  
1.12.050 - Enforcement of continuing county ordinances. 
The enforcement of the county ordinances continuing in effect in the incorporated area shall be by the city except insofar as services of enforcement are furnished by the county in accordance with Government Code Section 57384. 
(Ord. 93-01 § 6)  
1.12.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of the codes adopted in this chapter. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any provisions of said codes or failing to comply with any of their requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense of each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of the provisions of said codes is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm, partnership or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefore as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-01 § 9)  
1.12.070 - Civil remedies available. 
The violation of any of the provisions of any of the Codes adopted in this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city of Shasta Lake through civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. 
(Ord. 93-01 § 10)  
Chapter 1.16 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
1.16.010 - Penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any requirement of this code. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless the events are specifically classified in this code or by state law as an infraction, or the charge is reduced to an infraction, in which case the person shall be guilty of an infraction. 
B.  Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
C.  Any person convicted of an infraction of the provisions of this code, unless provision is otherwise made in this code, shall be punishable upon first conviction by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
D.  Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he or she shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. 04-159: Ord. 97-83 § 1)  
Chapter 1.17 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION 
 
1.17.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council hereby finds that there is a need for an alternative method of code enforcement to the traditional civil, criminal or administrative abatement actions, to effect compliance with the city code, its adopted codes and applicable state codes. The city council further finds that an appropriate alternative method of enforcement for code violations is an administrative citation program as authorized by Government Code Section 53069.4. 
The procedures established in this chapter will be in addition to criminal, civil or administrative abatement or any other legal remedy established by law, which may be pursued to address violations of the city code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes. 
Use of this chapter will be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 1, 6-6-2017)  
1.17.020 - Definitions. 
"Administrative citation" means the written notice provided to a responsible person to inform that person of a violation of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes. 
"Enforcement officer" means any officer or employee of the city, including his or her designee, with the authority to enforce this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes. 
"Hearing officer" means the hearing officer appointed by the city council. The hearing officer may be a city employee, but in that event the hearing officer shall not have had any responsibility for the investigation, prosecution or enforcement of this chapter and shall not have had any personal involvement in the proceeding to be heard within the past twelve (12) months or possess any disqualifying interest in the outcome of the proceeding. 
"Non-emergency health or safety violation" means a violation of any building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning ordinance which does not create an immediate danger to health or safety. 
"Responsible person" shall mean either of the following: 
1.  Any individual or legal entity who is the owner, tenant, co-tenant, lessee, sub-lessee, occupant or other person with any right to possession of the real property, owner or authorized agent of any business, company or entity, who causes, permits or maintains a violation of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes. 
2.  Any individual, legal entity or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, who causes, permits or maintains a violation of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 1, 6-6-2017)  
1.17.030 - Authority. 
A.  Any responsible person violating any provision of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes will be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this chapter. A violation of this code includes, but is not limited to, all violations of this code, the uniform codes adopted by the city council, or failure to comply with any condition imposed by any entitlement, permit, agreement or environmental document issued or approved under the provisions of this code. 
B.  Each and every day or portion thereof that a violation of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
C.  A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by an enforcement officer and shall be payable directly to the city. 
D.  Except where otherwise provided in this code, fines shall be assessed in the amounts specified by resolution of the city council, or where no amount is specified, fines shall be assessed in an amount not exceeding: 
1.  One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, per section 1.17.06 of this chapter; 
2.  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second, or continuance of the same violation, of the same provision (other than a building and safety code provision) within one year, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a violation of a building and safety code provision; 
3.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third, or continuance violation of the same provision (other than a building and safety code provision) within one year and one thousand ($1,000.00) for a violation of a building and safety code provision; 
4.  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional, or continuance of the same violation of a building and safety code provision. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 1, 6-6-2017)  
1.17.040 - Service procedures. 
The enforcement officer will endeavor to elicit voluntary compliance. In the case of non-compliance, an administrative citation form will be issued to the responsible person by the enforcement officer for violations of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes in the following manner: 
A.  Personal Service. The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and, if possible, obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation. If the served responsible person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings. 
B.  Service of Citation by Mail. 
1.  If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the administrative citation may be sent by first class mail. 
2.  Service by mail will be sent to the responsible person's address as shown on public records or as known to the city. If the administrative citation is sent by certified mail and returned receipt is unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective by first class mail, provided the administrative citation sent by the first class mail is not returned. 
3.  Service of the administrative citation shall be deemed effective five (5) days following deposit of such citation in the U.S. mail. 
C.  Service of Citation by Posting Notice. 
1.  If the enforcement officer does not succeed in serving the responsible person personally or by certified or first class mail, the enforcement officer will post the administrative citation in a conspicuous location on any real properly within the city in which the city has knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest. 
2.  Posting of the administrative citation shall be deemed effective service as of the date that the citation is actually posted. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 1, 6-6-2017)  
1.17.050 - Contents of notice. 
Each administrative citation will contain the following information: 
A.  Date, approximate time and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed; 
B.  The code section(s) or condition(s) violated and a description of the violation(s); 
C.  A description of the action required to correct the violation(s); 
D.  An order to the responsible person to correct the violation(s) by a correction date and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s); 
E.  The amount of the fine for the violation(s); 
F.  An explanation of how the fine shall be paid, the deadline by which it shall be paid, and the place to which the fine shall be paid; 
G.  An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation(s) described in the administrative citation; 
H.  Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place to obtain a notice of appeal and request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation; and 
I.  The name and signature of the enforcement officer and, if possible, the signature of the responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 1, 6-6-2017)  
1.17.060 - Satisfaction of administrative citation. 
A.  Upon receipt of an administrative citation, the responsible person shall do the following: 
1.  Remedy the violation(s) if the violation(s) is of such a nature that it can be remedied. If a non-emergency health or safety violation(s) is corrected before the correction date provided on the administrative citation, no fine will be imposed. 
2.  Pay the fine to the city within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date on the administrative citation. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city; 
B.  If the responsible person fails to correct the violation(s) set forth in the administrative citation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at the rate specified in section 1.17.030. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 1, 6-6-2017)  
1.17.070 - Appeal of administrative citation. 
A.  Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of this code or that he or she is the responsible person by completing a notice of appeal and request for hearing form and filing it with the city clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of issuance of the administration citation, together with an advance deposit of the total amount of the fine, or the timely filing of a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver form pursuant to section 1.17.080. Any administrative citation fine, which has been deposited, shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation(s) or that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. 
B.  In addition to the requirements listed in section 1.17.070, any appeal of the administrative citation shall include a detailed written explanation as to the grounds for appeal of the administrative citation. Any appeal shall be limited to such written grounds. 
C.  Appeals of administrative citations will be conducted pursuant to the following procedures: 
1.  A hearing will be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) days and not more than ninety (90) days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  At the hearing, the party contesting the administrative citation will be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence concerning the administrative citation. 
3.  The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
4.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the citation prior to issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 1, 6-6-2017)  
1.17.080 - Advance deposit hardship waiver. 
A.  Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest an administrative citation and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver form, available from the city clerk. 
B.  The request shall be filed with the city clerk within five (5) business days of the date of the issuance of the administrative citation. 
C.  The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fine, as described in section 1.17.030, shall be stayed unless or until the city manager makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. 
D.  The city manager may waive the requirement for advance deposit only if the cited party submits to the city manager a declaration under penalty of perjury supported by evidence that shows to the city manager's reasonable satisfaction that such party is financially unable to deposit the total amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. 
E.  If the city manager determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the cited party shall remit the deposit to the city within five (5) days of the date of that decision or fifteen (15) days from the date of issuance of the administrative citation, whichever is later. 
F.  The city manager shall list his/her reasons for granting or not granting an advance deposit hardship waiver in writing and serve it on the cited party. The city manager's decision is final. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 1, 6-6-2017)  
1.17.090 - Hearing officer's decision. 
A.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the city will retain the fine amount on deposit with the city. 
B.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the hearing officer will set a fine payment schedule for the payment of the fine. 
C.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the city, then the city will promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 1, 6-6-2017)  
1.17.100 - Failure to pay fines. 
A.  The failure of any person to pay the civil fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the matter being referred to the city attorney to file a claim with the applicable court. Alternatively, the city may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the civil fines, including, but not limited to, a lien pursuant to section 8.18.070 or special assessment pursuant to section 8.18.080. 
B.  Any person who fails to pay to the city any fine imposed pursuant to this chapter on or before the date that fine is due also shall be liable for the payment of a onetime late payment charge in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), plus interest at the maximum rate permitted by law. 
C.  The payment of any administrative fine shall not excuse or otherwise provide any defense to the continued violation of any provision of this code. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 1, 6-6-2017)  
1.17.110 - Notices. 
A.  The administrative citation and all notices to be given by this chapter shall be served on the responsible person in accordance with the provisions of section 1.17.040. 
B.  Failure to receive actual notice specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 1, 6-6-2017)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Established. 
The city council shall be the legislative body with exclusive and original jurisdiction to interpret and govern all matters described and/or set forth within the city of Shasta Lake interim general plan and all ordinances, resolutions, codes, and other regulatory directives adopted previously by this council by reference, or currently applicable to any activity, event, request, forbearance and/or issue raised of any nature within the boundaries of the city of Shasta Lake. 
(Ord. 93-13)  
2.04.020 - Compensation and benefits for city council members. 
Each member of the city council shall be entitled to a stipend (salary) and benefits as follows: 
A.  Each member shall receive a stipend of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month; 
B.  The city shall pay on behalf of each member the federal social security payments; 
C.  Each city council member shall be eligible to participate in the health, welfare and retirement programs of the city with the premium payments at or below the amount afforded to management employees. 
(Ord. 06-176 § 1: Ord. 06-172 § 1: Ord. 02-144 § 1: Ord. 93-10 § 1)  
2.04.030 - Meetings. 
Regular meetings of the city council of the city of Shasta Lake shall be held, without further notice, at such location as specified by resolution establishing the day, time, or location for meetings of the city council. 
(Ord. 97-80 § 1: Ord. 93-07 § 1)  
2.04.040 - Conduct of meetings. 
A.  All meetings will be conducted and all business carried out during the course of all meetings in accordance with all applicable city, county, state, and federal laws and regulations to the best ability of the city council members. 
B.  All meetings will be conducted in accordance with the following rules of conduct: 
1.  Obtaining the Floor. Any member of the council wishing to speak must first obtain the floor by being recognized by the chair. The chair must recognize any council member who seeks the floor when appropriately entitled to do so. 
2.  Motions. The mayor or any member of the council may bring a matter of business before the council by making a motion. Before the matter can be considered or debated, it must be seconded. Once the motion has been properly made and seconded, the chair shall open the matter for debate offering the first opportunity to debate to the moving party and, thereafter, to any council member properly recognized by the chair. Once the matter has been fully debated and the chair calls for a vote, no further debate will be allowed, provided however, council members may be allowed to explain their vote. 
3.  Voting. All council members present at a meeting when a question comes up for a vote, shall vote for or against the measure unless he or she is disqualified from voting and abstains because of such disqualification. If the vote is a voice vote, the chair shall declare the result and note for the record all "aye" votes and all "no" votes. The council may also vote by roll call vote, ballot or voting machine. Regardless of the manner of voting, the results reflecting all "ayes" and "noes" must be clearly set forth for the record. 
4.  Procedural Rules of Order. Once the main motion is properly placed on the floor, several related motions may be employed in addressing the main motion. These motions take precedence over the main motion, and if properly made and seconded, must be disposed of before the main motion can be acted upon. The following motions are appropriate and may be made by the mayor or any council member at any appropriate time during the discussion of the main motion. They are listed in order of precedence. The first three subsidiary motions are nondebatable; the last four are debatable. 
a.  Lay on the Table. Any council member may move to lay the matter under discussion on the table. This motion temporarily suspends any further discussion of the pending motion without setting a time certain to resume the debate. It must be moved and seconded and passed by a majority vote. In order to bring the matter back before the council, a member must move that the matter be taken from the table, seconded, and passed by a majority. A motion to take from the table must be made at the same meeting at which it was placed on the table or at the next regular meeting of the council. Otherwise the motion that was tabled dies, although it can be raised later as a new motion. 
b.  Move Previous Question. Any council member may move to immediately bring the question being debated by the council to a vote, suspending any further debate. The motion must be made and seconded without interrupting one who already has the floor. 
c.  Limit or Extend Limits of Debate. Any council member may move to put limits on the length of debate. The motion must be made and seconded and requires two-thirds vote of the council to pass. 
d.  Postpone to a Time Certain. Any council member may move to postpone the pending question to a time certain. This motion continues the pending main motion to a future date as determined by the council at the time the motion is passed. The motion must be seconded and requires a majority vote for passage. 
e.  Commit or Refer. Any council member may move that the matters being discussed should be referred to a committee or commission for further study. The motion must be seconded and requires a majority vote for passage. The motion may contain directions for the committee or commission, as well as a date upon which the matter will be returned to the council's agenda. If no date is set for returning the item to the council agenda, any council member may move, at any time, to require the item be returned to the agenda. The motion must be seconded and a majority vote is required for passage if the item is to come back at a future date certain. 
f.  Amend. Any council member may amend the main motion or any amendment made to the main motion. Before the main motion may be acted upon, all amendments and amendments to amendments must first be acted upon. A motion to amend must be seconded and requires a majority vote for passage. An amendment must be related to the main motion or amendment to which it is directed. Any amendment which substitutes a new motion rather than amending the existing motion is out of order and may be so declared by the chair. 
g.  Postpone Indefinitely. Any council member may move to postpone indefinitely the motion on the floor, thus avoiding a direct vote on the pending motion and suspending any further action on the matter. The motion must be seconded and requires a majority vote for passage. 
(Res. 93-45 § 1)  
2.04.050 - Motions of privilege, order and convenience. 
The following actions by the council are to insure orderly conduct of meetings and for the convenience of the mayor and council members. These motions take precedence over any pending main or subsidiary motion and may or may not be debated as noted. 
A.  Call for Orders of the Day. Any council member may demand that the agenda be followed in the order stated therein. No second is required and the chair must comply unless the council, by two-thirds vote, sets aside the orders of the day. 
B.  Question of Privilege. Any council member, at any time during the meeting, may make a request of the chair to accommodate the needs of the council or his or her personal needs for such things as reducing noise, adjust air conditioning, ventilation, lighting, etc. Admissibility of question is ruled on by the chair. 
C.  Recess. Any council member may move for a recess. The motion must be seconded and a majority vote is required for passage. The motion is debatable. 
D.  Adjourn. Any council member may move to adjourn at any time, even if there is business pending. The motion must be seconded and a majority vote is required for passage. The motion is not debatable. 
E.  Point of Order. Any council member may require the chair to enforce the rules of the council by raising a point of order. The point of order shall be ruled upon by the chair. 
F.  Appeal. Should any council member be dissatisfied with a ruling from the chair, he or she may move to appeal the ruling to the full council. The motion must be seconded to put it before the council. A majority vote in the negative or a tie vote sustains the ruling of the chair. The motion is debatable and the chair may participate in the debate. 
G.  Suspend the Rules. Any council member may move to suspend the rules if necessary to accomplish a matter that would otherwise violate the rules. The motion requires a second and a two-thirds vote is required for passage. 
H.  Division of Question. Any council member may move to divide the subject matter of a motion which is made up of several parts in order to vote separately on each part. The motion requires a second and a majority vote for passage. This motion may also be applied to complex ordinances or resolutions. 
I.  Reconsider. Except for votes regarding matters which are quasi-judicial in nature or matters which require a noticed public hearing, the council may reconsider any vote taken at the same session, but no later than the same or next calendar day, to correct inadvertent or precipitant errors, or consider new information not available at the time of the vote. The motion to reconsider must be made by a council member who voted on the prevailing side, must be seconded and requires a majority vote for passage, regardless of the vote required to adopt the motion being reconsidered. If the motion to reconsider is successful, the matter to be reconsidered takes no special precedence over other pending matters and any special voting requirements related thereto still apply. Except pursuant to a motion to reconsider, once a matter has been determined and voted upon, the same matter cannot be brought up again at the same meeting. 
J.  Rescind, Repeal or Annul. The council may rescind, repeal or annul any prior action taken with reference to any legislative matter so long as the action to rescind, repeal or annul complies with all the rules applicable to the initial adoption, including any special voting or notice requirements or unless otherwise specified by law. 
K.  Authority of the Chair. Subject to appeal, the chair shall have the authority to prevent the misuse of the legitimate form of motions, or the abuse of privilege of renewing certain motions, to obstruct the business of the council by ruling such motions out of order. In so ruling, the chair shall be courteous and fair, and should presume that the moving party is making the motion in good faith. 
(Res. 93-45 § 2)  
2.04.060 - Public hearings. 
Matters which are required to be heard at a noticed public hearing shall be conducted in the following manner. 
A.  Time for Consideration. Matters noticed to be heard by the council shall commence at the time specified in the notice of hearing, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably possible, and shall continue until the same has been completed or until other disposition of the matter has been made. 
B.  Continuance of Hearings. Any hearing being held or noticed or ordered to be held by the council at any meeting of the council may, by order or notice of continuance, be continued or re-continued to any subsequent meeting in the manner provided herein for adjourned meetings; provided, that if the hearing is continued to a time less than twenty-four (24) hours after the time specified in the order of notice of hearing, a copy of the order or notice of continuance of hearing shall be posted immediately following the meeting at which the order or notice of continuance was adopted or made. 
C.  Public Discussion at Hearings. When a matter for public hearing comes before the council, the mayor shall open the public hearing. Upon opening the public hearing and before any motion is adopted related to the merits of the issue to be heard, the mayor shall inquire if there are any persons present who desire to speak on the matter which is to be heard or to present evidence respecting the matter. Any person desiring to speak or present evidence shall make his or her presence known to the mayor and upon being recognized by the mayor, the person may speak or present evidence relevant to the matter being heard. No person may speak without first being recognized by the mayor. Members of the council who wish to ask questions of the speakers or each other, during the public hearing portion may do so but only after first being recognized by the mayor. The mayor shall conduct the meeting in such a manner as to afford due process. 
All persons interested in the matter being heard by council shall be entitled to submit written evidence or remarks, as well as other graphic evidence. All such evidence presented shall be retained by the city clerk as part of the clerk's record. Time limits may be established by the council, limiting the duration of presentations as set forth in these rules. No person shall be permitted during the hearing, to speak about matters or present evidence which are not germane to the matter being considered. A determination of relevance shall be made by the mayor, but may be appealed as set forth in these rules. 
D.  Consideration of Question by Council. After all members of the public desiring to speak upon the subject of the hearing have been given an opportunity to do so, the public hearing shall be closed by the mayor and the council may consider what disposition they wish to make of the question or questions presented at the hearing. No member of the public shall be allowed, without consent of the mayor, to speak further on the question during this period of deliberation, although the council members may ask questions of the speakers if so desired. At the conclusion of council discussion, and appropriate motion having been made and seconded, the council shall vote on the matter. 
(Res. 93-45 § 3)  
2.04.070 - Appointment of mayor. 
A.  At the first regular meeting of December of each year, the city council will choose one council member to act as mayor and one member to act as mayor pro tempore of the city council, to serve until the first regular meeting of December of the succeeding year. 
B.  The mayor of the city council shall preside over, preserve order and decorum, and announce each action of the city council at all meetings. Motions shall be made in accordance with Section 2.04.040(B)(2) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 06-177 § 1 (part); Ord. 00-120 § 1: Res. 93-45 § 4)  
2.04.080 - Meeting agendas. 
A.  The agenda for the meeting shall consist of a consent calendar, with those items which, in the city clerk's opinion, do not require discussion (individual items of business, and itemization of current projects and subjects) with reports of progress or no progress to report), and a period of time for comment by the city council, staff, and public. 
B.  The item of business, and supporting material, will be placed on the agenda for each meeting under the direction of the mayor and/or the city manager. 
C.  All items of business, including supporting material, which will be placed on the agenda for the following regular meeting of the city council, must be delivered to the city clerk by twelve noon on Wednesday before the next meeting. 
D.  Subject to the provisions of Government Code Section 54954.2, after posting of the agenda, no additional items are to be added before the next regular meeting except items determined by the mayor and/or city manager to be of an emergency nature. 
E.  With the exception of city officials and employees, persons requesting a place on the agenda must state, in writing, the matter which they wish to discuss, including a substantial statement outlining the information which they intend to present to the city council. This request must be given to the city clerk no later than Wednesday prior to the regular meeting as set forth in previous items. 
F.  Those persons having an item of business on the agenda, and wishing to have the item continued to a subsequent meeting must, by written request to the city clerk prior to the meeting, request the continuance, stating the reasons for the request. 
G.  The clerk will assemble all requests or appearances on the agenda so that all similar matters will be placed as one item on the agenda and be heard at the same time at a regular meeting of the city council. Notice shall be given to those persons having a place on the agenda, the meeting date and approximate time their matter will be heard. 
H.  The agenda containing a brief general description of each item of business, shall be posted seventy-two (72) hours before a regular meeting in a conspicuous location accessible to the public, and shall contain the time and location of the regular meeting. Citizens or organizations wishing copies for their use shall be charged the fees adequate to cover the cost of providing copies; if mailed there will be a charge for the necessary postage. The agenda with supporting material, will be prepared and distributed to all officers, city council members, and administrative staff normally in attendance at regular meetings by four p.m. each Friday before the next regular meeting and shall be available at City Hall for review by the public before the regular meeting. 
I.  At all meetings of the city council, other than formal public hearings, those persons recognized by the mayor to address the city council, subject to the discretion of the mayor, must each present different and relevant information. 
J.  The clerk shall keep the records of the proceedings of the meetings. 
K.  The clerk will publish legal advertisements, and will give public notice of meetings as follows: (a) regular meetings: mailed notice to property owners with written requests on file one week prior to the meetings; (b) special meetings: mailed notice to property owners with written request on file one week prior to the meeting, or such notice as it deems practical, of special meetings called less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date for the meeting; (c) adjourned meetings: notice shall be given in the same manner as for special meetings. 
(Ord. 06-177 § 1 (part); Res. 93-45 § 5)  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Office created. 
The office of the city manager of the city of Shasta Lake is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 1)  
2.08.020 - Eligibility. 
No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such city council member shall have ceased to be a member of the city council. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 2)  
2.08.030 - Bond. 
The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the city manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city of Shasta Lake. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 3)  
2.08.040 - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine. In addition, the city manager shall be reimbursed for all actual necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of his or her official duties. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 4)  
2.08.050 - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be an administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He or she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all affairs of the city which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have the power set forth in the following subsections: 
A.  Law Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. 
B.  Authority Over Employees. It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he or she shall have the authority to control, order, and give corrections to all heads of departments, and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction through their department heads. 
C.  Power of Appointment and Removal. It shall be the duty of the city manager to, and he or she shall appoint, remove, promote, demote, and discipline any and all officers and employees of the city of Shasta Lake, except the city attorney. 
D.  Administrative Reorganization of Officers. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of officers, positions, or units under his or her direction as may be indicated in the interests of efficient, effective, and economical conduct of the city's business. 
E.  Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he or she shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary. 
F.  Financial Reports. It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
G.  Budget. It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval. 
H.  Expenditure Controls and Purchasing. It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on approval of the city manager or his or her authorized representative. The city manager, or his or her authorized representative shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all of the departments or divisions of the city. 
I.  Investigations and Complaints. It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligation to the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government in regard to the office maintained by public utilities in said city. 
J.  Public Buildings. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, and all other public properties which are under control and jurisdiction of the city council. 
K.  Hours of Employment. It shall be the duty of the city manager to devote his or her entire time to the duties of his or her office and in furthering the interest of the city. 
L.  City Clerk. The city manager shall perform all duties associated with the legal function of the city clerk position. The city manager, with city council approval, may designate a city clerk. However, the city manager shall retain all responsibility for the duties of the city clerk position. 
M.  Treasurer. The city manager shall perform all duties associated with the legal function of the treasurer's position. The city manager, with city council approval, may designate a treasurer. However, the city manager shall retain all responsibility for the duties of the treasurer position. 
N.  Additional Duties. It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. 
O.  Authorized Signatory. The city manager or city manager's designee has the authority to execute documents on behalf of the city, including warrants, written contracts, amendments, deeds, conveyances and documents requiring the city seal. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 5) 
(Ord. No. 14-232, § I, 5-20-2014)  
2.08.060 - Internal relations. 
A.  Council-Manager Relations. The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his or her orders or instruction from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council, and no individual council members shall give any orders or instruction to the city manager. 
B.  Departmental Cooperation. It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically, and harmoniously. 
C.  Attendance at Commission Meetings. The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission and any other commissions, boards, or committee created by the city council, upon his or her own volition and upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commissions, boards, or committees as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof, and he or she shall inform said members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he or she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, board, or committees appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 6)  
2.08.070 - Removal procedure. 
A.  Removal of the City Manager. The removal of the city manager may be effected with or without cause, but only by a majority vote of the whole city council as then constituted, convened in a regular council meeting. The city manager shall be afforded at least thirty (30) days written notice of the effective date of his or her termination. 
B.  Limitation on Removal. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the city manager shall not be removed from office during or within ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election members of the city council are elected or when a new city council member is appointed; the purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and abilities of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his or her office. After the expiration of said ninety (90) days aforementioned the provisions of subsection A of this section as to the removal of said city manager shall apply and be effective. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 7)  
2.08.080 - Agreements on employment. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power and authority of the city council to enter into any agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-08 § 8)  
Chapter 2.12 - PLANNING AGENCY 
Sections: 
 
2.12.010 - Established. 
The city council of the city of Shasta Lake shall be the planning agency for the city. 
The city council shall create a planning commission which shall have powers to do and perform such acts and carry out and put into effect such plans and programs as are provided by and pursuant to the provisions of the State Planning Act, California Government Code Sections 65100, et seq., and shall serve as the advisory agency to the city council regarding subdivisions, parcel maps, zoning, variances, use permits, general plans revisions, and other planning matters. 
(Ord. 93-09)  
Chapter 2.16 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Created. 
There is created a planning commission. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 1)  
2.16.020 - Members—Appointment—Terms—Vacancies. 
The planning commission shall consist of seven members who shall be either residents or business owners within the city. All members shall be appointed by a majority of the city council. 
The term of office of all members so appointed shall be for four years. Commissioners shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed from office by the council at any time. A vacancy by other than expiration of the term shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments are made. Except in cases of removal from office and notwithstanding the above, a commissioner shall serve until the appointment of a successor. 
No commissioner shall be an officer or employee of the city. No commissioner shall hold any other public office if the duties and responsibilities of that office may be incompatible with the duties and responsibilities of a planning commissioner.(Ord. 93-12 § 2) 
(Ord. No. 08-198, § 1, 12-16-2008)  
2.16.030 - Members—Compensation. 
All members of the planning commission shall serve as members without compensation unless the city council by resolution establishes a stipend. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 3) 
(Ord. No. 17-256, 2-21-2017)  
2.16.040 - Officers. 
There shall be two officers in the planning commission, a chairman and a vice-chairman. The planning director or his or her duly designated subordinate shall be secretary to the planning commission. The commission shall elect its officers at the first regular meeting of the commission in January of each year, and they shall hold office for a term of one year, and any vacancy in any of the offices shall be filled by the commission at the first regular meeting of the commission after the vacancy occurs, and shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term of office to be filled. The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the commission, and in his or her absence the vice-chairman shall preside. The secretary shall make and keep a record of all the resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations of the commission, and shall record and keep the minutes of the commission meetings. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 4)  
2.16.050 - Powers and duties. 
The planning commission shall perform the duties and shall have all the rights, powers and privileges specified and provided for in this code or by state law and shall serve as an advisory board to the city council on all matters related to planning and development. The decisions of the planning commission are subject to appeal to the city council and the council has the final say in all city matters. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 5)  
2.16.060 - Meetings—Time—Notice. 
Regular meetings of the planning commission of the city of Shasta Lake shall be held, without further notice, at such location as specified by resolution of the city council establishing the day, time, or location for meetings of the Planning Commission. 
The planning commission may adjourn any regular meeting of the planning commission from time-to-time, or place-to-place, so long as the adjournment shall not extend to a point in time beyond the day of the next regular meeting of the planning commission. Notice of all regular planning commission meetings shall be given in accordance with Sections 65090 through 65096 of the planning, zoning, and development laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 6) 
(Ord. No. 10-207, § 1, 1-5-2010)  
2.16.070 - Meetings—Special. 
Special meetings may be called by the chairman or a majority of the members by providing a written notice of said meeting time, place and agenda with the secretary of the planning commission at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to said meeting. The signed written notice shall also be served personally or by certified mail upon all members of the planning commission who did not sign the notice of the special meeting. Twenty-four (24) hours' notice in writing shall also be given to all newspapers, radio stations, and television stations which have filed a request for notice in writing with the city clerk or the secretary of the planning commission. The presence of all members at the special meeting, or the waiver of notice in writing by any absent member, shall constitute a waiver of the requirement of notice as it relates to members. This notice does not replace the notice requirements of Sections 65090 through 65096 of the Planning, Zoning and Development Laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 7)  
2.16.080 - Meetings—Place—Quorum. 
Regular meetings shall be held in the city council chambers. Adjourned regular meetings and special meetings may be held elsewhere within the city, provided notice of the time and place of the meetings and of the agenda of special meetings is given to all members of the planning commission and to all newspapers, radio stations, and television stations which have filed a request for notice in writing with the city clerk or with the secretary of the commission. The notice shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the special meetings, and as to an adjourned regular meeting, shall be given at the regular meeting prior to adjournment. A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any regular or special meeting of the commission. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 8)  
2.16.090 - Rules of order. 
All planning commission meetings shall be governed by Roberts Rules of Order and by other procedures as may be adopted by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 93-12 § 9)  
CHAPTER 2.18 - CITY OF SHASTA LAKE PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.18.010 - Created. 
There is created a parks and recreation advisory commission. 
(Ord. No. 09-199, § 1, 3-17-2009)  
2.18.020 - Rules of order. 
All parks and recreation advisory commission meetings shall be governed by the Ralph M. Brown Act, Roberts Rules of Order, and by other procedures as may be adopted by the parks and recreation advisory commission. 
(Ord. No. 09-199, § 1, 3-17-2009)  
2.18.030 - Members—Appointments—Terms—Vacancies. 
The parks and recreation advisory commission shall consist of five regular members that are residents of the city. The regular members shall serve two year terms. The city council may appoint a youth member, who is a resident of the city to serve as a non-voting member for a one-year term. All members shall be appointed by a majority of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 09-199, § 1, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 10-210, § 1, 5-18-2010)  
2.18.040 - Members—Compensation. 
All members of the parks and recreation advisory commission shall serve as members without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 09-199, § 1, 3-17-2009)  
2.18.050 - Officers. 
There shall be two officers in the parks and recreation advisory commission, a chair and a vice chair. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall appoint a staff member to serve as Secretary to the parks and recreation advisory commission. The commission shall elect its officers at the first regular meeting of the commission in January of each year, and they shall hold office for a term of one year, and any vacancy in any of the offices shall be filled by the commission at the first regular meeting of the commission after the vacancy occurs, and shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term of the office to be filled. The chair shall preside at all meetings of the commission, and in his or her absence the vice chair shall preside. The secretary shall communicate and send copies of the minutes to the city clerk. The city clerk shall forward all minutes of the parks and recreation advisory commission to the city council. The chair shall report activities of the parks and recreation advisory commission to the city council twice a year. 
(Ord. No. 09-199, § 1, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 10-210, § 1, 5-18-2010)  
2.18.060 - Powers and duties. 
The parks and recreation advisory commission shall perform the duties and shall have all the rights, powers and privileges specified and provided for in this code or by state law and shall serve as an advisory board to the city council on all matters related to parks and recreation. The decisions of the parks and recreation advisory commission are subject to appeal to the city council and the council has the final say in all city matters. 
(Ord. No. 09-199, § 1, 3-17-2009)  
2.18.070 - Meetings—Time—Notice. 
Regular meetings of the parks and recreation advisory commission of the city of Shasta Lake shall be held, without further notice, at such location as specified by resolution of the city council establishing the day, time, or location for meetings of the parks and recreation advisory commission. Notice of all regular parks and recreation advisory commission meetings shall be given in accordance with the legal provisions of the state of California. 
(Ord. No. 09-199, § 1, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 10-210, § 1, 5-18-2010)  
2.18.080 - Meetings—Place—Quorum. 
Regular meetings shall be held in the city council chambers. Adjourned regular meetings may be held elsewhere within the city, provided notice of the time and place of the meetings and of the agenda of special meetings is given to all members of the parks and recreation advisory commission and to all newspapers, radio stations, and television stations which have filed a request for notice in writing with the city clerk or with the secretary of the commission. The notice shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the special meetings, and as to an adjourned regular meeting, shall be given at the regular meeting prior to adjournment. A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any regular or special meeting of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 09-199, § 1, 3-17-2009)  
2.18.090 - Vacancies. 
In the event that any member of the commission shall be absent from the regular meetings for two consecutive meeting following the last regular meeting attended by the commissioner, unless by permission of the chair or in the absence of the chair, the vice-chair, expressed in its official minutes, constitutes the voluntary resignation of the member and the position shall be declared vacant. 
(Ord. No. 09-199, § 1, 3-17-2009)  
2.18.100 - Goals. 
The purpose of the parks and recreation advisory commission shall be to make recommendations to the city council regarding all parks and recreation activities in an advisory capacity as follows: 
(1)  To insure a sound program of parks and recreation development and maintenance; 
(2)  To promote understanding and financial support from public and private sources; 
(3)  To recommend to the city council the establishment of general policies with respect to the parks and recreation; 
(4)  To prepare and recommend to the city council studies and uses of facilities pursuant to the guidelines established by the city council; 
(5)  To use funds to the best benefit of the largest number of residents; 
(6)  To provide a broad-based parks and recreation program for youth and adults; 
(7)  To promote traditional programs of organized sports and fitness education; 
(8)  To promote joint use and development; 
(9)  To promote strong self-esteem programs; 
(10)  To maintain and improve existing programs and facilities; 
(11)  To promote tourism. 
(Ord. No. 09-199, § 1, 3-17-2009)  
2.18.110 - Special events. 
All special events promoted and/or suggested by the parks and recreation advisory commission shall require a special event permit. The application for the permit shall be obtained at the administrative office in city hall. 
(Ord. No. 09-199, § 1, 3-17-2009)  
Chapter 2.20 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
Sections: 
 
2.20.010 - Established. 
It is found, determined, and declared that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city of Shasta Lake in accordance with the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. 
Said redevelopment agency is established pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, to be known as the redevelopment agency of the city of Shasta Lake (the "agency"). The agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the Community Redevelopment Law, this city council declares itself to be the agency. 
The city council finds and determines that designation of the city council as the agency will serve the public interest and promote the public safety and welfare in an effective manner in that this public body is best able to serve the needs of the community to implement the purposes of the Community Redevelopment Law and that there has been full disclosure of all proposals relating to the city council's intent to declare itself the redevelopment agency. 
(Ord. 93-21 §§ 1—4)  
2.20.020 - Compensation for redevelopment agency city council members. 
1.  Each member of the redevelopment agency shall receive thirty dollars ($30.00) per meeting for meetings of the redevelopment agency but in no event shall thirty dollars ($30.00) be paid for more than four meetings in one month. 
2.  Compensation established for redevelopment agency members will be effective when this ordinance becomes final.(Ord. 02-145 § 1)  
Chapter 2.22 - GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
2.22.010 - Date of elections. 
Pursuant to the authority set forth in the California Elections Code Section 1301(b), the city shall conduct its general municipal elections on the same day as the statewide general election in November of even-numbered years, beginning in November of 2012. 
(Ord. 99-111 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 10-216, § I, 12-21-2010)  
2.22.020 - Consolidation. 
The city shall consolidate its general municipal elections with those conducted by the County of Shasta. The appropriate consolidation requests shall be submitted periodically by the city to the county in accordance with the procedures set forth in California Elections Code Section 10400 et seq. 
(Ord. 99-111 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 10-216, § I, 12-21-2010)  
2.22.030 - Effect on terms of office. 
The terms of office for all current elected officeholders shall be extended as necessary, but for no more than 12 months. 
(Ord. 99-111 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 10-216, § I, 12-21-2010)  
Chapter 2.24 - CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE 
Sections: 
 
2.24.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be titled "The city of Shasta Lake conflict of interest code." 
(Ord. 96-73 § 1)  
2.24.020 - Model code. 
The Political Reform Act of 1974, California Government Code Section 81000, et seq., requires state and local government agencies to adopt and promulgate conflict of interest codes. The Fair Political Practices Commission has adopted a regulation set forth in Title 2, California Code of Regulations, Section 18730, which contains the terms of a standard conflict of interest code. The terms can be incorporated by reference and may be amended by the Fair Political Practices Commission after public notice and hearings to conform to amendments to the Political Reform Act. 
(Ord. 96-73 § 2)  
2.24.030 - Adoption. 
The provisions of Title 2, California Code of Regulations, Section 18730, and any amendments to it duly adopted by the Fair Political Practices Commission, are incorporated by reference, and, constitute the conflict of interest code of the city of Shasta Lake. 
(Ord. 96-73 § 3)  
2.24.040 - Amendments. 
The city council shall, by resolution, establish those officials, officers, employees, and consultants that will be "designated officers" for the purpose of filing the required statement of economic interest and definition of specific investments, business positions, interests in real property, and sources of income which shall be reportable by "designated positions." 
(Ord. 96-73 § 4)  
Chapter 2.32 - PURCHASING SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
2.32.010 - Purchasing system adopted—Purpose. 
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, nonprofessional services and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function, and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system, is adopted. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 1)  
2.32.020 - Purchasing authority established. 
There is created a centralized purchasing authority in which is vested authority for the purchase of supplies, nonprofessional services and equipment. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 2)  
2.32.030 - Purchasing agent designated—Powers and duties. 
A.  The city manager is designated and delegated the responsibility and authority to be the city's purchasing authority. The city manager may delegate the routine administrative responsibilities as specified in this chapter, or in any other applicable purchasing regulations, to another staff person who shall have the title of purchasing agent. The purchasing agent shall be responsible for organization and management of purchasing for all city departments, divisions, or agencies. The duties of the purchasing agent may be combined with those of any other office or position. 
B.  The purchasing agent shall: 
1.  Negotiate purchase and contract for equipment, supplies, nonprofessional services or services not involving peculiar ability required by any office or department of the city in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter and such other rules or regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council; 
2.  Act to procure for the city the needed quality in equipment, supplies, nonprofessional services or services not involving peculiar ability, at least expense to the city; 
3.  Encourage uniform bidding, and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases; 
4.  Prepare and recommend to the city manager rules governing the purchase of supplies, services and equipment for the city; 
5.  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing prices, market conditions and new products; 
6.  Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations; 
7.  Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed, and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department, or which have become unsuitable for city use; 
8.  Maintain a bidders' list, vendors' catalogue file, and records for the efficient operation of the purchasing division. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 3)  
2.32.040 - Filing of estimated requirements. 
All using departments and agencies shall file detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies, services and equipment in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the purchasing agent shall prescribe. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 4)  
2.32.050 - Exemptions from centralized purchasing. 
The purchasing agent, with approval of the city manager, may authorize in writing, any city department to purchase or contract for specified supplies, services and equipment independently of the purchasing section, but he or she shall require that such purchases or contract be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter, and shall further require periodic reports from the department on the purchases and contracts made under such written authorization. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 5)  
2.32.060 - Public projects exempted when. 
This chapter is expressly made inapplicable to bids for public projects, governed by the procedures in Public Contract Code Section 20161 et seq. The provisions contained in Public Contract Code Section 20161 et seq. establish the contact procedures the city shall follow regarding public projects. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 6)  
2.32.070 - Purchases under fifteen thousand dollars. 
A.  Open-Market Procedure. Purchases of supplies, equipment, nonprofessional services or services not involving a unique ability of an estimated value in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or less may be made by the purchasing agent in the open market, pursuant to the procedure prescribed in this chapter; provided, however, all bidding may be dispensed with in an emergency, or where said goods and/or services can be obtained from only one source, or when the amount is less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), provided further that the dollar limitations noted herein shall be increased on January 1 not less than three years following the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted, and every three years thereafter by the total CPI West Coast Cities Index rounded to the nearest one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the preceding three-year period. 
1.  Minimum Number of Quotations. Open-market purchases shall, whenever possible, be based on at least three quotations and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible quotation. 
2.  Notice Inviting Quotations. The purchasing agent shall solicit bids by written request to prospective vendors or by telephone. 
3.  Written Quotations. Written quotations shall be submitted to the purchasing agency, who shall keep a record of all open-market order and quotes for a period of one year after the submission of quotes of the placing or orders. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. 
4.  Written Contract. Where contracts are entered into for purchases made under this section, the purchasing agent is authorized to execute such contracts on behalf of the city. Such purchases shall be made only by purchase order. 
B.  Requisition Forms. Using departments shall submit request for these goods and services to the purchasing agent by standard requisition forms. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 7)  
2.32.080 - Encumbrance of funds. 
Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing agent shall not issue any purchase order for supplies, nonprofessional services, or services involving peculiar ability or equipment for which there is an insufficient appropriation in the budgetary account against which said purchase is to be charged. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 8)  
2.32.090 - Formal contract procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases of supplies, equipment and services of a value greater than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder, pursuant to the procedure prescribed herein: 
A.  Notice Inviting Bids. Notice inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased and shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place of opening bids. 
1.  Published Notice. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten days before the day of opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
2.  Bidder's List. The purchasing agent shall also solicit sealed bids from responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidder's list. 
B.  Bidder's Security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bidder's security shall be required. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security upon execution of the contract or upon the re-advertisement for bids; provided, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his or her bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder, grant it to and execute a contract with the next lowest bidder. If the next lowest bidder is awarded the contract and he or she fails or refuses to execute the contract, he or she shall forfeit his or her entire bid security. 
C.  Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing agent, and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated during regular business hours and kept for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening. 
D.  Rejection of Bids. In its discretion, the city council may reject any and all bids presented, and re-advertise for bids. 
E.  Award of Contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided herein. 
F.  Award of Contracts by Purchasing Agent. The purchasing agent is authorized to award contracts to the lowest responsible bidder when the city council has budgeted funds for the item(s), and the amount of the award is not more than the budgeted amount. 
G.  Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unity price, quality, service and delivery being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the city council may accept the one it chooses, or accept the lowest bona fide offer by negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening. 
H.  Performance Bonds. The purchasing agent shall have authority to require a performance bond before entering a contract, in such amount as it shall be found reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the purchasing agent requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 9)  
2.32.100 - Exceptions to normal competitive bidding. 
A.  The city may make exceptions to the purchasing procedures required in this chapter when such exceptions are approved by the city council. Exceptions to normal purchasing procedures may be submitted to the city council for consideration, when in the opinion of the city manager, such exception is necessary and appropriate. 
B.  The following criteria or standards will be evaluated by the city manager in determining whether an exception will be referred to the city council. 
1.  The purpose for which the materials, supplies, or equipment is unique and requires a quality that is significantly different, and therefore restricts the purchase to certain products and or providers or vendors. 
2.  The proposed purchase must represent a cost effective expenditure of public funds in that any additional costs associated with a purchase of a specific product or from a limited or single vendor, shall not exceed the benefit to the city. Benefit shall, to the degree possible, be calculated in terms of dollars. However, benefit may be more subjective provided that said evaluation shall be converted to estimated dollar value. 
3.  The proposed exception shall be advertised in the same manner as the city's legal notices, not less than once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
4.  The proposed exception shall be valid for not more than one year, providing however, that the exception may be continued, if approved by city council, and if the exception has been evaluated by the city manager, utilizing the criteria and standards included herein. 
C.  The exception must thereafter be placed on city council's public agenda and approved by resolution at each of two (2) regular meetings of the city council. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 10)  
2.32.105 - Procedure for the acquisition of used motor vehicles and equipment. 
Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, the procedure for the acquisition of used motor vehicles or equipment shall be the following: 
In the event that the city deems it necessary to purchase used motor vehicles or equipment that can only be secured from a single vendor, the city manager shall be required to approve such purchases. The funds of the purchase of used motor vehicles and equipment must be from funds previously budgeted and approved by the city council for such purposes. 
(Ord. 04-160 § 1: Ord. 00-127 § 1)  
2.32.110 - Inspection and testing of materials and services. 
The purchasing agent may inspect supplies and equipment delivered, and determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The purchasing agent shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids, and to take samples of products at delivery, which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 11)  
2.32.120 - Surplus supplies and equipment. 
All using agencies shall submit to the city manager, at such times and in such form as he or she shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used to which have become obsolete or worn out. The city manager shall have authority to sell all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for city use, or to exchange them for, or trade them in on, new supplies and equipment. The sales shall be made pursuant to Section 2.32.090 or 2.32.100, whichever is applicable, except that surplus supplies and equipment may be sold for fair value without competitive bidding to other public agencies or nonprofit agencies providing valuable community services. 
(Ord. 02-140 § 1: Ord. 97-84 § 12)  
2.32.130 - Splitting orders to avoid competitive bidding prohibited. 
It is unlawful to split or separate into smaller orders the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or services for the purpose of evading the competitive bidding provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 13)  
2.32.140 - Equipment leasing agreements. 
A.  As used in this section: 
1.  "Leasing of nonpurchasable equipment" means equipment which is available through "lease only" plans; 
2.  "Leasing purchasable equipment" means equipment which can be acquired through "lease with option to purchase" type plans. 
B.  Equipment Leasing. Leasing of purchasable or nonpurchasable equipment shall be in accordance with Sections 2.32.070 and 2.32.090 of this chapter. Bidding may be dispensed with only as stated in Section 2.32.070 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 14)  
2.32.150 - Maintenance agreements. 
A.  As used in this section, "maintenance agreements" means that which guarantees to maintain equipment in good operating conditions subject to terms and conditions agreeable to both the company and the city. 
B.  Maintenance agreements shall be signed or terminated before agreement expiration by the purchasing agent with prior approval of the department head responsible for the equipment. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 15)  
2.32.160 - Cooperative purchasing agreements with county or other agencies. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the voluntary participation by the city in any voluntary cooperative purchasing agreement(s) or programs entered into between the city and the state, county and other municipalities, or other cooperative and joint power agency purchasing alliances. The purchasing agent is empowered and authorized to act under the provisions of this chapter to procure for the city supplies and equipment in conjunction with such voluntary cooperative purchasing agreement(s) or programs as may be entered into by the city. All formal contract and bidding procedures to be followed in such cases shall be those specifically enumerated in the voluntary cooperative purchasing agreement or program. 
(Ord. 97-84 § 16) 
(Ord. No. 15-242, 9-15-2015)  
Chapter 2.36 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
Sections: 
 
2.36.010 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this ordinance are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Ord. 03-150 § 1)  
2.36.020 - Definition. 
As used in this ordinance, "emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities for this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. 03-150 § 1)  
2.36.030 - Disaster council membership. 
The city of Shasta Lake disaster council is hereby created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be chair. 
B.  The director of emergency services who shall be vice-chair. 
C.  The assistant director of emergency services. 
D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this ordinance. 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. 03-150 § 1)  
2.36.040 - Disaster council powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city of Shasta Lake disaster council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chair or, upon call of the vice-chair (in the absence of the chair). 
(Ord. 03-150 § 1)  
2.36.050 - Director and assistant director of emergency services. 
A.  There is hereby created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
B.  There is hereby created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. 
(Ord. 03-150 § 1)  
2.36.060 - Powers and duties of the director and assistant director of emergency services. 
A.  The director is hereby empowered to: 
1.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. 
2.  Request the governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the city's emergency organization for the accomplishment of the purposes of this ordinance. 
4.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the city's emergency organization; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them. 
5.  Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein. 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the governor or the director of the state Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the director is hereby empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonable related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time the city council; 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
c.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as deemed necessary in the execution of duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster services workers; 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of the city's departments or agencies; and 
e.  To execute all ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred by this ordinance or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. 
C.  The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Ord. 03-150 § 1)  
2.36.070 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of 2.36.060.A.6.c. of this ordinance, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city of Shasta Lake. 
(Ord. 03-150 § 1)  
2.36.080 - Emergency Plan 
The city of Shasta Lake disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city's emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. 
Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 03-150 § 1)  
2.36.090 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city of Shasta Lake. 
(Ord. 03-150 § 1)  
2.36.100 - Punishment of violations. 
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to: 
A.  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this ordinance, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this ordinance. 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this ordinance, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
C.  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Ord. 03-150 § 1)  
2.36.110 - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
It is the intent of the city council in enacting this ordinance that it shall be considered a revision and continuation of the ordinance repealed by this ordinance, and the status of volunteers shall not be affected by such repeal; nor shall plans and agreements, rules and regulations, or resolutions adopted pursuant to such repealed ordinance be affected by such repeal until amended, modified, or superseded as provided in this ordinance. 
(Ord. 03-150 § 1)  
Chapter 2.40 - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
2.40.010 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-254, § 1, adopted Jan. 3, 2017, repealed §§ 2.40.010, 2.40.120, 2.40.190—2.40.260, and 2.40.280, which pertained to purpose and general provisions; layoff and reinstatement; military leave; jury duty; expense allowance; payroll deductions; physical examinations; outside employment; and training and derived from Ord. 99-113 § 2; Ord. 95-61 §§ 1, 12, 19, 20, 23—26, 28.  
2.40.030 - Compensation. 
A.  The city manager shall be responsible for recommending to the city council for its approval wage rates and salary schedules for each job class. These wage rates and salary schedules shall be authorized at the adoption of the fiscal budget. The wage rate or salary schedule for each class shall be such as to reflect fairly the similarities and differences in levels of duties, authority, responsibilities, and shall be related to compensation for comparable positions in public employment in the appropriate labor market, and the city's ability to fund these amounts. 
B.  Each job class shall be assigned to a wage schedule in a uniform pay plan developed by the city manager. Such assignment to a wage schedule shall be accepted by the city council by the adoption of the fiscal budget. 
C.  Wage schedules for all job classes shall be reviewed by the city manager from time to time, and if such wage reviews indicate that there should be wage adjustments, the city manager shall make his or her recommendation in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.40.030(B) of these policies. 
(Ord. 95-61 § 3)  
2.40.040 - Appropriate salary step. 
A.  The uniform pay plan adopted by the city council shall be the official document to be utilized when determining appropriate changes in the assignment of employees' salary steps. 
B.  Assignment of a higher step may be granted only for continued meritorious and efficient service and continued improvement by the employee in the effective performance of his or her duties. Such a salary increase is not automatic, and shall require the specific recommendation of the employee's department head and certification of the city manager. 
1.  The effective date of any salary step increase shall be determined by the city council upon the recommendation noted in subsection B of this section. 
2.  An employee not recommended for a salary step increase may be reconsidered for such an increase at any subsequent time. 
(Ord. 95-61 § 4)  
2.40.050 - Compensation—City manager. 
The salary for the city manager shall be established by the city council. 
(Ord. 95-61 § 5)  
2.40.080 - Hiring, appointments and promotions. 
A.  Appointments to vacant positions shall be based on merit and fitness, and may be determined by competitive examinations and/or evaluations. Minimum standards of employment for each job class shall be established by the city manager. 
B.  Vacancies in positions above the entrance level may be filled by promotion whenever one or more qualified candidates are available. Promotions shall be on a competitive basis, except when the city manager finds that the number of employees qualified for promotion is insufficient to justify competition. Appropriate consideration shall be given to promotional candidates' qualifications and record of performance. 
1.  Advancement to a job class which is compensated at a higher rate shall constitute a promotion. 
C.  Examinations, if any, for appointments and promotions shall be in such form as will fairly test the abilities and aptitudes of candidates for the duties to be performed, and shall not include any inquiry into the religious or political beliefs or affiliations, membership in or attitude toward any employee organization, ethnic or geographical origin, or race of any candidate. 
D.  When a recommendation has been made to fill a vacancy, the appropriate department head shall submit to the city manager the name and the desired employment date of the candidate so recommended. Final selection to such position shall be made by the city manager. 
E.  Any appointment or promotion to a department head position shall be made by the city manager. 
F.  Appointment to the position of city manager shall be made by the city council. 
G.  The city may retain, employ or otherwise contract with intern, temporary, interim or other short term personnel or professional, paraprofessional, expert, or contract personnel or businesses or services at any time for any purpose. 
(Ord. 95-61 § 8)  
2.40.120 - Reserved. 
Note— See note at § 2.40.010.  
2.40.130 - Voluntary demotion. 
A.  If an employee takes a voluntary demotion as a result of a downward reclassification of his or her position, his or her salary step status shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.40.020 of this chapter. 
B.  An employee may request a voluntary demotion for any reason. Such a voluntary demotion shall require the approval of the department head under whom the employee will serve and the city manager. An employee taking such a voluntary demotion may be placed in any salary step of the appropriate salary schedule that does not provide an increase in salary. He or she shall be given a new anniversary date for purposes of merit pay increase in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.40.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 95-61 § 13)  
2.40.140 - Inclement weather practice. 
A.  Regular or probationary employees who are unable to work in the field because of inclement weather or other similar causes will receive pay for the full day, provided they have reported for duty. After reporting for duty, such employees may be assigned other duties outside the customary course and scope of their job description, held pending emergency calls, or given other instructions. 
B.  Employees other than regular and probationary employees who report for work and are unable to work in the field because of inclement weather or other similar causes will be paid only for the time they work, or are held by the city except, however, they will be paid for not fewer than two (2) hours. 
(Ord. 95-61 § 14)  
2.40.190—2.40.260 - Reserved. 
Note— See note at § 2.40.010.  
2.40.270 - Code of ethics. 
A.  Declaration of Policy. The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial, and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is established a code of ethics for all officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standard of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the city, and by directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the city. The provisions and purposes of this code and such rules and regulations as may be established are declared to be in the best interests of the city and for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
B.  Dedicated Service. All officials and employees of the city owe a duty of loyalty to the political objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed by the city council to attain those objectives. Appointive officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the standard for their positions, by the appropriate authority. 
Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and owe a duty to cooperate fully with other public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law by officially recognized confidentiality of their work. 
C.  Fair and Equal Treatment. 
1.  Use of Public Property. No official or employee shall request or permit the use of city owned vehicles, equipment, materials, or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such official or employee in the conduct of official business. Shop privileges are the exception, as established by the city council. 
2.  Obligations to Citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment, or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. 
D.  Conflict of Interest. No council member or other official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have a financial or personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties in the public interest, or would tend to impair his or her independence or judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties. Personal as distinguished from financial interest includes an interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or close business association. 
Specific conflicts of interest are enumerated below for the guidance of officials and employees: 
1.  Incompatible Employment. No council member or other officials or employee shall engage in or accept private employment, or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair his or her independence or judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties. 
2.  Disclosure of Confidential Information. No council member or other official or employee shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the city, nor shall he or she use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or herself or others. 
3.  Gifts and Favors. No council member or other official or employee shall accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise from any person, firm or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the city; nor shall any such official or employee (1) accept any gift, favor, or thing of value that may tend to influence him or her in the discharge of his or her duties, or (2) grant in the discharge of his or her duties any improper favor, service or thing of value. 
4.  Representing Private Interests Before City Agencies. No council member or other official or employee whose salary is paid in whole or in part by the city shall appear on behalf of private interests before any agency of the city. He or she shall not represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the interests of the city in any litigation to which the city is a party. 
A council member may appear before city agencies on behalf of constituents in the course of his or her duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civil obligations. However, no council member or other official or employee shall accept a retainer or compensation that is contingent upon a specific action by a city agency. 
5.  Contracts with the City. Any council member or city official or employee shall not have a financial interest in any business transaction, or contact with the city, or in the sale of real estate, materials, supplies, or services to the city, except as permitted in the conflict of interest statutes of the state of California (Government Code Section 1090, et seq.). 
6.  Disclosure of Interest in Legislation. A council member who has a financial or other private interest in any legislation shall disclose on the records of the city council or other appropriate authority, the nature and extent of such interest. 
Any other city official or employee who has a financial or private interest, and who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion to the city council concerning pending legislation, shall disclose on the records of the city council or other appropriate authority the nature and extent of such interest. 
E.  Applicability of Code. When a council member or other official or employee has doubt as to the applicability of a provision of this code to a particular situation, he or she should apply to the city council for an advisory opinion and be guided by that opinion when given. The council member or other officials or employees shall have the opportunity to present his or her interpretation of the facts at issue and of the applicable provisions of the code before such advisory decision is made. This code shall be operative in all instances covered by these provisions except when superseded by applicable statutory provisions or when the application of a statutory provision is discretionary but determined to be more appropriate or desirable. 
F.  Ex Parte Communications. No official or employee shall encourage, make or accept any ex parte or other unilateral application or communication that excludes the interests of other parties in a matter under consideration when such application or communication is designed to influence official decision or conduct of the official or other officials, employees or agencies in order to obtain a more favored treatment or special consideration to advance the personal or private interests of himself or herself or others. The purpose of this provision is to guarantee that all interested parties to any matter shall have equal opportunity to express and represent their interests. 
Any written ex parte communication received by an official or employee in matters where all interested parties should have equal opportunity for a hearing shall be made part of the record by the recipient. 
Any oral ex parte communication received under such conditions should be written down in substance by the recipient and also made a part of the record. 
A communication concerning only the status of a pending matter is not regarded as an ex parte communication. 
G.  Avoidance of Impression of Corruptibility. Public officials and employees, whether appointed or elected, full-time or part-time, paid or unpaid, should conduct their official and private affairs so as not to give a reasonable basis for the impression that any such official or employee can be improperly influenced in the performance of his or her public duties. Such officials or employees should so conduct themselves as to maintain public confidence in their performance of public trust in the government they represent. They should not be a source of embarrassment to that government, and should avoid even the appearance of conflict between their public duties and private interests. 
H.  Discrimination in Appointments. No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way favored or discriminated against with respect to any appointive administrative office because of the party's race, age, religion, national origin, or political opinions or affiliations, if otherwise qualified for the position or office. This provision shall not be construed to impair administrative discretion in determining the requirements of a position or in job assignment of a person holding such position, subject to review by the city council. 
I.  Investments in Conflict with Official Duties. No director or other official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall possess any substantial or controlling investment, direct or indirect, in any financial, business, commercial or other private transaction which creates or may create a conflict with his or her official duties, nor shall he or she invest to such degree in any business regulated or licensed or by doing business with the city in which he or she is employed, or be a party to any transaction on which he or she may be called to make a decision in an official capacity, subject only to the exceptions provided in the conflict of interest sections of the Government Code of the state of California. 
J.  Disclosure of Income. An official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, who has a direct financial or other interest in any transaction, the disposition of which may be influenced by the officer's or employee's official position or action, shall disclose all sources of income and the nature and extent of any personal interest in such. 
(Ord. 95-61 § 27)  
2.40.280 - Reserved. 
Note— See note at § 2.40.010.  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY 
Sections:  
Article I. - Assessor and Tax Collector 
 
3.04.010 - Designated. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the Government Code of the state of California, the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the city assessor and tax collector are transferred to the assessor and tax collector of the county of Shasta. 
(Ord. 93-15 § 1)  
Article II. - Deposit and Management of City Funds 
 
3.04.020 - City bank designated. 
Whereas it is considered by the city council of Shasta Lake to be in the best interests of the city to deposit city funds with the financial institutions as approved by the city council by ordinance, the city council of Shasta Lake resolve as follows: 
A.  That the foregoing recitals are true and correct; 
B.  That city funds on hand on the date of passage of the resolution codified herein, and in the future, shall be deposited with the approved financial institutions. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 4.04.010)  
3.04.030 - Security for city deposits. 
The city council of Shasta Lake resolve as follows: 
A.  That security for such portions of the city's deposits with the approved financial institutions as is insured pursuant to federal law be waived; and 
B.  That the depository be authorized to deduct the value of the secured deposits for which security is waived from the amount of deposits, subject to security collateralization pursuant to Government Code Section 53653. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 4.04.020)  
3.04.040 - Stop payment authority for city checks. 
A.  It becomes necessary, from time to time, for various reasons, for the city to stop payment on a check which has been written to be drawn upon a city account in said approved financial institutions. 
B.  The city manager of the city, or any one of the members of the city council of Shasta Lake, or the city accountant/treasurer, is authorized to execute, on behalf of the city, documents which are required to stop payment on city checks, when the city makes a request for stop payment on a check. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 4.04.030)  
Article III. - Capital Outlay Fund 
 
3.04.050 - Fund created—Statutory authority. 
There is created a fund for capital outlays, pursuant to the provisions of Sections 53730 through 53737 of the Government Code of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 4.16.010)  
Article IV. - Short-Term Loans 
 
3.04.060 - Capital improvement projects. 
Short-term loans from local financial institutions or interdepartment loans are authorized in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for grant-funded and loan-funded capital improvement projects. 
(Prior code § 4.20.010)  
Article V. - Annexation Fees 
 
3.04.070 - Annexation fee due and payable when. 
When any tract or parcel of land is annexed to the city, an annexation fee shall be due and payable to the city as a condition of annexation. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 4.12.010)  
3.04.080 - Costs to be paid by owner. 
All city-incurred costs associated with the annexation shall be paid by the owner. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 4.12.020)  
3.04.090 - Fee per acre—Schedule. 
The annexation fee per acre shall be determined as follows: 
Electric system ..... $245.00 
Water system ..... 251.00 
Sewer system ..... 116.00 
Parks system ..... 33.00 
$645.00 per acre 
(Prior code § 4.12.030)  
3.04.100 - Charge for parcels under one acre. 
A parcel of less than one acre in size shall be charged the same percentage of the per-acre fee as the percentage that the parcel is of one acre, except that no annexed parcel shall be charged less than one-quarter of the per-acre fee. 
(Prior code § 4.12.040)  
3.04.110 - Effective date. 
The annexation fee as approved by the resolution codified in this article became effective on September 19, 1979, the date of its adoption by the board of directors. 
(Prior code § 4.12.050)  
Chapter 3.08 - CLAIMS AND DEMANDS AGAINST THE CITY 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Purpose. 
The city desires to adopt procedures relative to the fiscal affairs of the new city and to provide for the payment of its debts as they come due. The city, therefore, determines to adopt the ordinance codified in this chapter and to provide for its codification when the Shasta Lake Municipal Code is prepared. 
(Ord. 93-11 § 1)  
3.08.020 - General. 
The provisions of this chapter recognize the general claim procedures applicable to local public agencies, including this city, are governed by the provisions of Chapter 1 of Division 3.6 of the Government Code of the state of California, commencing with Section 900 and following. 
(Ord. 93-11 § 2)  
3.08.030 - Special claims procedures. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 935 of the Government Code of the state of California, the following claims procedures are established for those claims against the city for money or damages not now governed by state or local laws: 
A.  Employee Claims. Notwithstanding the exceptions contained in Section 905 of the Government code of the state of California, all claims by public officers or employees for fees, salaries, wages, overtime pay, holiday pay, compensating time off, vacation pay, sick leave pay, and any other expenses or allowances claimed due from the city, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by the state or local laws, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Sections 910 to 915.2 of the Government Code of the state of California. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945.4 of the Government Code of the state of California relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the council. 
B.  Contract and Other Claims. In addition to the requirements of subsection A of this section, and not withstanding the exemption set forth in Section 905 of the Government Code of the state of California, all claims against the city for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local laws, shall be presented within time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Sections 910 through 915.2 of the Government Code of the state of California. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945.4 of the Government Code of the state of California relating to the prohibition of suits in absence of the presentation of claims and actions thereon by the council. 
(Ord. 93-11 § 3)  
3.08.040 - Filing. 
All claims or demands against the city shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be presented by the city clerk to the city council at a regular meeting thereof for approval or rejection, whether in whole or in part, if such presentation is required by law. 
(Ord. 93-11 § 4)  
3.08.050 - Claims covered by insurance. 
All claims filed with the city clerk, which claims are covered by insurance, shall be forwarded by the city clerk after action thereon by the council, to the appropriate insurance carrier for handling and further processing. 
(Ord. 93-11 § 5)  
3.08.060 - Purchases, supplies or services. 
A.  All demands, invoices, or claims for purchases, supplies, or services included within budgetary appropriations shall be presented in writing to the city manager. All such demands, invoices, or claims shall be fully itemized and verified as just and correct by the claimant or his authorized agent. 
B.  Each demand shall bear the number of the purchase order issued for the materials or services rendered. 
C.  Such demands, invoices, or claims shall be audited by the treasurer or director of finance, who shall prepare a register of audited demands. The affidavit of the director of finance shall be attached to such register, certifying to the accuracy of the register. 
D.  Such demands, invoices, or claims shall be approved by the city manager and the city council. 
E.  All claims approved shall be paid by checks drawn up by the city treasurer signed by the person(s) designated by the resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 93-11 § 6)  
Chapter 3.12 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Short title—Adoption authority. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the real property transfer tax ordinance of the city of Shasta Lake. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Section 11901 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 97-85 § 1)  
3.12.020 - Imposition. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writ in by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of fifty-five cents for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. 97-85 § 2)  
3.12.030 - Payment. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.12.020 of this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Ord. 97-85 § 3)  
3.12.040 - Exemptions—Instruments to secure debts. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Ord. 97-85 § 4)  
3.12.050 - Public agencies when acquiring title. 
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
(Ord. 97-85 § 5)  
3.12.060 - Exemptions—Plans or reorganization or adjustment. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering, or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
B.  Subdivisions 1 to 4, inclusive, of subsection A of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval, or change. 
(Ord. 97-85 § 6)  
3.12.070 - Exemptions—Deed taken in lieu of foreclosure. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on the deed, instrument or writing or stated in an affidavit of declaration under penalty of perjury for tax purposes. 
(Ord. 97-85 § 7)  
3.12.080 - Exemptions—Community property. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument or other writing which purports to transfer, divide, or allocate community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property assets between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to Section 4000 of the Civil Code of California, or by a written agreement between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order, whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of any of those judgments or orders. In order to qualify for the exemption provided by this section, this deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument, or other writing is entitled to the exemption. 
(Ord. 97-85 § 8)  
3.12.090 - Exemptions—Order of Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision A of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made certifies that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79K of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Ord. 97-85 § 9)  
3.12.100 - Exemptions—Partnerships. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Ord. 97-85 § 10)  
3.12.110 - Administration. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Sections 11931 through 11935 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 97-85 § 11)  
3.12.120 - Refunds. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Sections 11921 through 11926 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 97-85 § 12)  
Chapter 3.16 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 1)  
3.16.020 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 2)  
3.16.030 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall be operative on July 2, 1993. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 3)  
3.16.040 - Purpose. 
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 4)  
3.16.050 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax chapter; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 5)  
3.16.060 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.16.020 of this chapter of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 6)  
3.16.070 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which time retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 7)  
3.16.080 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.16.020 of this chapter of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 8)  
3.16.090 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 9)  
3.16.100 - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof) 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 10)  
3.16.110 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 11)  
3.16.120 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 12)  
3.16.130 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become part of this chapter. This chapter also shall be deemed to adopt by reference the provisions of Sections 7202 to 7203, inclusive, of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as now in effect or as later amended, which are required to be included in this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 13)  
3.16.140 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 93-02 § 14)  
3.16.150 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable in accordance with Section 1.16.010 of this code. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Ord. 93-02 § 15)  
Chapter 3.17 - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-265, § 3, adopted Aug. 29, 2017, repealed the former ch. 3.17, §§ 3.17.010—3.17.070, and enacted a new ch. 3.17 as set out herein. The former ch. 3.17 pertained to marijuana collective/cooperative business tax and derived from Ord. No. 14-238, § 1, adopted Nov. 4, 2014. 
 
3.17.010 - Imposition of tax. 
A.  Tax on Commercial Cannabis Cultivation. 
1.  Every person engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation in the city limits of the city of Shasta Lake shall pay an annual commercial cannabis business tax at a rate of up to ten dollars ($10.00) per square foot of outdoor cultivation area, eighteen dollars ($18.00) per square foot of mixed-light cultivation area, and twenty-six dollars ($26.00) per square foot of indoor cultivation area. 
2.  Notwithstanding the maximum tax rate established by this chapter, the city council may at its discretion, at any time by resolution, implement a lower tax rate for all persons engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation within the city limits for different categories of commercial cannabis cultivation including medical or non-medical use, subject to the maximum rate established in subsection (A)(1). The city council may, by resolution, also increase any such tax rate from time to time, not to exceed the maximum tax rate established in subsection (A)(1). 
3.  Pursuant to subsection (A), the commercial cannabis business tax on commercial cannabis cultivation is to be initially imposed as follows: 
Cultivation Area (s/f) 	Rate per s/f 
Outdoor 
5,000 	$ 2.00 
5,001 to 10,000 	$ 5.00 
10,001 to 22,000 	$ 7.00 
Indoor 
5,000 	$ 7.00 
5,001 to 10,000 	$10.00 
10,001 or more 	$15.00 
Mixed-light 
5,000 	$ 5.00 
5,001 to 10,000 	$ 8.00 
10,001 or more 	$11.00 
 
B.  Tax on Commercial Cannabis Manufacturing. 
1.  Every person engaged in commercial cannabis manufacturing in the city limits shall pay an annual commercial cannabis business tax at a rate of up to twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per square foot of manufacturing area. 
2.  Notwithstanding the maximum tax rate established by this chapter, the city council may at its discretion, at any time by resolution, implement a lower tax rate for all persons engaged in commercial cannabis manufacturing within the city limits subject to the maximum rate established in subsection (B)(1). The city council may, by resolution, also increase any such tax rate from time to time, not to exceed the maximum tax rate established in subsection (B)(1). 
3.  Pursuant to subsection (B), the commercial cannabis business tax on commercial cannabis manufacturing is to be imposed at the following rate: 
Operator 	Rate per s/f 
Manufacturer 	$ 7.00 
 
C.  Tax on all Other Commercial Cannabis Business. 
1.  Every person engaged in operating a commercial cannabis business, other than commercial cannabis cultivation or manufacturing, including but not limited to as a distributor, distribution facility, testing facility, transporter, nursery, dispensary, cooperative, collective, or engaging in delivery of cannabis in the city limits shall pay an annual commercial cannabis business tax at a rate of up to twelve (12) percent of gross receipts per fiscal year. 
2.  Notwithstanding the maximum tax rate established by this chapter, the city council may at its discretion, at any time by resolution, implement a lower tax rate for all persons engaged in commercial cannabis manufacturing within the city limits subject to the maximum rate established in subsection (C)(1). The city council may, by resolution, also increase any such tax rate from time to time, not to exceed the maximum tax rate established in subsection (C)(1). 
3.  Pursuant to subsection (C), the commercial cannabis business tax on every person engaged in commercial cannabis business, including but not limited to as a distributor, distribution facility, testing facility, transporter, nursery, dispensary, cooperative, collective or engaging in delivery of cannabis is to be imposed at the following rates: 
Operator 	Percentage of 
Gross Receipts 
Cannabis nursery 	3% 
Dispensary 	6% 
Distributor 	3% 
Testing laboratory 	0% 
Transporter 	0% 
 
(Ord. No. 17-265, § 3, 8-29-2017)  
3.17.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter. 
"Business tax" or "commercial cannabis business tax" means the tax due pursuant to this chapter for engaging in lawful commercial cannabis business in the city. 
"Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin and as defined in Business and Professions Code 19300.5(f). For purposes of this section the terms cannabis and marijuana shall have the same meaning. 
"Commercial cannabis business" means any commercial business activity relating to cannabis, including but not limited to cultivating, manufacturing, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, packaging, transporting, distributing, delivering, or sale of cannabis, medical cannabis or a cannabis or medical cannabis product, except as related Business and Professions Code Section 19319, and as they may be amended or Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 through 11362.45 and as they may be amended. 
"Commercial cannabis cultivation" means the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, processing, or storage of one or more cannabis plants or any part thereof and as defined in the MCRSA 19300.5(k) and or a cannabis nursery as defined in MCRSA 19300.5(ag). 
"Commercial cannabis manufacturing" means the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of manufactured cannabis or cannabis products, directly or indirectly, by non-volatile extraction methods. 
"Cultivation area" means all portions of the premises deducting therefrom driveways, sidewalks, landscaping, vacant unused space, areas used exclusively for office space, employee break rooms, restrooms, and storage space unrelated to the commercial cannabis business (such as a janitorial closet). 
"Gross receipts" means the total amount actually received or receivable from all cannabis sales; the total amount or compensation actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit is allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares, or merchandise; discounts, rents, royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, and gains realized. Included in "gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the material used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. 
"Manufacturing area" means the entire premises utilized for production, preparation, propagation, storage or compounding of manufactured cannabis or cannabis products, directly or indirectly, by non-volatile extraction methods not deducting for unutilized portions of the premises. 
"Mixed-light cultivation" means using a combination of natural and supplemental artificial lighting at a maximum threshold in a permanent facility in compliance with the state building code as determined by the state licensing authority. 
(Ord. No. 17-265, § 3, 8-29-2017)  
3.17.030 - Payment obligation. 
Any entity subject to this chapter must pay the full tax imposed by this chapter regardless of any rebate, exemption, incentive, or other reduction set forth elsewhere in this Code, except as required by California or federal law. Failure to pay the taxes required by this section within thirty (30) days after the due date shall be subject to the following penalties, interest charges, and assessments: 
A.  A penalty in the sum equal to ten percent of the total amount due; and 
B.  If the tax remains unpaid, an additional penalty equal to ten percent shall be added on the first day of each calendar month following the initial penalty. 
(Ord. No. 17-265, § 3, 8-29-2017)  
3.17.040 - Remittance. 
The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be remitted directly to the city quarterly as set forth in this chapter. The tax due shall be no less than the quarterly installment due, but the taxpayer may at any time pay the tax due for the entire fiscal year. Each business shall pay on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter. 
(Ord. No. 17-265, § 3, 8-29-2017)  
3.17.050 - Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business or activity. 
The payment of any commercial cannabis business tax required under the provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in an illegal matter. Nothing in this section implies or authorizes that any activity connected with the distribution or possession of cannabis is legal unless authorized by California and federal law. Nothing in this section shall be applied or construed as authorizing the sale of cannabis. 
(Ord. No. 17-265, § 3, 8-29-2017)  
3.17.060 - Modification, repeal or amendment. 
The voters expressly authorize the city council to amend, modify, change, revise, or appeal any provision in this chapter as the city council deems in the best interest of the city without a vote of the people to the extent allowed by law. However, as required by Article XIII C of the California Constitution, voter approval is required for any amendment to Section 3.17.010 that would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant to this chapter above the maximum rates established by this chapter. 
The city council may impose any tax authorized by this chapter at a lower rate and may establish exemptions, incentives, or other reductions, and interest charges for failure to pay the tax in a timely manner, as otherwise allowed by California law. No action by the council under this section shall prevent it from later increasing the tax or removing any exemption, incentive, or reduction, and restoring the maximum tax rates specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-265, § 3, 8-29-2017)  
3.17.070 - Administration. 
A.  The city manager or the city manager's designee shall promulgate rules, regulations, and procedures to implement and administer this chapter to ensure the efficient and timely collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. 
B.  The city manager or the city manager's designee shall annually audit the commercial cannabis business taxes imposed by this chapter to verify that tax revenues have been properly expended in accordance with the law. The city manager's agent shall have the right to examine and audit all the books, business records and tax returns to verify that tax revenues have been properly reported and paid. 
(Ord. No. 17-265, § 3, 8-29-2017)  
Chapter 3.20 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Definitions. 
Except where the context requires otherwise, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter. 
"Campground" means an area or a tract of land where one or more spaces are occupied or intended to be occupied by a camping party and which is customarily occupied for temporary purposes using tents, tent trailers, or other such structure for sleeping purposes. Campground does not mean any of the following: 
1.  Any camp or other housing furnished by an employer exclusively for employees; 
2.  Any area or tract of land within the curtilage of any private dwelling house rented only occasionally and incidental to the normal occupancy of the dwelling house; 
3.  Any area or tract of land operated or used exclusively for religious, charitable, or educational purposes by any organization that has qualified for an exemption from property taxes under the laws of the state of California; 
4.  A campground owned and operated by the state of California. 
"Camping party" means a person or group of persons occupying a space at a campground. 
"Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, including any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similarly structure or portion thereof. A mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location shall not include a mobile home located within a mobile home park, nor a location where the mobile home tenant is an employee of the owner or operator of the property on which the mobile home is located. 
"Occupancy" means the use or possession of, or the right to use or possess, any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel or dwelling, or space in any campground or recreational vehicle park, for lodging or sleeping purposes. 
"Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, campground, or recreational vehicle park, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
"Person" means any individual, camping party, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational purposes and is either self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently towable on the highways without a permit. 
"Recreational vehicle park" means an area or tract of land where one or more spaces are occupied or intended to be occupied by owners or users of recreational vehicles and which is customarily occupied for temporary purposes. 
Recreational vehicle park does not mean any of the following: 
1.  A mobile home park as defined in the Health and Safety Code; 
2.  An area or tract of land used for the placement of manufactured homes as defined in the Health and Safety Code; 
3.  Any area or tract of land where spaces are furnished by an employer exclusively for employees; 
4.  Any area or tract of land within the curtilage of any private dwelling house rented only occasionally and incidental to the normal occupancy of the dwelling house; 
5.  Any area or tract of land used exclusively for religious, charitable, or educational purposes by any organization that has qualified for an exemption from property taxes under the laws of the state of California; 
6.  A recreational vehicle park owned and operated by the state of California. 
"Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel, or space in any campground or recreational vehicle park, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
"Space" means an area or tract of land of a campground or recreational vehicle park designated or used for the occupancy of a camping party or recreational vehicle. 
"Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying any room or rooms or portion thereof in a hotel, or space in any campground or recreational vehicle park, shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. 
(Ord. 93-03 § 2)  
3.20.020 - Tax imposed—Payment and collection. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, campground, or recreational vehicle park, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel, campground, or recreational vehicle park, at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient ceasing to occupy space in a room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel, or space in any campground or recreational vehicle park. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, campground, or recreational vehicle park, the director of finance shall require that the tax be paid directly to the director of finance of city. 
(Ord. 93-03 § 3)  
3.20.030 - Exemptions. 
A.  No tax shall be imposed upon the following: 
1.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter; 
2.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
B.  No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the finance director of the city. 
(Ord. 93-03 § 4)  
3.20.040 - Operator duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel, campground, or recreational vehicle park shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-03 § 5)  
3.20.050 - Registration certificates. 
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel, campground, or recreational vehicle park renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel, campground or recreational vehicle park with the director of finance of city and obtain from him or her a "transient occupancy registration certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The name and address of the hotel, campground, or recreational vehicle park; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the city director of finance for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the director of finance. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business, or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel, campground, or recreational vehicle park without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Ord. 93-03 § 6)  
3.20.060 - Reports and remittances. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the finance director, make a return to the finance director, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the city finance director. The finance director may establish a shorter reporting period for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection for the tax and he or she may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the city finance director. 
(Ord. 93-03 § 7)  
3.20.070 - Delinquency—Interest. 
A.  Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a secondary delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  If the finance director determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first become delinquent until paid. 
E.  Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid by this chapter. 
(Ord. 93-03 § 8)  
3.20.080 - Determination of delinquency. 
If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the finance director shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the finance director procures such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect it and to make the report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against the operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the finance director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of business. The operator may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of the notice, make application in writing to the finance director for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the finance director shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the finance director shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for the tax, interest and penalties. At the hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why the specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After the hearing the finance director shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this section of the determination and the amount of the tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.20.090. 
(Ord. 93-03 § 9)  
3.20.090 - Appeal and hearing. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the finance director with respect to the amount of the tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to the operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in Section 3.20.080 for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Ord. 93-03 § 10)  
3.20.100 - Records required. 
It is the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment of the city, which records the finance director shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 93-03 § 11)  
3.20.110 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section; provided, a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the finance director within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the finance director. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the finance director that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner prescribed in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the finance director that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 93-03 § 12)  
3.20.120 - Collection by court action. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 93-03 § 13)  
3.20.130 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in accordance with Section 1.16.010 of this code. 
B.  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the finance director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as set out in subsection A of this section. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim, who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as set out in subsection A of this section. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Ord. 93-03 § 16)  
Chapter 3.24 - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Created. 
To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code, and to avail itself of the benefits of Sections 2106 and 2107 thereof, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as "special gas tax street improvement fund." 
(Ord. 93-04 § 1)  
3.24.020 - Payments into fund. 
All monies received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interest therein, or for engineering or for the construction, maintenance, or improvement of streets or highways by the city, and all interest received from the investment thereof, shall be paid into said fund. 
(Ord. 93-04 § 2)  
3.24.030 - Expenditures. 
All monies in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purpose authorized by and subject to the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 93-04 § 3)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
5.04.010 - Purpose. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for the purpose of regulation. All revenue raised from business licenses shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. It is the intent of the city, subject to the approval of the city council, to allocate a portion of the general fund equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the business license tax revenue collected to business procurement and promotion. 
(Ord. 94-50 § 1)  
5.04.020 - Definitions. 
"Business" means professions, trades, lessors, and occupations, and all and every kind of calling carried on for profits or livelihood where the gross income exceeds three hundred dollars ($300.00) per quarter. 
"Contractor and subcontractor" mean and refer to persons who transact in the city the business of a contractor licensed pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code. 
"Engaged in business" means the conducting, managing, or carrying on of any profession, trade, calling, occupation or commercial enterprise in the city. 
"Licensee" means any person to whom a license has been issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. 94-50 § 2)  
5.04.030 - Business licenses required. 
It is unlawful for any person to be engaged in business in the city of Shasta Lake without having an unrevoked license from the city of Shasta Lake to do so, valid and in effect, and in compliance with regulations of business contained in this chapter, unless exempt under the provisions of this chapter. The business charge set forth herein shall be paid for each kind or class of business carried on within the city limits of Shasta Lake. 
The issuance of a business license under this chapter or any other ordinance shall not entitle the licensee to engage in any business which for any reason is in violation of any law, this chapter or other ordinances. 
(Ord. 94-50 § 3)  
5.04.040 - Application. 
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for the license to the city clerk, and upon the payment of the prescribed fee, the city clerk shall issue to the person a license which contains the following: 
A.  The name of the person to whom the license is issued; 
B.  The business license; 
C.  The address and type of business; 
D.  The date of expiration of the license; 
E.  Other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
The city clerk must affix the official seal, business license number, and imprint the clerk's signature on all licenses. The city clerk shall maintain adequate records of all matters pertaining to the business licenses issued by the city clerk. 
(Ord. 94-50 § 4)  
5.04.050 - No assignment of license. 
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred or assigned, nor shall any license be construed as authorizing any person other than the licensee and his or her employees, to engage in the licensed business. 
(Ord. 94-50 § 5)  
5.04.060 - Licensing of contractors and subcontractors. 
All contractors and subcontractors, whether or not having a fixed place of business within the city, who are engaged in business within the city shall obtain a business license. 
(Ord. 94-50 § 6)  
5.04.070 - Display. 
The business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the licensees' place of business or vehicle. Every person having such a license and not having a fixed place of business shall carry the license with him or her at all times while carrying on the business for which it was granted. Every person having a license shall produce and exhibit it when applying for a renewal of whenever requested to do so by any police officer or authorized city agent. 
(Ord. 94-50 § 7)  
5.04.080 - Police duties. 
The city law enforcement department or contract Shasta County sheriff's department officers, acting in behalf of the city, shall have and exercise the power to make arrests for the violation of the provisions of this chapter and to enter upon business premises, free of charge, at any time a license is required by this chapter, for the purpose of demanding exhibition of the license for the current term by any person engaged or employed in the transaction of business. If the person fails then and there to exhibit the license, the person shall be liable to the penalties provided for herein as a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 94-50 § 8)  
5.04.090 - License fees. 
Businesses engaging in business in the city of Shasta Lake for a period of less than six months of the calendar year shall pay a minimum fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). All businesses with the city limits engaging in business for more than six months during the calendar year shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. 94-50 § 9)  
5.04.100 - Fees due and payable. 
The business license fee provided in this chapter shall be due and payable to the city on the first day of business of each year, and shall be delinquent thirty (30) days thereafter. 
(Ord. 94-50 § 10)  
5.04.110 - Delinquency. 
A person or business failing to obtain a business license as required by this chapter shall be subject to a ten percent delinquent penalty charge added to the amount of the business license fee due for each month that the person or business entity fails to obtain the license. The city clerk shall take steps to collect such delinquent accounts. 
(Ord. 94-50 § 11)  
5.04.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is an infraction. The conviction and punishment of any person having engaged in business without a license shall not exempt or excuse the person from payment of any license fee due and payable at the time of the conviction and nothing in this chapter shall prevent the filing of a civil action to collect unpaid license fees. 
(Ord. 94-50 § 12)  
5.04.130 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a nonprofit organization that is exempted from taxes by Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 23701) of Part 11 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or Subchapter F (commencing with Section 501) of the Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or to any minister, clergyman, Christian Science practitioner, rabbi or priest of any religious organization that has been granted an exemption from federal income tax by the United States Commissioner of Internal Revenue as an organization described in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or a successor to that section. 
(Ord. 94-50 § 13)  
Chapter 5.05 - REGULATION OF COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES 
 
5.05.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this section to regulate the cultivation, manufacturing, testing, distribution, transportation, and sale of cannabis in order to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. The regulations in this article, in compliance with the Compassionate Use Act, the Medical Marijuana Program Act, the Medical Cannabis Regulations and Safety Act, Proposition 64, and the California Health and Safety Code (collectively referred to as "state law") do not interfere with the right to use cannabis or medical cannabis as authorized under state law, nor do they criminalize the possession or cultivation of cannabis or medical cannabis as authorized under state law. All commercial cannabis business shall at all times be in compliance with current state law at a minimum. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.020 - Scope of article. 
The operating standards established in this article apply to any site, facility, location, use, or business currently operating in the city, or which commences operations after the effective date of this section, that cultivates, distributes, dispenses, stores, sells, exchanges, processes, delivers, or gives away cannabis for medical or recreational purposes. Any dispensary, cultivation facility, manufacturing facility or testing facility shall operate in conformance with the operating standards set forth in this section of the code to assure that the operations of the dispensary, cultivation facility, manufacturing facility, distribution or testing facility are in compliance with state law and to mitigate the adverse secondary effects from its operations. 
Persons who cultivate cannabis for their sole personal use, or qualified primary caregivers who cultivate medical cannabis on behalf of their qualified patient(s) may do so in quantities recommended by their physician and in accordance with all state and local regulations without submitting any application or permit. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance may also be deemed to exist if such activity is determined to be related to the cultivation of cannabis and produces: 
1.  Odors which are disturbing to people residing or present on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public. 
2.  Repeated responses to the property from law enforcement or other code enforcement officers (more than three (3) times in a one-year period). 
3.  Repeated disruption to the free passage of persons or vehicles in the neighborhood (more than three (3) times in a one-year period) as reported to law enforcement officers or the city code enforcement officer. 
4.  Any other impact which adversely impacts the health, safety or general welfare of people on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the city's authority to abate any nuisance which may exist from the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, processing or storage of cannabis plants or any part thereof from any location. 
All cannabis cultivation shall be subject to chapter 8.12 (summary abatement-immediately dangerous buildings and conditions), chapter 8.16 (abatement of dangerous buildings, substandard buildings and public nuisances) and the state housing code (California Health and Safety Code) and other applicable provisions of local and state law. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.030 - Definitions. 
The definitions in section 17.10.030 are incorporated herein as fully set forth and are applicable to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.040 - Separation requirements. 
No cannabis dispensary, cultivation facility, manufacturing facility, testing facility or any other commercial cannabis business facility may be located within a 900-feet linear footage (from property line to property line) from a school, day care home, recreational center, youth center, library or public park as required by Section 11362.768 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.050 - Maximum number of dispensaries permitted citywide. 
A.  In no case shall the city allow more than three (3) dispensaries to operate within city limits, regardless of the location's compliance with any other section specified in this title. 
B.  The total number of dispensaries in operation shall be determined based on the number of locations which have been issued a cannabis dispensary permit by the city or are eligible to submit for a cannabis dispensary permit. 
C.  Dispensaries already operating with the city's permission in the city are deemed permitted to dispense cannabis and cannabis products provided they pay all regulatory fees and taxes and all other requirements and standards of the city's regulatory ordinance, zoning ordinance and tax ordinance and as they may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.060 - Commercial cannabis cultivation, testing, manufacturing, distribution and dispensing facilities. 
A.  Commercial cannabis cultivation shall be limited to indoor or mixed-light only. 
B.  Cannabis cultivation, manufacturing or testing facilities shall not contain an exhibition or product sales area or allow for retail distribution of products at that location. 
C.  Cannabis cultivation, manufacturing, dispensary, testing and distribution facilities shall be required to provide an air treatment system that ensures off-site odors shall not result from its operations. This requirement at a minimum means that the facility shall be designed to provide sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust systems so that any odor generated inside the location is not detected outside the building, on adjacent properties or public rights-of-way, or within any other unit located within the same building as the facility, if the use occupies only a portion of a building. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017; Ord. No. 18-268, 4-3-2018)  
5.05.070 - Commercial cannabis business permit required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city cannabis business without a commercial cannabis business permit. A cannabis business shall register and obtain a commercial cannabis business permit from the city prior to operation. The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by the city council. 
B.  A copy of the commercial cannabis business permit shall be displayed at all times in a place visible to the public. 
C.  A commercial cannabis business permit shall be valid for one year, unless sooner revoked. No permit granted herein shall confer any vested right to any person or business for more than the above-referenced period. 
D.  All owners shall comply with state residency requirements as defined in Business and Professions Code 26054.1(a)(b). 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.080 - Commercial cannabis business permit. 
A.  A commercial cannabis business permit shall not be issued to an individual or a business entity associated with an individual, who has violated California Health and Safety Code Section 11590 and its provisions. 
B.  The commercial cannabis business permit shall be issued to the specific person or persons listed on the cannabis permit application. 
C.  A commercial cannabis business permit does not transfer with the land and does not transfer with the transfer of the property. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.090 - Commercial cannabis business permit application submission process. 
A.  The development services director or his/her designee will prepare cannabis application forms and a related administrative policy. Each applicant interested in operating pursuant to this section may submit an application together with a nonrefundable processing fee in an amount established by the city council. 
B.  The initial application period shall be thirty (30) calendar days from the date the applications are released. Should the thirtieth (30th) day fall on a day when city hall is closed, the application period shall be extended to the next open day at four o'clock p.m. Following the application period, the director or his/her designee shall stop accepting applications and review all applications received. 
C.  The director or his/her designee shall determine whether each application received demonstrates compliance with the minimum requirements to be eligible to be entered into the selection process. These requirements include: 
1.  Application was submitted during the application period. 
2.  Application is filled out completely. 
3.  Application fee is paid. 
4.  The location indicated on the application meets the zoning criteria established in section 17.10.020. 
5.  The location indicated on the application meets the separation criteria established in section 5.05.040. 
6.  A planning and/or building permit with a receipt proving payment for processing from the city planning department for the property location the commercial cannabis business will occupy. 
7.  A notarized signature from the property owner authorizing the location to be used for commercial cannabis business activity. 
8.  Authorization from the management association/CC&R's that a cannabis business use is allowed on that parcel (if applicable). 
9.  Business owner(s)/applicant(s) referenced on the application completes live scan background check. 
10.  There may be no change in applicant/business owner from the one(s) listed on the commercial cannabis business permit application. The application must identify individual owner(s) as defined in the MCRSA 19320(b)1. et seq.) as may be amended. 
11.  All other application documents required in the city's application package instructions, the MCRSA, Proposition 64 and any other applicable regulations as they may be amended. 
12.  Photographs of the exterior of the building including the entrance(s), exit(s), street frontage(s) and parking area. 
13.  If the property is being rented, leased or purchased under contract, the lease agreement term, name of lessor or equivalent, shall be provided by a notarized signed affidavit of the property owner. 
14.  The name and address of the applicant's current agent for service of process. 
15.  A copy of the applicant's board of equalization seller's permit. 
16.  A copy of the commercial cannabis business operating standards, listed in sections 5.05.130 and 5.05.140 if applicable containing a statement dated and signed by the business owner stating that under penalty of perjury that they read, understand and shall ensure compliance with the aforementioned operating standards. 
17.  Provide a statement, signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury, that the information provided is complete, true, and accurate. 
18.  Release of the city from all liability associated with the commercial cannabis business. Such a release includes indemnifying the city for claims, damages and injuries that may arise as a result of the commercial cannabis business. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.100 - Commercial cannabis business permit application selection process. 
A.  The director or his/her designee will evaluate the applications received and make a determination on the eligibility of each application. The director of development services shall confer with law enforcement on the background checks of the listed managers, employees and volunteers. Each application that is complete and in compliance with chapter shall be placed on the "qualified commercial cannabis business application list" and shall be notified in writing that they are a "qualified commercial cannabis business applicant." 
B.  Qualified applicants will appear on the "qualified applicant list" in the order that they are selected during the independent selection process. The development services department shall maintain the "qualified application list." 
C.  A qualified commercial cannabis business applicant must submit a written request each year to maintain its status on the "qualified application list." 
D.  All cannabis applications received after the initial application period will be reviewed for completeness and compliance with this chapter. If the application qualifies, it will be placed on a "waitlist" in the order it is received. Applicants placed on the "waitlist" shall be notified in writing of their "waitlist" status. 
E.  Cannabis applications placed on the "waitlist" will be moved to the "qualified applicant list" when the number of applicants on the "qualified applicant list" falls below twenty (20) and will be notified of the change in writing. 
F.  The director of development services or his/her designee, after receiving the application and aforementioned information, will grant the permit if they find: 
1.  The required fee has been paid. 
2.  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
4.  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation and background checks required by this section. 
5.  The applicant has not had a commercial cannabis business license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city in the state within the last five (5) years prior to the date of the application. 
6.  The commercial cannabis business, as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety requirements. 
7.  The applicant has demonstrated compliance with all aspects of the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act (MCRSA) and any other applicable requirements contained in the California Health and Safety Code. 
G.  After all tenant improvements have been finalized by the commercial cannabis business owner, the director of development services or his/her designee shall perform an inspection of the cannabis business location to confirm compliance with this section and issue a report to the director of development services to ensure compliance with the submitted application. 
H.  If any of the items listed in the application process are not met, the director shall notify the applicant of the deficiency, after which the applicant will have ten days from receipt of notice to correct the deficiency. If the deficiency is not corrected within ten days, the director may deny the permit and notify the applicant of this determination in writing after which the applicant can appeal the decision in accordance with section 5.05.120 (appeal of denial of permit reference). 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017; Ord. No. 18-268, 4-3-2018)  
5.05.110 - Cannabis permit annual renewal. 
A.  Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed with the director of development services at least sixty (60) calendar days before the expiration of the current permit. Any permittee allowing their permit to lapse or which permit expired during a suspension shall be required to submit a new application, pay the corresponding original application fees and be subject to all aspects of the selection process. 
B.  Any person desiring to obtain a renewal of their respective permit shall file a written application under penalty of perjury on the required form with the director of development services who will conduct a review. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by the city council to defray the cost of the review required by this section. An applicant shall be required to update the information contained in their original permit application and provide any new and/or additional information as may be reasonably required by the director of development services in order to determine whether said permit should be renewed. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.120 - Appeal of denial of permit. 
A.  The development services director, in consultation with law enforcement, building official and city fire protection district, will review all commercial cannabis business applications, and all other relevant information, and determine if a permit should be granted. If the development services director determines that the permit shall not be granted, the reasons for denial shall be provided in writing to the applicant. The applicant shall have fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of the receipt of the written denial to correct the reasons for denial and request in writing reconsideration of permit issuance. Following review of the amended permit application, the development services director will approve or deny the permit by providing written notice to the applicant. 
B.  An applicant who disagrees with the development services director's decision may appeal such decision to the city planning commission by submitting a written appeal within five (5) calendar days from receipt of the written denial pursuant to the requirements of section 17.92.050(G). A decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council if the appeal is submitted in writing to the city clerk within five (5) calendar days following the planning commission's action. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.130 - Operational standards for all commercial cannabis business activities. 
A.  Interior and exterior locations of the business property shall be monitored as all times by closed circuit cameras for security purposes. The cameras and recording system shall be of adequate quality, color rendition and resolution to allow the sufficient identification of any individual committing a crime on location premises. All controlled access areas, security rooms and all points of ingress/egress to limited access areas and all point of sale (POS) areas must have fixed camera coverage capable of identifying activity occurring within a minimum of twenty (20) feet. Camera video recordings shall be maintained unaltered in a secure onsite location for a period of not less than fourteen (14) days, and be available for inspection at any time. 
B.  Recordings shall be maintained, unaltered, for a period of not less than fourteen (14) days and shall be stored digitally. The city or law enforcement may request the recordings in connection with an investigation. If the recordings are not voluntarily provided, the city or law enforcement may seek a warrant or court order for the recordings. 
C.  A commercial cannabis business entity that remains inoperative for more than ninety (90) days shall be deemed "abandoned" and the permit shall be forfeited. A business may temporarily suspend operations for a period of time as may be reasonably required to affect upgrades, modifications, repairs, or other property issue mitigations as approved by the development services director or his or her designee. 
D.  Establish and participate in a track and trace system for reporting the movement of commercial cannabis throughout the distribution chain. 
E.  Register with the department of pesticide regulation if using any pesticides. 
F.  Comply with all state regulations regarding testing, labeling and storage of all cannabis products. 
G.  Meet all state and local regulations for the disposal of all cannabis materials and materials used in conjunction with processing, distributing and cultivating of cannabis. 
H.  Conform to all state regulations requiring the use of appropriate weighing devices. 
I.  Conform to all state and local regulations regarding water usage. 
J.  All electrical and plumbing must comply with state and local regulations. 
K.  Comply with all state insurance and security bond regulations. 
L.  The commercial cannabis business shall have a centrally-monitored fire and burglar alarm system which shall include all perimeter entry points and perimeter windows. 
M.  Meet all state deadlines for applying for a state license and receive a state license within six (6) months after the date the state begins issuing licenses. This may be waived if the state has longer delays in issuing licenses of the type the commercial cannabis business seeks. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.140 - Additional operational standards for dispensaries. 
A.  If required by the state, at all times the cannabis dispensary is open, the dispensary shall provide at least one security guard who is licensed, possesses a valid department of consumer affairs "security guard card", and has a valid city business license. 
B.  The security guard and cannabis dispensary personnel shall monitor the site and the immediate vicinity of the site to assure that patrons immediately leave the site and do not consume cannabis in the vicinity of the dispensary or on the property or in the parking lot. 
1.  Signage. 
a.  All exterior signage shall conform with existing zoning requirements. The existing dispensary signage is 'grandfathered' in as of April 1, 2017. Any additional signage modifications shall comply with existing zoning. 
b.  The following information shall be provided on a sign posted in a conspicuous location inside the cannabis dispensary: 
(i)  Smoking, ingesting or consuming cannabis on this property or within one hundred (100) feet of the business is prohibited. 
(ii)  No one under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be allowed to enter this facility unless they are a qualified patient or a primary caregiver and they are in the presence of their parent or legal guardian. 
(iii)  The city of Shasta Lake has not tested or inspected any cannabis product for pesticides, or other regulated contaminants, distributed at this location. 
C.  No recommendations from a doctor for medical cannabis shall be issued on-site. 
D.  Each dispensary owner shall establish minimum training standards for all employees. 
E.  There shall be no on-site sales of alcohol or tobacco products, and no on-site consumption of food, alcohol, tobacco or cannabis by patrons without prior written approval from the city. 
F.  Drive-through sales must be approved in writing by the city prior to implementing. 
G.  The dispensary shall comply with state department of health requirements pertaining to use of commercial kitchen facilities for the cannabis operations. 
H.  Hours of operation shall be limited to: Monday—Sunday ten o'clock (10:00) a.m.—eight o'clock (8:00) p.m. 
I.  All employees of the dispensary must wear photo identification badges clearly identifying them as employees at all times when on duty. Badges must have a frontal face picture, be at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches and of passport picture quality. Alternatively, employees must at all times on the premises wear an employer furnished uniform and name badge which clearly identifies them as an employee, and distinguishes them from customers and others. 
J.  No one under eighteen (18) years of age shall be permitted to enter a dispensary unless such person is a qualified patient and is accompanied by his or her primary caregiver, licensed attending physician, parent(s) or documented legal guardian. 
K.  Any commercial cannabis dispensary already in compliance and permitted by the city will be considered selected and continue to operate under the regulations of this chapter, provided however, that in order to continue operating such commercial cannabis business must apply for a commercial cannabis business permit pursuant to this chapter and otherwise meet all other conditions and requirements of this chapter imposed on newly-established commercial cannabis businesses. Only three (3) such facilities exist in the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.150 - Deliveries. 
A.  Deliveries may be made from a licensed dispensary or retail outlet. 
B.  All employees who deliver cannabis must have a valid identification card at all times while the delivery is being made. 
C.  Deliveries may only take place during normal business hours of the dispensary or retail outlet. 
D.  A customer requesting delivery shall maintain a physical or electronic copy of the delivery request and shall make it available upon request by the licensing authority and law enforcement officers. 
E.  A dispensary or retail outlet shall maintain a list of all deliveries, including the address delivered to, the amount and type of product delivered and any other information required by the state. 
F.  A cannabis business shall only deliver cannabis in aggregate amounts tied to its members' needs. A cannabis business shall ensure compliance with state law limits as they regard cannabis and cannabis products. 
G.  A manifest with all information required in this section must accompany any delivery person or delivery method at all times during the delivery process and delivery hours. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.160 - Maintenance of records. 
A.  A cannabis dispensary shall maintain records at the location accurately and truthfully documenting: 
1.  The full name, address, and telephone number(s) of the owner, landlord, and/or lease of the location. 
2.  The full name, address, and telephone number(s) of all members who are engaged in the management of the dispensary. 
3.  Medical cannabis dispensaries shall maintain the full name, address and telephone number(s) of all patient members to whom the business provides medical cannabis, and a copy of a physician-issued recommendation card for all patient members. 
4.  All receipts of the dispensary, including but not limited to: all contributions, reimbursements, and reasonable compensation, whether in cash or in kind, and all expenditures incurred by the dispensary. 
B.  These records shall be maintained for a period of seven (7) years and shall be made available by the dispensary to the law enforcement and/or code enforcement officials upon request. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.170 - Inspection and enforcement responsibilities. 
City code enforcement officials may enter and inspect the location of any commercial cannabis business between the normal business hours to ensure compliance with this section. In addition, law enforcement may enter and inspect the location of any cannabis business and the recordings and records maintained as required by this section, except that the inspection and copying of private medical records shall be made available to law enforcement only pursuant to a properly executed search warrant, subpoena, or court order. A person engaging in commercial cannabis business without a permit and associated unique identifiers required by this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties of up to twice the amount of the permit fee for each violation, and the department, state or local authority, or court may order the destruction of cannabis associated with that violation. A violator shall be responsible for the cost of the destruction of cannabis associated with his or her violation, in addition to any amount covered by a bond required as a condition of licensure. Each day of operation shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.180 - Fees. 
All cannabis operations shall pay applicable fees and taxes, which may include one or more of the following. 
A.  Application Fee. The business applicant shall submit a nonrefundable fee to cover the cost of processing an application for the commercial cannabis business. 
B.  Business License Fee. The business owner shall at all times maintain a current and valid business certificate and pay all business taxes required by this code. 
C.  Regulatory License Fee. The business owner shall pay an annual regulatory license fee ("regulatory fee") to cover the costs of anticipated enforcement relating to the cannabis operation. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the city council and be supported by the estimated additional costs of enforcement and monitoring associated with the cannabis operation. The regulatory fee shall be due and payable prior to opening for business and thereafter on or before the anniversary date. The regulatory fee may be amended from time to time based upon actual costs. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
5.05.190 - Violation and enforcement. 
Each and every violation of this section shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures authorized by this code. Additionally, as a nuisance per se, any violation of this article shall be subject to injunctive relief, revocation of the business's commercial cannabis business permit, disgorgement and payment to the city of any and all monies unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of investigation, attorney fees, and any other relief or remedy available at law or equity. The city may also pursue any and all remedies and actions available and applicable under local and state laws for any violations committed by the cannabis business and persons related or associated with the cannabis business. 
(Ord. No. 17-259, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
Chapter 5.06 - REGULATION OF PERSONAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION 
 
5.06.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to impose restrictions on the personal cultivation of cannabis pursuant to state law. This article is not intended to interfere with a patient's right to use medical cannabis pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act, as may be amended, nor does it criminalize cannabis possession or cultivation otherwise authorized by state law. This article is not intended to give any person or entity independent legal authority to operate a cannabis business, it is intended simply to impose restrictions regarding personal cultivation of cannabis in the city pursuant to this code and state law. 
(Ord. No. 18-269, 4-3-2018)  
5.06.020 - Permit required. 
The cannabis cultivation addressed in this chapter will require a permit issued by the city. The city council may, by resolution, establish fees to cover costs incurred by the city in administering and enforcing this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 18-269, 4-3-2018)  
5.06.030 - Applicability. 
No part of this article shall be deemed to conflict with federal law as contained in the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. § 800 et seq., nor to otherwise permit any activity that is prohibited under that act or any other local, state or federal law, statute, rule or regulation. Nothing in this article shall be construed to allow any conduct or activity relating to the cultivation, distribution, dispensing, sale, or consumption of cannabis that is otherwise illegal under local or state law. No provision of this article shall be deemed a defense or immunity to any action brought against any person by the city, the Attorney General of the State of California or the United States of America. 
(Ord. No. 18-269, 4-3-2018)  
5.06.040 - Definitions. 
The definitions in Section 17.10.030 are incorporated herein as fully set forth and are applicable to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 18-269, 4-3-2018)  
5.06.050 - Indoor personal cultivation. 
Indoor Cultivation. Indoor personal cultivation of cannabis is permitted in all legally established dwelling units pursuant to the standards included in this chapter: 
A.  All indoor personal cultivation, including by a qualified patient or primary caregiver, shall occur in a legally established dwelling or fully-enclosed and legal accessory building or structure. 
B.  Medical cannabis shall be cultivated by a qualified patient (or primary caregiver) exclusively for his or her own personal medical use but who does not provide, donate, sell, or distribute medical cannabis to any other person. 
C.  Structures and equipment used for indoor cultivation, such as indoor grow lights, shall comply with all applicable building, electrical and fire code regulations as adopted by the city. 
D.  All accessory buildings and structures used for indoor cultivation shall comply with the state building code requirements pertaining to natural and mechanical ventilation or as otherwise determined by the building official or his/her designee. Cultivation shall not create an odor, humidity or mold problem on the subject property or adjacent properties. 
E.  Indoor personal cultivation of cannabis may occur inside a dwelling and/or an accessory building or structure on the same parcel, subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  The cumulative cultivation area for medical cannabis shall total no more than twenty-five (25) contiguous square feet per qualified patient, and no more than one hundred (100) contiguous square feet for primary caregivers, but in no event shall the total cumulative cultivation area for medical cannabis exceed one hundred (100) contiguous square feet regardless of how many qualified patients or primary caregivers reside at the premises. Either a qualified patient or primary caregiver shall reside full-time on the premises where the medical cannabis cultivation occurs. 
2.  For persons other than qualified patients or primary caregivers, all personal cultivation shall be conducted by persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older. For persons other than qualified patients or primary caregivers, the cumulative total of cannabis plants on the property, indoor and outdoor, shall not exceed six cannabis plants, regardless of the number of persons residing on the property. 
F.  Personal cultivation of cannabis shall not interfere with the primary occupancy of the building or structure, including regular use of kitchen(s), bathroom(s) or the garage. 
G.  No exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring at the property shall be discernable from the public right-of-way. 
H.  Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to preclude any landlord from limiting or prohibiting personal cultivation of cannabis by tenants. 
I.  Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to authorize commercial cultivation of cannabis. 
J.  Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to authorize any public or private nuisance as specified in this code. 
(Ord. No. 18-269, 4-3-2018)  
5.06.060 - Outdoor personal cultivation. 
Outdoor Cultivation. Outdoor personal cultivation of cannabis is permitted as a part of legally established dwelling units, pursuant to the standards included in this chapter: 
A.  For persons other than qualified patients or primary caregivers, all outdoor personal cultivation shall be conducted by persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older, and the cumulative total of cannabis plants on the property, indoor and outdoor, shall not exceed six cannabis plants, regardless of number of persons residing on the property. 
B.  For qualified patients and primary caregivers, the cumulative total of cannabis plants outside shall not exceed six cannabis plants, regardless of the number of qualified patients and primary caregivers residing on the property. 
C.  Outdoor personal cultivation of cannabis is only permitted in a rear or side yard that is entirely enclosed by a solid, opaque fence that is associated with a dwelling or secondary dwelling unit. 
D.  The height of the cannabis plants shall not exceed the standard fence height applicable to the parcel, or six feet, whichever is lesser. 
E.  The cannabis plants shall be placed at a minimum setback of five feet from the edge of canopy to the property line. 
F.  No exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring at the property shall be visible from the public right-of-way. 
G.  Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to preclude any landlord from limiting or prohibiting cannabis cultivation by tenants. 
H.  Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to authorize commercial cultivation of cannabis. 
I.  Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to authorize any public or private nuisance as specified in this code. 
(Ord. No. 18-269, 4-3-2018)  
5.06.070 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter will be enforced by the city's code enforcement officials. 
(Ord. No. 18-269, 4-3-2018)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this title the following definitions apply: 
"Animal" means any living creature, except humans. 
"Animal at large" means any animal that is wilfully or negligently permitted to run off of the property of the owner or possessor. 
"Animal control" means the animal control unit of the city. 
"Animal control officer" may be used interchangeably with "office" and means the individual appointed by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this Title. 
"Cattery" means a place where four or more adult cats are kept, whether by owners of the cats or by persons providing facilities and care, whether or not for compensation, but not including a pet shop. An adult cat is one of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of six months. 
"Fee" means a fee, rate or charge set by the city council. 
"Health department" means the county health department. 
"Health officer" means the county health officer or his or her designee. 
"Kennel" means any premises upon which four or more dogs over four months old are kept for any purpose, except a veterinary hospital operated by a veterinarian or an animal shelter operated by a governmental agency. 
"Kennel operator" means a person who owns or operates a kennel. 
"Person" means an individual, corporation, partnership or association. 
"Possessor" means a person possessing an animal. 
"Officer" means animal control officer. 
"Person" means an individual, corporation, partnership or association. 
"Possessor" means a person possessing an animal. 
"Stray animal" means an animal which is permitted by the owner or possessor, whether through negligence or willfulness, to run at large within the city upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court, or any other public place, or upon any private property or premises other than those of the person owning or having charge of the animal. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.04.020 - Administration. 
A.  The animal control officer shall be appointed and supervised by the city manager and shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this title and (a) with the assistance of designees, issue citations for violations of this title. 
B.  The officer shall: 
1.  Exercise direct line supervision over the animal control officers, keep such records as may be required by the city manager or his or her designee, and make duty assignments; 
2.  Cooperate with the Department of Fish and Game trappers regarding predatory animals and other problems related to animal control; 
3.  Make referrals to the sheriff or the sheriff's designee of general law violations and of major crimes involving animals. 
C.  Each officer shall receive initial and recurrent training which will enable him or her to carry out the duties prescribed by this chapter. 
D.  Animal control officers are public officers, and not peace officers. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.04.030 - Enforcement. 
A.  The owner or possessor of any animal which is a nuisance or which is not vaccinated or not licensed may be issued a citation to appear in municipal or justice court to determine whether the condition, treatment or confinement of the animal or other circumstances constituting the violation have changed so as to eliminate the nuisance or violation. The court may make any order it deems appropriate to prevent reoccurrence of the nuisance or violation, including the destruction of the animal or the removal of the animal from the premises. 
B.  Administrative hearings required by this chapter shall be conducted by a hearing officer selected by the city manager and the city attorney. The hearing officer will be an individual who is not a city employee nor having any interest or involvement in animal regulation actions for the city. The hearing officer will have had prior experience in the conducting of administrative hearings. Hearings shall be conducted in an informal manner consistent with due process of law. The owner or possessor of the animal and the department may present relevant evidence and call and cross-examine witnesses, but the strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing officer shall render a brief written decision within ten days following the hearing. The failure to conduct a hearing required by this title shall have no bearing on any criminal prosecution for violation of any provision of this title. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 6.08 - ANIMAL REGULATIONS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
6.08.010 - General care of animals. 
The owner or possessor of any animal must provide adequate housing inside the owner's residence, or a run, fenced yard, or a chain not less than six feet in length, shelter from the elements, and daily fresh food and water. 
If it is determined by animal control that any animal suffering from abuse or neglect and the owner of the animal does not take immediate action to remedy the situation, animal control may take immediate possession of the animal and hold the animal in protective custody until the officer is assured the animal will be properly provided for by the owner. Any fees or charges incurred during the protective custody period including any veterinary charges will be the responsibility of the owner of the animal. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.020 - Keeping of animals. 
A.  No person shall keep any animal, fowl or bird, wild or domestic, other than cats, dogs, canaries or birds of the psittacinae family, within thirty-five (35) feet of any residence or dwelling house or other building used for the habitation of human beings or within one hundred (100) feet from any school, hospital or similar institution. 
B.  No such animal or fowl shall be kept or maintained in any yard, coop or building which is in a foul or unsanitary condition. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.030 - Cleanliness of premises. 
Every person owning or occupying premises where any animal is kept shall keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition and free of animal urine and fecal matter. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.040 - Animal restraints. 
A.  No person driving a motor vehicle shall transport any animal in the back of the vehicle in a space intended for any load on the vehicle on a highway unless the space is enclosed or has side and tail racks to a height of at least forty-six (46) inches extending vertically from the floor, the vehicle has installed means of preventing the animal from being discharged, or the animal is cross tethered to the vehicle, or is protected by a secured container or cage, in a manner which will prevent the animal from being thrown, falling, or jumping from the vehicle. 
B.  This section does not apply to any of the following: 
1.  The transportation of livestock. 
2.  The transportation of a dog on a public road required for transport between different portions of the owner's property for purposes associated with ranching or farming. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.050 - Nuisances designated. 
A.  Dangerous Animals. 
1.  Presumption of Dangerousness. A dangerous animal is a nuisance. Any animal except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which demonstrates any of the following behavior is rebuttably presumed dangerous: 
a.  An attack which requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury and/or property damage in a place where such person is conducting himself or herself peacefully and lawfully; 
b.  An attack that results in an injury to a person in a place where such person is conducting himself or herself peacefully and lawfully; 
c.  Any behavior that constitutes a physical threat of bodily harm to a person in a place where such person is conducting himself or herself peacefully and lawfully; 
d.  An attack on another animal or livestock which occurs off the property of the owner of the attacking animal. 
For the purposes of this section, a person is peacefully and lawfully upon the private property of an owner or possessor of the animal when he is on such property in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by the laws of the state or any city, or by the laws or postal regulations of the United States, or when he or she is on such property upon invitation, expressed or implied. 
2.  Finding of Dangerousness. After notice and hearing upon charges following the procedure expressed in Section 6.04.030B, the animal control officer may declare that an animal is dangerous. 
3.  Dangerous Animal At Large. Any dangerous animal found at large shall be impounded. Any dangerous animal found at large within twelve (12) months after having been declared a dangerous animal, may be humanely destroyed after notice and hearing upon charges following the procedure expressed in Section 6.04.030B. 
4.  Impoundment Pending Hearings. Any animal subject to dangerous animal proceedings may be impounded at the discretion of the supervisor pending notice, hearings and determinations hereunder and until any required permit is obtained. The animal's owner shall be charged for all costs incurred or fees applicable with respect to such impoundment unless a finding is made that the animal is not dangerous. 
5.  Other Proceedings. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of any person or officer to take any proceedings against a dangerous animal or the owner thereof otherwise permitted or provided by law. 
6.  Expiration of Dangerous Animal Designation. Any animal designated as dangerous according to Section 6.04.030B will be monitored by animal control for thirty-six (36) months following the finding of being dangerous. If the owner of the animal complies with the dangerous animal conditions for the thirty-six (36) months, the city manager or his or her designees may remove the dangerous animal designation. 
B.  Unrestrained Dog on School Grounds. No owner or possessor of any dog shall permit it to enter upon the grounds of any school, unless the dog is secured by a leash or is under the control of its possessor or is securely fastened to some permanent fixture. An unrestrained dog which enters upon school grounds is a nuisance. 
C.  Strays. No owner or possessor of any animal shall permit it to stray from the premises where such animal is kept. It is unlawful for the owner or possessor to permit such animal to enter upon the land of another without the permission of the owner or possessor of such land. Any such animal is a nuisance. This subsection does not apply to livestock on the open range or to domestic cats. 
D.  Animals Which Disturb the Peace. The keeping of any animal which by habitually howling, barking or other noise, disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood is unlawful, and any such animal is a nuisance. The written affirmation by two persons, not related and having separate residences, stating that their peace and quiet is unreasonably disturbed by the animal shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. This subsection does not apply to reasonable noises emanating from legally operated hospitals, humane societies, kennels, farms or agricultural facilities. 
E.  Strays Which Damage Property. No owner or possessor of any animal shall permit it to trespass on public or private property so as to damage or destroy any property or thing of value. Such an animal is declared a nuisance. This subsection extends to trespass on the open range if the public health or welfare is endangered. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.060 - Nuisance abatement. 
If animal control finds a nuisance to exist, or if it determines that a dog is not vaccinated or licensed, it shall issue a citation to the owner or possessor of the animal, in accordance with Section 6.04.030A. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.070 - Dog leash law. 
A.  No owner or possessor of any dog shall cause or permit the dog to run at large in any area of the city pursuant to this section. For the purpose of this section, "running at large" means the presence of a dog at any place except upon the premises of the dog's owner or possessor. However, a dog shall not be considered to be running at large if it is on a leash. 
B.  Every dog running at large is a nuisance. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.080 - Capture of animals at large. 
Animal control officers shall attempt to capture any animal found at large in violation of this code. The officer shall not seize or impound any stray animal that has strayed from but returned to the property of its owner or possessor, but in such a case a citation may be issued pursuant to Section 6.04.030A. However, if the owner or possessor cannot safely secure the animal upon the premises, the animal may be impounded. The officer shall post a notice of impoundment at the residence or place of business of the owner or possessor of the animal, if known. The notice shall instruct the owner or possessor on how to retrieve the animal, shall indicate the ultimate disposition of the animal if no action to regain it is taken within a specified period of time, and shall advise the owner or possessor that he or she may, within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of notice, request a hearing before the city manager or his designee for the purpose of showing lack of reasonable cause for the seizure. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.090 - Impoundment. 
Animal control may impound any animal found or kept in violation of the provisions of this title, or found to be a public nuisance or determined to be injured or diseased. Owners of dogs or cats may voluntarily impound their animals with animal control and shall pay a fee for such impounding. The owner of any impounded animal is liable for the cost of the impoundment whether or not the owner redeems the animal. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.100 - Transportation costs. 
Animal control shall collect any special transportation costs for impounded animals in addition to the impoundment fee. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.110 - Sale or other disposition of impounded animals. 
A.  All impounded animals shall be kept in the animal facility for a period of four business days unless redeemed earlier. The time during which an animal has been held by another governmental entity shall be included in the determination of four business days. 
B.  Unless an impounded dog is redeemed by the owner or possessor within the time specified above, the animal control officer may dispose of the animal. If the identity of the owner or possessor of the animal is known, oral or written notice of the animal's impoundment and the date of intended disposal shall be given at least five days before disposal. Any time during which the animal was held by another governmental entity shall be included in determining the five-day period. 
C.  The owner or possessor of an impounded animal may redeem the animal within the time specified above by payment of a redemption fee. A license shall also be purchased prior to redemption of any unlicensed impounded dog. The owner or possessor shall, within ten (10) days of redemption, provide proof of current vaccination to animal control. 
D.  Animals relinquished by their owners may be destroyed or transferred to a new owner without regard to any prescribed holding time and without notice to the former owners. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.120 - Abandonment of dog or cat. 
It shall be unlawful to willfully abandon any domestic dog or cat. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.130 - Injured or diseased animals. 
No person shall knowingly possess any animal that is seriously injured or afflicted with mange, ringworm, distemper or any other contagious disease, unless in the opinion of the animal control officer or a veterinarian, the animal is being given adequate treatment for such condition. Animal control officers may take immediate possession of any animal not being treated or which is not responding to treatment, and dispose of the animal unless the owner or possessor immediately places the animal under the control or treatment of a veterinarian. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.140 - Animal owner responsibilities. 
City Policy. It is the policy of the city to determine the degree of injury to the animal and the extent of suffering and pain. The animal control officer will examine and identity any obvious injuries that are survivable with reasonable care. Once this examination has taken place, the officer will make every effort to determine the ownership of animal. The animal owner will be responsible for all bills incurred from the time discovered until discharge or euthanization of the animal by the veterinarian. In the event that ownership can't be determined, the city will stabilize the animal to the degree that can be performed with minimal veterinarian care. Injured animals with no known ownership and significant injuries requiring more than initial life stabilization treatment will be euthanized. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to convey all injured cats and dogs found without their owners in a public place directly to a veterinarian for a determination of whether the animal shall be immediately euthanized or hospitalized for further treatment. Animal control will determine ownership based upon city licensing records. If the animal does not require veterinary care in the opinion of the veterinarian, the animal shall be impounded. In the event ownership cannot be determined or in the veterinarians' opinion the animal will require more than life stabilizing veterinary care, the animal will be euthanized. 
B.  If the owner does not redeem the animal within the five-working-day waiting period, euthanasia may be performed on the animal; or, if the animal is treated and recovers from its injuries, an animal control officer may keep the animal for purposes of adoption. 
C.  If the veterinarian determines that minimal life stabilizing emergency treatment and hospitalization, the costs of any services which are provided are the responsibility of the owner. In the event the owner cannot be located, minimum treatment will be provided and shall be paid by the city. Payment for services rendered by the veterinarian is the responsibility of the animal owner. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.150 - Rabies vaccinations. 
A.  Responsibility of Administrative Services Manager. The assistant to the city manager and animal control officer shall supervise rabies control. If the health officer finds that rabies exists in this city, he or she shall take measures to abate the condition which may include the quarantine of any animal. The animal control supervisor shall cooperate with and assist the health officer in carrying out any measures necessary for rabies control, including but not limited to the holding of rabies clinics. 
B.  Duties of Owner or Possessor. An owner or possessor of any dog over four months old, or one who brings a dog more than four months old into the city, shall, within four months of the dog's birth or ten days of its entry into the city, whichever is later, procure and maintain the dog's vaccination for rabies. The veterinarian who vaccinates the dog shall issue a vaccination certificate to its owner or possessor, in accordance with procedures established by the health officer. 
C.  Exemption. A dog is exempt from vaccination if a veterinarian has examined the dog and certified in writing that at such time vaccination would endanger the dog's health, due to illness or advanced age. Rabies vaccination must be obtained within thirty (30) days of the dog's recovery from the illness. 
D.  Rabies Reports. Rabies is declared to be a reportable disease. Every veterinarian practicing in this city who suspects that an animal is rabid and every person providing professional medical treatment for animal bite by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall immediately notify the health department. Every veterinarian practicing in this city shall provide the supervisor with a copy of every rabies immunization certificate which he/she issues, within thirty (30) days of issuance. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.160 - Animals suspected of rabies—Costs. 
The owner or possessor of any animal which is confined, isolated, examined or destroyed as a result of being rabid, suspected rabid or a biting animal is liable for the costs of such confinement, isolation, examination or destruction, whether or not the animal is returned to the owner or possessor. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.170 - Destruction of aged or diseased animals. 
All animals taken into custody of animal control which by reason of age, disease, or other cause, are unfit for further use or dangerous to keep impounded, shall be destroyed by arrangement of an animal control officer four business days after impounding. Oral or written notice shall be given to the owner, if known, prior to destroying the animal. The owner may request a hearing prior to destruction of the animal. The request shall be in writing and applicant shall agree therein to pay the cost of care and maintenance of the animal pending the hearing. Decisions of the hearing officer are final. Seriously ill or injured animals may be destroyed without regard to the prescribed holding period and without notice to the owner, to alleviate suffering or to protect other animals or persons from contagious diseases. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.180 - Removal of animal carcasses. 
A.  Where public health or safety is endangered, the animal control officer shall remove or arrange for removal of carcasses of dogs or cats and other animals. 
B.  The cost of removal and disposal shall be the responsibility of the owner, if known. 
C.  Animal control shall arrange for the removal and disposal of stray canine and feline carcasses found in or on city maintained roadways. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.190 - Burial of animals. 
Every person who knowingly fails to properly dispose of the carcass of any animal which belonged to that person at the time of the animal's death, and who allows the carcass to remain within city limits, shall be guilty of an infraction. 
A.  No person shall bury the carcass of any domestic or livestock animal in such a manner that there is less than three feet of soil above the carcass. This does not apply to bio-hazardous waste. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the owner or person having custody of a deceased animal suspected of having rabies to surrender the carcass of such animal, or such portion of the carcass as may be demanded, to the health officer after the death of the animal. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.08.200 - Recordkeeping. 
Animal control shall keep a record of all animals taken into custody which shall show the date of impoundment and the date and manner of disposition. Records shall also be kept of the identity of owners of licensed dogs. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 6.12 - DOGS AND CATS 
Sections: 
 
6.12.010 - Mandatory spay and neutering. 
No person shall own or harbor any dog over the age of six months within the city that has not been spayed or neutered unless: 
1.  The person holds an unaltered animal license for the animal pursuant to this title; or 
2.  The animal(s) are registered as working guide dog, service dog or police dog, thereby exempted from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.12.011 - License requirements. 
No person shall harbor, keep or maintain within the city any dog four months or older which does not have a current license. 
A.  License Issuance. Pet licenses shall be issued by the city and/or the animal control authority. License fees are made payable to the city according to the schedule approved by resolution of the city council. 
B.  No person shall own or possess more than four dogs in any household unless it is a kennel or a licensed veterinarian. 
C.  No person shall own or possess any dog over four months old unless the dog has been licensed and vaccinated as required by this title. If ownership of a licensed dog changes, the new owner shall obtain a transfer license within thirty (30) days of obtaining the dog. When an unlicensed dog is brought into the city, the owner or possessor shall obtain a license for the dog within ten days. 
D.  The animal control officer may require any person owning, possessing, harboring or controlling any animal for which a license or permit is required under this chapter to produce any required license or certificate of rabies vaccination for inspection. Any person who fails to produce a required license or certificate of rabies vaccination for inspection by the animal control supervisor after a demand for inspection, is in violation of this section. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.12.020 - Selling, giving away or auctioning animals. 
No person shall sell or give away unaltered dogs and cats in any public places or to auction off or raffle unaltered dogs and cats as prizes or gifts. No person in the city shall publish or advertise to city residents the availability of any unaltered cat or dog unless the publication or advertisement includes: the unaltered animal's license number, provided, however, that nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit licensed breeders from advertising in national publications for sale of a planned litter(s). 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.12.030 - Cattery and kennel licenses. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep and maintain any cat or dog within the city for the purposes of maintaining a kennel or cattery without obtaining and maintaining a current license therefor. In addition, each animal maintained in the kennel or cattery must have a current license. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.12.040 - Physical requirements—Catteries and kennels. 
A.  The animal control officer and the planning department may require setback; additional setback, fencing, screening or soundproofing as may be deemed necessary to insure the compatibility of the kennel or cattery with the surrounding neighborhood. Factors to be considered in determining such compatibility are: 
1.  Statements regarding approval/disapproval of surrounding neighbors relative to maintenance of a cattery or kennel at the address applied for; 
2.  Past history of animal control complaints relating to the cats and dogs of the applicant at the address for which the cattery or kennel is applied for; 
3.  Facility specifications/dimensions in which the cats and dogs are to be maintained; 
4.  Animal size, type and characteristics of breed; 
5.  The cattery or kennel has complied or can comply with requirements established for such uses in the city's zoning code. 
B.  The cattery or kennel shall limit dog and cat reproduction to no more than two litters per license year per female cat, and one litter per license year per female dog: 
C.  Each cat and dog in the cattery or kennel shall have current and proper immunization from disease according to the species and age. Such will be generally accepted by the veterinary community and shall take into consideration basic animal health standards and state mandated rabies control protocol. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.12.050 - License tags. 
Upon proper application and payment of the license fee, a serially numbered license tag, stamped with the name of the city and the year of issue shall be issued for a dog which has been properly vaccinated in accordance with Section 6.08.150. The tag shall be affixed to the dog at all times. Whenever a license tag is lost or damaged, the owner or possessor shall obtain a replacement from animal control within thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.12.060 - Individual licenses—Fees. 
A.  A license fee shall be paid for each dog over four months old. The license period shall be for thirty-six (36) months or less, twenty-four (24) months or less or twelve (12) months or less, commencing on the day the license is obtained. The license renewal fee shall be due and payable at the expiration of the license period. 
B.  The license fee is delinquent sixty (60) days after it becomes due and payable and an additional fee shall be collected for the issuance of the license. The additional fee may be waived by the supervisor but only on a showing of good cause and only if the dog is not being held as a stray. 
C.  A fee shall not be collected or required for any dog license issued for a seeing-eye dog or a hearing-ear dog used by any partially or totally blind or deaf person. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.12.070 - Types of license. 
A.  Dog Licenses. 
1.  Pet licenses for unaltered dogs will be valid for a maximum term of one year from the date of issuance, expiring on the last day of the twelfth month. Pet licenses for altered dogs will be valid for an optional two or three years. Renewal licenses will retain the original expiration period whether renewed prior to, on, or after their respective renewal month; 
2.  Applications for pet license(s) shall be on forms provided by the city animal control authority; 
3.  License tags shall be attached to an appropriate collar for the species and worn by dogs at all times. 
B.  Dog License Fees. Licensing fees will be established by resolution adopted and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.12.080 - Sentry dogs—Requirements. 
No person shall place any sentry dog on a premises, unless the premises is posted to warn of the dog's presence and unless the sentry dog is fenced within the premises or confined within the building. Signs shall be placed at fifty (50) foot intervals around the perimeter of the area guarded by the sentry dog and at all entrances and exits to the area. 
The signs shall have minimum dimensions of ten inches by fourteen (14) inches and shall contain black lettering on a white background stating: 
WARNING—SENTRY DOG ON DUTY 
and shall also depict the head of a dog with bared fangs. The sign shall also set forth the name, address and telephone number of the sentry dog company furnishing the dog for hire, if any, and the telephone number of the owner or caretaker of the premises. Each sentry dog shall be registered and tagged. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part))  
6.12.090 - Imposition of fees. 
The city council, by resolution, will adopt and revise the fee and fine schedule to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the city in providing the services and regulations set forth in this title. 
(Ord. 03-153 § 1 (part)) 
ANIMAL CONTROL FEES AND FINE SCHEDULES 
   
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.02 - HEALTH AND SANITATION VIOLATIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.02.010 - Reserved.  
8.02.020 - Reserved.  
8.02.030 - Health and sanitation violations. 
A.  No person shall expectorate or spit tobacco juice, spittle, or rejected tobacco, or tobacco partially chewed or consumed, or similar substances, on the floor of any public conveyance or public building or on any sidewalk within the city; and 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, any human urine or feces upon any public or private highway or road, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or in or upon any public property other than property designated or set aside for that purpose, or in or upon any private property where the public is admitted by easement, license or other permission, or upon any private property which is exposed to public view; and 
C.  Persons who violate this section due to one or more verified medical conditions shall be exempt from the enforcement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11-221, 5-17-2011)  
8.020.040 - Penalty. 
General penalty, Chapter 1.16 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 11-221, 5-17-2011)  
Chapter 8.04 - REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The title of Ch. 8.04 was amended by Ord. 07-184. Prior ordinance history: Ord. 95-55. 
 
8.04.010 - Finding and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares that the public health, safety, and welfare require the regulation of refuse collection and disposal within the city. "Refuse" is defined as all garbage, trash, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial waste, demolition, construction waste, and "solid waste," as defined by the Public Resources Code of the state of California. The city council further finds that appropriate regulation of refuse collection and disposal will prevent indiscriminative dumping of refuse and will insure that all citizens of the city are provided with adequate refuse collection services and that refuse is disposed of appropriately. 
(Ord. 07-184 (part))  
8.04.020 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any individual, firm or corporation to commercially collect, transport, or dispose of "refuse" for another for money or other consideration without first receiving a permit, contract and/or business license to do so issued by the city. 
(Ord. 07-184 (part))  
8.04.030 - Mandatory residential collection. 
It shall be mandatory of all owners, occupants, or persons in possession, charge or control of a residential dwelling in the city to subscribe to, pay for, and receive city disposal service. Residential dwellings are all those units designed for single-family residential occupancy. 
(Ord. 07-184 (part))  
8.04.040 - Initiation of service. 
Refuse collection service will be initiated in conjunction with water, electric and wastewater service. 
(Ord. 07-184 (part))  
8.04.050 - Charges. 
The city may, by resolution, fix the rates to be charged for the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste. All rules and regulations governing the collection of water, sewer, and electric bills shall be applicable to charges for services rendered under this chapter. 
The bill for collection, removal and disposal of solid waste shall be combined with the bill for water, sewer and electric services. No one service charge may be paid separately from any other service charge. Failure to pay any portion of the bill for collection will result in the discontinuance of all water, sewer, and electric, and refuse disposal services. 
(Ord. 07-184 (part))  
8.04.060 - Billing and collection procedures. 
All residential solid waste charges shall be payable to the city of Shasta Lake or its authorized agent for billing and collection. Collection shall be initiated pursuant to Section 13.04.400. 
(Ord. 07-184 (part))  
8.04.070 - Liability and collection. 
Every person receiving services pursuant to this chapter shall be liable to the city for the services rendered. In addition, it is presumed that the occupant of any premises receiving services is acting for and on behalf of the owner of the premises and that the services rendered are a benefit to the premises. The charges for providing such services shall be collected as provided in Section 8.04.060 of this chapter, may be collected by personal action against the owner or occupant or be fore closure of a lien placed on the premises. 
(Ord. 07-184 (part))  
8.04.080 - Solid waste containers. 
All solid waste to be collected shall be placed in containers that are either approved by the city or provided by the city. Where specifically designed automated refuse containers are either approved or provided by the city, only those containers shall be allowed. 
(Ord. 07-184 (part))  
8.04.090 - Placement and removal of containers. 
Automated refuse containers shall be placed no further than two feet into the street and away from any obstruction that may interfere with the safe operation of the sanitation equipment. It is unlawful and shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises or property in the city to maintain such premises or property with the refuse container(s) stored in the public right-of-way, except on scheduled waste collection days. 
Refuse containers will be removed from the street or public right-of-way, before sunset, on collection day. Containers left in the street or public right-of-way may be considered a public nuisance and the owner or occupier may be cited pursuant to Section 8.16.070. 
(Ord. 07-184 (part))  
Chapter 8.05 - BUTANE RESALE ORDINANCE 
 
8.05.010 - Authority and title. 
The city council of the city of Shasta Lake does enact Chapter 8.05 of the Municipal Code, which shall be known as the Butane Resale Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 16-247, § I, 2-16-2016)  
8.050.020 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The northern region of our State has experienced a recent increase in explosions caused from the manufacture of concentrated cannabis or honey oil (also known as hash oil) in clandestine labs using five times refined ("5x") butane and higher. These incidents have caused considerable property damage, personal injury and even incidents of death to those participating in the manufacturing process, and to innocent bystanders. 
B.  Use of 5x refined butane and higher is done to dissolve the tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) resin, which concentrates into a liquid/oil form as a result of the butane's stripping process. The stripping of the THC through use of refined butane causes flammable butane vapors to accumulate low to the ground and remain exposed to ignition sources. Studies suggest that 99.5 percent of the extracted THC butane mixture will volatilize into the immediate area and find an ignition source if 5x refined butane and higher is used. 
C.  A honey oil lab using 5x refined butane and higher presents a serious hazard for first responders as the gas has no odor and can only be detected by a combustible gas instrument. Such conditions present grave risk of loss where devices such as a TASER are capable of igniting the gas resulting in an explosion. 
D.  The resale of 5x refined butane and higher occurs at levels sufficient to aid the manufacture of honey oil. Such sales and possession of butane should be regulated to prevent the use of such butane in the manufacture of honey oil where such activity presents grave dangers to the people in the city of Shasta Lake and the first responders therein. 
(Ord. No. 16-247, § I, 2-16-2016)  
8.05.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions apply: 
"Butane" means five times refined ("5x") or higher of any of the following: iso-butane, n-butane, and butane. 
"Canister" means a single container in which butane is stored or collected or from which butane is dispensed. 
"Code" means the City of Shasta Lake Municipal Code. 
"Customer" means any person who is sold or acquires during a transaction products from any reseller. 
"Day" means calendar day. 
"Package" means butane offered for sale at quantities of two or more. 
"Person" means a corporation, partnership, or association as well as a natural person. 
"Reseller" means any business, company, corporation, person, employee or associate that sells, offers to sell, or distributes products to any customer in the city of Shasta Lake. It does not include any wholesaler engaged in a wholesale transaction. 
"Sell" means to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender, distribute or supply, whether for monetary gain or other consideration. 
"Transaction" means a purchase, sale, trade, loan, pledge, investment, gift, transfer, transmission, delivery, deposit, withdrawal, payment, exchange of currency, extension of credit, purchase or sale of any monetary instrument, or an electronic, magnetic or manual transfer between accounts or any other acquisition or disposition of property by whatever means effected. 
"Wholesaler" means a person whose business is the selling of goods in gross to Resellers for purposes of resale. 
(Ord. No. 16-247, § I, 2-16-2016)  
8.05.040 - Unlawful sale, purchase, and handling of butane. 
A.  It is unlawful for any reseller to sell, offer to sell, or distribute to a customer in the city of Shasta Lake any number of butane canisters that exceed a combined total storage quantity of 600 ml of butane during a single transaction. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person that is not a reseller or wholesaler to have in their possession, custody or control in the city of Shasta Lake any number of butane canisters that exceed a combined total storage quantity of 600 ml of butane at any one time. 
C.  It is unlawful for any customer to purchase or acquire per calendar month in the city of Shasta Lake any number of butane canisters that exceed a combined total storage quantity of 600 ml of butane, whether sold individually or by the package. 
(Ord. No. 16-247, § I, 2-16-2016)  
8.05.050 - Tracking of butane sales. 
A.  For every sale of butane, every Reseller shall prepare a bill of sale that identifies the date of sale, quantity of butane purchased, and the customer's identification. The customer's identification as used herein shall mean a person's first and last name as verified from a valid driver's license or other official and valid state-issued identification that contains a photograph of the customer and a residential or mailing address. Reseller shall retain a copy of the bill of sale in readable form for a period of two years. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any reseller to sell butane to any customer without complying with Section 8.05.050(A) of this code. 
(Ord. No. 16-247, § I, 2-16-2016)  
8.05.060 - Penalties, strict liability, and nuisance. 
A.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter of the Municipal Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate violation shall exist for every single butane canister sold or possessed in violation of this chapter. 
B.  This chapter is a regulatory provision necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare and safety. In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter, it is not necessary to prove knowledge or criminal intent. 
C.  A violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a public nuisance. This chapter is cumulative to all other remedies now or hereafter available to abate or otherwise regulate or prevent public nuisances or to enforce the provisions of the City of Shasta Lake Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 16-247, § I, 2-16-2016)  
Chapter 8.08 - LITTERING, DUMPING AND REFUSE ACCUMULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.08.010 - Finding and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares that the public health, safety, and welfare require the regulation of refuse collection and disposal within the city. A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated, specifically enjoined in a civil action filed for that purpose, or criminally prosecuted in accordance with the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 94-36 § 1)  
8.08.020 - Definitions. 
Unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is intended, the following words when used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
"Refuse" means all household and commercial, including restaurant, waste consisting of Group 2 type wastes as defined by the regulations of the State Water Resources Control Board, and including wastes such as discarded materials and appliances from dwelling places, households, apartment houses, stores, office buildings, restaurants, hotels, motels, mobile home parks, and all commercial establishments, including waste or discarded food, animal and vegetable matter, paper, cardboard, wood, cans, tires, asphalt paving fragments, metal, glass, ashes, boxes, cuttings from trees, lawns, and gardens. 
"Refuse" does not include hazardous waste or contaminates which might be injurious to personnel engaged in solid waste handling including, but not limited to, acids, explosives, radioactive materials, and septic tank pumpings; nor does it include any materials that are, or in the future may be, prohibited from dumping in a residential landfill by state or federal regulations. The collection and disposal of all such material is under the jurisdiction of the Shasta County resource management department or appropriate state agencies. 
(Ord. 94-36 § 2)  
8.08.030 - Dumping or littering prohibited. 
It is unlawful to throw, discard, place, deposit, or dump, or cause to be placed, deposited, or dumped, within the corporate limits of the city any refuse, including the carcass of any dead animal in or upon any street, road, or alley, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or in or upon any private property, into or upon which the public is admitted by easement or license, or in or upon any public park or other public property except in appropriate storage containers available for such purpose, or public disposal site set aside for the disposal of refuse, or in or upon any waterway, creek, or drainage ditch, either natural or artificial. 
(Ord. 94-36 § 3)  
8.08.040 - Refuse—Accumulation prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to deposit, keep, or accumulate, or cause, permit, or suffer to be deposited, kept, or accumulated in other than an authorized receptacle, for more than seven days, any refuse, including furniture, appliances, packing materials, cardboard, abandoned, or discarded vehicles or parts thereof, or any other matter classified as refuse, in or upon any lot or parcel of land, house, store, restaurant, business, or other commercial establishment, public property, or in any other place within the city. 
(Ord. 94-36 § 4)  
8.08.050 - Refuse—Burying prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to bury any refuse on any lot or parcel, or in any other location within the city. This provision shall not apply to burying or composting of organic material on private property in an amount reasonably necessary for noncommercial gardening or landscaping in or upon the lot or parcel on which the burying or composting takes place. Burying and composting must be accomplished in a manner which does not constitute a public nuisance by the attraction of rodents or other animals, and does not cause the premises to become unsightly or become a nuisance to adjoining property owners. 
(Ord. 94-36 § 5)  
8.08.060 - Refuse—Burning prohibited. 
It is unlawful to burn any refuse on any lot or premises within the corporate limits of the city except trees, leaves, bushes, brush, and other garden trimmings and branches cut on the premises. All burning shall be conducted only in accordance with Shasta County air quality regulations and the regulations of the applicable fire protection district. 
(Ord. 94-36 § 6)  
8.08.070 - Receptacle—Required. 
Each occupant of a place of residence or a place of business in the city shall keep on the premises occupied by him or her a water-tight refuse container made of galvanized steel or other approved material which will not rust easily and can be readily cleaned, having at least two rigid handles and a close-fitting lid of the same material, and having a capacity of not less than five gallons nor more than forty (40) gallons. The close-fitting cover shall at all times, except when refuse is being deposited in or taken from such receptacle, shall be placed in proper position as a cover to the container. 
(Ord. 94-36 § 7)  
8.08.080 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor unless in the sole discretion of the prosecuting attorney the violation is deemed to be an infraction. Each day that a prohibited act continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 94-36 § 8)  
Chapter 8.09 - SKATEBOARD FACILITY REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.09.010 - Safety requirements. 
No person shall ride a skateboard, or permit a minor for whom he or she is responsible, to ride a skateboard, in a city park or recreational facility unless the person, while riding the skateboard, is wearing a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads. 
(Ord. 01-131 § 1 (part))  
8.09.020 - Bicycles prohibited. 
No person shall ride or use a bicycle, or any other device propelled by human power, other than a skateboard or in-line skates, within the city-owned skateboard facility in Clair Engle Park. 
(Ord. 01-131 § 1 (part))  
8.09.030 - Penalty — Infraction. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 01-131 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 8.10 - CAMPING 
 
8.10.010 - Finding and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares that the streets and public areas within the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. Such activity can constitute a public health and safety hazard which adversely impacts neighborhoods and commercial areas. Camping on private property without the consent of the owner, proper sanitary measures and for other than a minimal duration adversely affects private property rights as well as public health, safety, and welfare of the city. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain streets, parks and other public and private areas within the city in a clean, sanitary and accessible condition and to adequately protect the health, safety and public welfare of the community, while recognizing that, subject to reasonable conditions, camping and camp facilities associated with special events can be beneficial to the cultural and educational climate in the city. Nothing in this chapter is intended to interfere with otherwise lawful and ordinary uses of public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 17-264, 9-5-2017)  
8.10.020 - Camp defined. 
As used herein, "camp" shall mean an outdoor location or vehicle used for eating, cooking, or sleeping, and includes, but is not limited to: 
A.  The use of camping facilities such as tents, tarpaulins, or temporary shelters or makeshift structures; 
B.  The use of sleeping bags, cots, beds, or hammocks; 
C.  The use of park benches, recreation equipment or similar structures; 
D.  The use of any parked vehicle, including an automobile, bus, truck, camper, trailer, or recreational vehicle; or 
E.  The use of any outdoor place for storage of personal belongings evidencing an intent to eat, cook or sleep, or otherwise use such place for living accommodation purposes. 
(Ord. No. 17-264, 9-5-2017)  
8.10.030 - Unlawful camping. 
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to sleep or camp, to occupy camp facilities, or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas: 
A.  In or on any public right-of-way, including any street, alley, roadway, easement, median, irrigation canal, or embankment; 
B.  In or on any public park or trail or upon the grounds of any public facility or property, whether improved or unimproved; 
C.  Private unimproved property; 
D.  Upon any lot with a single family residence, except when used by property owner or with the property owner's permission, and such use is no longer than seven days in a calendar year provided, however, that; 
1.  Any recreational vehicle or trailer coach to which is attached to any rigid water, gas, sewer pipe or electrical service outlet from a single family residence or an accessory building is prohibited unless a permitted exterior outlet of up to fifty (50) amps has been provided; 
2.  Any recreational vehicle or trailer coach connected to a generator may be run only between the hours of 7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 
E.  The city manager may, in his or her discretion, issue a permit to establish, maintain and operate a camp or a camp facility in connection with a special event. A special event is intended to include, but not be limited to, programs operated by the departments of the city, youth or school events, marathons or other sporting events and scouting activities. The city manager may consult with various city departments, the health officer and the public prior to issuing any temporary permit. Each department or person consulted may provide comments regarding any health, safety or public welfare concerns and provide recommendations pertaining to the issuance, denial or conditioning of the permit. In exercising his or her discretion to issue a temporary permit, the city manager may consider any facts or evidence bearing on the sanitary, health, safety and welfare conditions on or surrounding the area or tract of land upon which the proposed temporary camp or camp facility is to be located. 
F.  The city manager is further empowered to ascertain that the operation or maintenance of any camp or camp facilities to which a temporary permit shall apply will in no way jeopardize the public health, safety or welfare and for this purpose may make additional rules and regulations pertaining to their establishment, operation or conduct. The city manager may also impose conditions on the establishment, maintenance and operation of the camp or camp facility, including, but not limited to, security, sanitation facilities, the number of occupants, posting of bonds or deposits, insurance, quiet hours, duration of the permit, and permitted activities on the premises. When the city manager shall issue any permit under the terms of Section 8.10.050 of this chapter, the same may be revoked at any time thereafter by the city manager if the city manager becomes satisfied that the maintenance or continuing operation of the camp or camp facilities is adverse to the public health, safety and welfare. 
G.  Nothing herein is intended to prohibit the temporary emergency use of a mobile home per Section 17.81.030(I) of this Code. 
The enforcement officer will endeavor to elicit voluntary compliance. 
(Ord. No. 17-264, 9-5-2017)  
8.10.040 - Sewage disposal. 
It is unlawful to permit any waste or gray water to be deposited upon the surface of the ground. No recreational vehicle or trailer coach may be connected to a sewer system, covered or uncovered cesspool or septic tank. A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute an infraction, punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.17 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-264, 9-5-2017)  
8.10.050 - Renting trailer prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to rent or hold out for rent for habitation any recreational vehicle or trailer coach except as provided in Section 17.88.160 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-264, 9-5-2017)  
Chapter 8.12 - SUMMARY ABATEMENT—IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND CONDITIONS* 
Sections: 
 
8.12.010 - Applicable procedures. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this title to the contrary, the procedures for the abatement of an immediately dangerous building, structure or condition shall be regulated by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 1 (part))  
8.12.020 - Authority and administration. 
The health officer, fire chief, building official and the director of development services and their respective designees are each authorized to administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the classification of immediately dangerous conditions or buildings for the purpose of abating those conditions which exist as the result of a violation of those ordinances for which their respective departments have primary enforcement responsibility. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 1 (part))  
8.12.030 - Definitions of dangerous building or conditions. 
For the purpose of this chapter: 
"Immediately dangerous building or structure" means any building or structure which has been so damaged by fire, infestation, seismic disturbance, or by any other cause, including neglect, to the extent that its structural integrity is irreparably damaged or destroyed and is in imminent danger of collapsing or where the condition of the structure poses an immediate and present threat to life, health or safety of the public. 
"Immediately dangerous condition" means a condition on any premises or property which, in the opinion of the health officer, the fire chief, the building official or the director of development services, is of such a nature as to be imminently dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the public, which if abated according to the procedures of this code, would, during the pendency of such proceedings, subject the public to potential harm of a serious nature. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 1 (part))  
8.12.040 - Procedure to abate. 
A.  Whenever the building official or fire chief has inspected or caused to be inspected any building or structure and has found and determined that such building or structure is an immediately dangerous building or structure as defined in Section 8.12.030 the same may be summarily abated and removed by the city without compliance with the provisions of this code prior to such abatement. 
B.  The building official or fire chief may summarily abate the immediately dangerous building and/or the dangerous conditions in any reasonable manner which he/she determines will eliminate the immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public. Reasonable means to abate the immediately dangerous building and/or the dangerous conditions include, but are not limited to, demolition, repairing, boarding to city specifications, securing, fencing, barricading, vacating and removal of debris and junk. 
C.  No action shall be taken to summarily abate an immediately dangerous building without prior approval of the city attorney or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 1 (part))  
8.12.050 - Lien or personal obligation for summary abatement. 
The cost of abatement, including all reasonable administrative and engineering costs incurred by the city as a result of any action taken pursuant to this chapter may be assessed as a lien against the property upon which the immediately dangerous building or structure was located and may be made a personal obligation of the property owner. The recovery of such costs shall be governed by the procedures provided in Chapter 8.16, Article X of this title. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 8.16 - ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
8.16.010 - Authority and administration. 
The health officer, fire chief, building official and the director of development services and their respective designees are each authorized to administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the classification of dangerous buildings, substandard buildings and public nuisances for the purpose of abating those conditions which exist as the result of violation of those ordinances for which their respective departments have primary enforcement responsibility. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.020 - Violations of chapter. 
No person, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee, or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any order issued by the building official hereunder. For purposes of this chapter "person" means and includes individuals, partnerships, corporations, joint ventures, receivers, limited liability company, trust, estate, cooperative, association or any other entity. Any person violating the provisions of this section or any other provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues. Any person violating the provisions of this section or any other provision of this chapter shall also be liable for civil penalties of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day the violation continues. The city attorney may seek civil penalties in any civil action brought to enforce any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.030 - Abatement hearing officer. 
Subject to ratification by a majority of the city council, the city manager shall appoint the abatement hearing officer(s) for proceedings under this chapter. The term of office of the abatement hearing officer shall be two years. The city manager may designate more than one abatement hearing officer, however, no more than one abatement hearing officer shall preside over any particular proceeding under this chapter. The city manager may re-appoint an abatement hearing officer for successive two-year terms. Compensation for the abatement hearing officer(s) may be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.040 - General definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following specified meanings: 
"Common area" means the entire common interest development as that term is defined in California Civil Code Section 1351, except the separate interests therein, or any area defined as a "common area" within a homeowners association's declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions. 
"Drive-in enterprise" means any commercial enterprise such as a service station or drive-in restaurant upon which enclosed buildings occupy less than fifty (50) percent of the lot area and where a primary method of providing goods and services to customers is by means of a drive through service. 
"Homeowners association" means any California corporation, California nonprofit mutual benefit corporation or unincorporated association created for other purposes of controlling, managing, or maintaining the common areas of a common interest development as that term is defined in California Civil Code Section 1351. 
"Junk" means any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn-out or wrecked object, thing or material composed in whole or in part of asphalt, brick, carbon, cement, plastic or other synthetic substance, fiber, glass, metal, paper, plaster, plaster of Paris, rubber, terra cotta, wool, cotton, cloth canvas, organic matter or other substance, having no substantial market value or requiring reconditioning in order to be used for its original purpose. 
"Junkyard" means a junkyard as that term is defined in Title 18, or any premises from or on which any junk is abandoned, bailed, bartered, bought, brought, bundled, deposited, disassembled, disposed of, exchanged, handled, kept, packed, processed, scattered, shipped, sold, stored, or transported, regardless of whether or not such activity is done for profit. 
"Owner" means the owner of record of real property, occupant, lessee, sublessee, interested holder in real property, or homeowners association, as the case may be. For purposes of this chapter, a homeowners association which exercises management and/or control over a common area shall be deemed an owner of the area over which such control is exercised. Exercising control includes but is not limited to ownership, maintenance, easements and/or assessing fees on property owners pursuant to agreements, deeds or recorded documents. 
"Premises" means any real property and/or improvements thereon, as the case may be, including but not limited to, an area designated as a common area within a condominium or similar project. 
"Property" means premises. 
"Responsible official" means the health officer, fire chief, building official or the director of development services, or their respective designees, authorized to use the provisions of this chapter for violations of those ordinances for which their respective departments have primary enforcement authority. 
"Service station" means any premises upon which the improvements are designed and built for the primary purpose of selling to or providing others with fuels for internal combustion engines of motor vehicles, whether or not providing related automotive maintenance and repair services. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
Article II. - Dangerous Buildings Specified 
 
8.16.050 - Dangerous building or structure specified. 
For purposes of this chapter, any building or structure which has one or more of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a dangerous building; provided, that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property, or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered: 
A.  Whenever any door, aisle, hallway, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic; 
B.  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, hallway, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is so warped, buckled, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic; 
C.  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location; 
D.  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location; 
E.  Whenever any portion or member of a building or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property; 
F.  Whenever any portion of a building or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of two-thirds of that specified in the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city for such buildings; 
G.  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction; 
H.  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of: 
1.  Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay, 
2.  Faulty construction, 
3.  The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building, 
4.  The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation, or 
5.  Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse; 
I.  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used; 
J.  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base; 
K.  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three (33) percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or fifty (50) percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings; 
L.  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become: 
1.  An attractive nuisance to children, 
2.  A harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or 
3.  As to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts; 
M.  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code or any other code adopted by the city or of any law or ordinance of this state or city relating to the condition, location, or structure of buildings; 
N.  Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion, less than fifty (50) percent or in any supporting part, member, or portion less than sixty-six (66) percent of the (1) strength, (2) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (3) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location; 
O.  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, insects, rodents, pests or other vectors, or otherwise, is determined by the building official or health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease; 
P.  Whenever the building official or fire chief has determined that a building, structure, or the premises thereof constitute a fire hazard for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials, 
2.  Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials, 
3.  Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings or other highly flammable materials, 
4.  Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning or ventilating systems or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts, 
5.  Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, 
6.  Other conditions including, but not limited to, want of repairs, lack of adequate exit facilities, required automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, which create a hazardous condition; 
Q.  Whenever any building or structure, because of lack of fire-resistive construction, or other cause, is determined by the building official or fire chief to be a fire hazard to life, health or property; 
R.  Whenever any building or structure, because of faulty electrical wiring or other cause, is determined by the building official or fire chief to be an electrical or fire hazard to life, health or property; 
S.  Whenever any building or structure, because of faulty gas connections, heating apparatus or water and sewer systems, or other cause, is determined by the building official or fire chief to be a hazard to life, health or property; 
T.  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is vacant, unoccupied, or abandoned for a period in excess of six months such that the building or portion thereof is an attractive nuisance or excavation appurtenant to any existing hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public; 
U.  Whenever any well, septic tank or other structure has been abandoned. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
Article III. - Substandard Buildings 
 
8.16.060 - Substandard buildings specified. 
Any building or structure or any portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room, or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the following conditions to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be deemed and is declared to be a substandard building and a public nuisance: 
A.  Inadequate Sanitation. Inadequate sanitation shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit, lodging house or congregate residence; 
2.  Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories, and bathtubs or showers per number of guests in a hotel; 
3.  Lack of, or improper kitchen sink; 
4.  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit, lodging house, hotel, congregate residence, or commercial establishment; 
5.  Lack of adequate heating facilities; 
6.  Lack of, or improper operation of required ventilating equipment; 
7.  Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city; 
8.  Room and space dimension less than required by the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city. However, a condition which would require displacement of sound walls or ceilings to meet height, length, or width requirements for ceilings, rooms, and dwelling units shall not by itself be considered sufficient existence of dangerous conditions making a building a substandard building, unless the building was constructed, altered, or converted in violation of such requirements in effect at the time of construction, alteration or conversion; 
9.  Lack of required electrical lighting; 
10.  Dampness of habitable rooms; 
11.  Infestation of insects, vermin, or rodents as determined by city officials and/or the health officer; 
12.  General dilapidation or improper maintenance; 
13.  Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system; 
14.  Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by city officials and/or the health officer. 
B.  Structural Hazards. Structural hazards shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations; 
2.  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports; 
3.  Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
4.  Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
5.  Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
6.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
7.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
8.  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge, or settle due to defective material or deterioration; 
9.  Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety. 
C.  Nuisances. Any nuisance as defined in this code, state law or common law. 
D.  Hazardous Wiring. Hazardous wiring includes all wiring not installed, maintained or used in conformance with the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code or any other code adopted by the city. Except as provided in any federal, state, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, hazardous wiring shall not include wiring which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
E.  Hazardous Plumbing. Hazardous plumbing includes all plumbing not installed, maintained or used in conformance with the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code or any other code adopted by the city. Except as provided in any federal, state, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, hazardous plumbing shall not include plumbing which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and which is free of cross-connections and siphonage between fixtures. 
F.  Hazardous Mechanical Equipment. Hazardous mechanical equipment, including vents, not installed, maintained or used in conformance with the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code or any other code adopted by the city. Except as provided in any federal, state, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, hazardous mechanical equipment shall not include mechanical equipment which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
G.  Faulty Weather Protection. Faulty weather protection, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster; 
2.  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors; 
3.  Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of pain or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering; 
4.  Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings. 
H.  Fire Hazard. Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste, or vegetation which, in the opinion of the building official or fire chief, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause, shall be deemed to be a fire hazard. 
I.  Faulty Materials of Construction. Faulty materials of construction shall include all materials of construction except those which are specifically allowed or approved by Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code and any other code adopted by the city, and which have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition. 
J.  Hazardous or Unsanitary Premises. Hazardous or unsanitary premises shall include those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or conditions which, in the opinion of city officials or the health officer, constitute fire, health or safety hazards. 
K.  Unsafe Building. Any building or portion thereof which is determined to be an unsafe building due to inadequate maintenance or any other reason, in accordance with the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code or any other code adopted by the city. 
L.  Inadequate Exits. 
1.  Inadequate exits includes all buildings or portions thereof not provided with adequate exit facilities as required by the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code, or any other code adopted by the city. Except as provided in any federal, state, or local law or hereinafter enacted, inadequate exits shall not include those buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and which have been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and increased in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. 
2.  When an unsafe condition exists through lack of, or improper location of exits, additional exits may be required to be installed. 
M.  Inadequate Fire-Protection or Fire-Fighting Equipment. Inadequate fire-protection or fire-fighting equipment includes all buildings or portions thereof which are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code, or any other code adopted by the city. Except as provided in any federal, state, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, inadequate fire-protection or fire-fighting equipment shall not include those buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. 
N.  Improper Occupancy. Improper occupancy includes all buildings or portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking, or dining purposes which were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies. 
O.  Inadequate Structural Resistance. Inadequate structural resistance includes all buildings or portions thereof not constructed with adequate structural resistance to horizontal forces as required by the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city. Except as provided in any federal, state, or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, inadequate structural resistance shall not include any building which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of its construction and which has been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
Article IV. - Public Nuisances 
 
8.16.070 - Public nuisances specified. 
It is declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, subleasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in this city to maintain such premises in such a manner than any one or more of the conditions or activities described in the following subsections are found to exist: 
A.  The keeping, storage, depositing, or accumulation on the premises of any personal property which is within the view of persons on adjacent or nearby real property or the public right-of-way when such personal property constitutes visual blight, reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, is offensive to the senses, or is detrimental to nearby property or property values. Personal property includes, but is not limited to, junk as defined in Section 8.16.040, abandoned, wrecked or dismantled automobiles, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or not seaworthy boats or vessels, automotive parts and equipment, appliances, furniture, containers, packing materials, scrap metal, wood, building materials, rubbish, and debris; 
B.  The keeping, storage, depositing, or accumulation on the premises of any dead grass, weeds, brush, or rubbish of any kind likely to increase the danger of fire, or any manure, dead animals, decayed vegetables, offal, or other similar matter which is in the view of persons on adjacent or nearby real property or the public right-of-way when such items constitute visual blight, a danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public, reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, or is offensive to the senses or is detrimental to nearby property or property values; 
C.  The keeping, storage, depositing or accumulation of dirt, sand, gravel, concrete or other similar materials that constitutes visual blight or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or is offensive to the senses or is detrimental to nearby property or property values; 
D.  The operation of a junk yard or automobile dismantling yard, except in an industrial zone pursuant to a use permit; 
E.  Any dangerous, unsightly, or blighted condition which is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public; 
F.  Any condition in violation of Title 6 (Animals) of the Shasta Lake Municipal Code; 
G.  Any condition in violation of Title 8 (Health and Safety) of the Shasta Lake Municipal Code or in violation of the Uniform Fire Code; 
H.  Any condition in violation of Title 15 (Buildings and Construction) of the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, or in violation of the California Building Code, the Uniform Housing Code, the California Electrical Code, or the California Plumbing Code; 
I.  Any condition in violation of Title 17 (Zoning) of the Shasta Lake Municipal Code; 
J.  Any condition specified in the Shasta Lake Municipal Code as a public nuisance; 
K.  Any condition recognized in law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance; 
L.  The maintenance of the exterior of any vacant or unoccupied building or the interior of any such building which is readily visible from any public street or adjacent parcel of property in a state of unsightliness so as to constitute a blighted condition detrimental to the property values in the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare; 
M.  The draining or allowing of sewage to be drained into or onto the ground of any premises, whether or not occupied or improved, except that sewage may be properly disposed of in an adequate private sewage disposal system as otherwise permitted by law; 
N.  Any unimproved real property or improved, but unoccupied real property which has become a dumping ground for litter, garbage, junk, debris, discarded vehicles, vehicle parts and/or vehicle hulks, and which real property has been subject of two or more written requests by the city to remove litter, garbage, junk, debris, discarded vehicles, vehicle parts and/or vehicle hulks from the property within a twelve (12) month time period or which has been subject to abatement action on one or more occasions by the city. Once proceedings have been commenced pursuant to this chapter to declare property a public nuisance under this subsection, no such property shall be deemed to be in compliance with this chapter solely because such property thereafter becomes occupied. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
Article V. - Procedure 
 
8.16.080 - Commencement of proceeding. 
Whenever the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building or structure and has found and determined that such building or structure is a dangerous building he/she shall (1) commence proceedings to repair, vacate, secure or demolish the building or (2) commence proceedings to cause abatement of the substandard building and/or public nuisance. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.090 - Notice and order. 
The responsible official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain: 
A.  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building and/or public nuisance is located; 
B.  A statement that the building official has found the building or structure to be dangerous, substandard and/or a public nuisance with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building substandard or dangerous under the provisions of this chapter; 
C.  A statement advising that, in accordance with Sections 17274 and 24436.5 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, a tax deduction may not be allowed for interest, taxes, depreciation, or amortization paid or incurred in the taxable year. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.100 - Specific procedure for a dangerous building. 
A.  The notice and order that the building official has determined that the building must be repaired or demolished at the option of the owner in the manner and within the time limitations hereinafter specified. 
1.  If the owner elects to repair the building, all required permits for repair shall be secured therefore and the work physically commenced thirty (30) days from the date of the order and completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances. 
2.  If the owner elects to demolish the building, all required demolition permits shall be secured therefore and demolition commenced not later than thirty (30) from the date of the order, and that demolition be completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable. 
3.  If, prior to compliance, the building or conditions in the building or on the property becomes an immediately dangerous building or an immediately dangerous condition as defined in Section 8.12.030, the city may abate the immediately dangerous building or the immediately dangerous condition as provided in Section 8.12.040. 
B.  Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work is not commenced or completed with the time specified, the building official: 
1.  May order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed if the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, or if the building official determines that repair or demolition of the building or structure cannot be accomplished without making it immediately dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants; 
2.  May order the immediate disconnection of hazardous utility services (electricity, gas, sewer or water); and 
3.  May proceed to repair, secure or demolish the building and charge the costs thereof against the property and its owner. 
C.  Statements advising: 
1.  That any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal, from the notice and order or any action of the building official to the abatement hearing officer, provided the appeal is made in writing, as provided in this chapter, and filed with the building official within thirty (30) days from the date of the order; and 
2.  That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and a final determination of the matter. The final order is subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.110 - Specific procedure for substandard buildings and/or public nuisances. 
A.  The notice shall contain an order to the owner to appear before the abatement hearing officer at a stated time, but in no event less than thirty (30) calendar days after having mailed such notice, to show cause why the premises should not be declared a substandard building and/or a public nuisance and the same abated in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  A statement advising the owner that he/she has the option of voluntarily abating the substandard building and/or public nuisance prior to the date set for hearing. If the owner chooses voluntary abatement, such abatement must be completed prior to the hearing date. The owner must advise the responsible official in writing that he/she will voluntarily abate the substandard building and/or public nuisance, and the proposed date of completion. The responsible official will inspect the premises on the completion date, and if the substandard building and/or public nuisance has been abated, the hearing will be taken off calendar. The owner may request a continuance of the hearing pursuant to Section 8.16.230. 
C.  A statement that the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer after the hearing is a final decision and order and is subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.120 - Specific procedures relevant to dangerous buildings. 
A.  A statement advising the owner whether the city elects to seek its attorney's fees in the abatement proceeding pursuant to Section 8.16.280; 
B.  A statement that every owner of property within the city is liable to the city for the total cost of abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this chapter on his/her property; 
C.  A statement about how and where interested persons may contact the responsible official or his/her designee about the hearing notice. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
Article VI. - Service and Method of Service 
 
8.16.130 - Service of notice and order. 
The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record owner, and posted on the property, and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following if known to the building official or disclosed from official public records: 
A.  The holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; 
B.  The owner or holder of any lease of record; and 
C.  Any known tenants actually occupying the property or occupying that portion affected by the notice and order. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.140 - Method of service. 
A.  Service of the notice and order may be made upon all persons entitled thereto, either by personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Service may be made upon the record owner at his/her/their address as it appears on the latest equalized assessment roll of Shasta County or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, or as known to the building official. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing. A copy of the notice and order and any amended or supplemental notice and order shall also be posted on the premises. In lieu of personal service or service by certified mail, service of the notice and order and any amended or supplemental notice and order may be made as follows: 
1.  In the event that service by certified return receipt mail cannot be effected or the recipient cannot be personally served, service may be made by substituted service. Substitute service may be accomplished as follows: 
a.  By leaving a copy during usual business hours in the recipient's business with the person who is apparently in charge, and by thereafter mailing by first-class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left; or 
b.  By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place of abode in the presence of a competent member of the household and thereafter mailing by first-class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left. 
2.  In the event the recipient refuses to accept certified return receipt mail or cannot be personally served and has a property manager or rental agency overseeing the premises, substituted service may be made as set forth in subsection (A)(1) of this section upon the property manager or rental agency. 
3.  If the recipient lives out of state and will not accept certified return receipt mail, then service may be made by first-class mail. 
4.  If the recipient cannot be located or service cannot be effected as set forth in this section, service may be made by publication in a Shasta Lake newspaper of general circulation which is most likely to give actual notice to the owner. Service shall be deemed sufficient when it is accomplished pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. 
B.  Failure to Serve. The failure of the building official to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other persons duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him or her by the provisions of this chapter. The failure of any person served pursuant to this section to receive such notice and order shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. 
C.  Proof of Service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the building official. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.150 - Notice of pendency of action—Notice of final disposition of action. 
Recordation of Notice of Pendency of Action. Concurrent with service of the notice and order, the building official shall record a notice of pendency of action with the county recorder. The building official shall instruct the county recorder to record the notice and index it in the property index as well as in the name of each owner of record as shown in the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, and/or as known to the building official. The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF PENDENCY OF ACTION 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that pursuant to Shasta Lake Municipal Code Title 8, Chapter 8.12, an administrative abatement action was commenced on _______, by the City of Shasta Lake against the property described herein and the action is now pending. 
The action alleges that the property is in violation of Shasta Lake Municipal Code Chapter in that it constitutes a dangerous building and that such dangerous building must be abated. 
As of the date of the commencement of the abatement action, the name and address of the record owner of the property described herein is: 
The real property against which the abatement action is pending is that certain real property commonly known as _______, Assessor Parcel No._____, and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
Dated:_____       CITY OF SHASTA LAKE 
_______ 
Name of Officer 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.160 - Standards. 
Any building declared a dangerous building under this chapter shall either be repaired, secured or demolished by the owner in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.170 - Notice to vacate. 
A.  Order to Vacate. If any building or structure declared a dangerous building is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property, or safety of the public or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in Section 8.16.140 be posted at or upon each exit of the building or upon any individual unit to be vacated, and shall be in substantially the following form: 
DANGEROUS BUILDING 
DO NOT ENTER 
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
You are hereby ordered and required to vacate this building on or before_______. 
It is a misdemeanor pursuant to the City of Shasta Lake Municipal Code Sections 8.16.170 to occupy this building on or after or to remove or deface this notice. 
Dated:_____       CITY OF SHASTA LAKE 
_______ 
Name of Official 
C.  Compliance. Whenever a notice to vacate is posted, the building official shall specify in the notice to vacate the conditions which necessitate an immediate notice to vacate. 
D.  Violation. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit without the consent of the building official. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, securement, demolition, or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the Shasta Lake Municipal Code and the California Building Code. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
E.  The building official may permit occupancy of the building or individual units if the owner corrects those problems which pose an immediate danger to life, limb, property and safety of the public or occupants. 
F.  Prior to issuing a notice to vacate, the building official shall obtain approval of the city attorney or his/her representative. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.180 - Disconnection of hazardous utilities. 
Whenever a notice to vacate has been posted and served in accordance with Section 8.16.140, the building official may order the immediate disconnection of any utility services determined to be hazardous by the building official. If the sewer service is ordered disconnected pursuant to this section, city water service to such building shall also be disconnected in order to prevent the accumulation of sewage on such premises. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail to disconnect utility services when ordered to do so pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
Article VII. - Appeal 
 
8.16.190 - Appeal—Generally. 
A.  Form of Appeal. Any person entitled to service under Section 8.16.130, and any person who is a tenant may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the building official under this chapter by filing with the building division, a written appeal containing: 
1.  A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and order; 
2.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant; 
3.  A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside; 
4.  The signatures of all parties named as appellants, and their official mailing addresses; 
5.  A declaration under penalty of perjury of at least one appellant setting forth the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. 
B.  Processing of Appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed and the appeal fee pursuant to this section, the building official shall calendar the appeal for hearing before the abatement hearing officer as follows: 
1.  If the appeal is received by the building official not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular hearing of the abatement hearing officer, if any, it shall be calendared for hearing at that hearing; 
2.  If the appeal is received by the building official on a date less than fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular hearing of the abatement hearing officer, if any, it shall be calendared for hearing at the next subsequent hearing of the abatement hearing officer; 
3.  If more than one appeal is received by the building official regarding a notice and order on the same property, all such appeals shall be calendared to be heard at the same hearing of the abatement hearing officer as the last timely appeal received by the building official. 
C.  Noticing Appeal for Hearing. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the building official either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his or her address shown on the appeal and to all other people receiving the appealed-from notice and order. 
D.  Appeal Fee. The building official may collect and require an appeal fee to be paid at the time the written appeal notice is filed pursuant to this section. The appeal fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be calculated to recover the total city costs incurred in the appeal including, but not limited to, staff time to process and handle the appeal, preparation and service of notices, staff appearance at the appeal hearing, and compensation of the abatement hearing officer, if any. No appeal shall proceed without payment of the fee at the time the appeal is filed. The building official may waive the appeal fee upon written request for good cause shown. Good cause may include severe economic hardship, significant attempts to comply with the notice and order, and other factors indicating good faith attempts to comply with the order(s). 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.200 - Effect of failure to appeal. 
Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.16.190 shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and a final adjudication of the building official's order, or any portion thereof, subject only to review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1904.5. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.210 - Staying of orders under appeal. 
Except for orders to vacate made pursuant to Section 8.16.170, and utility disconnection orders made pursuant to Section 8.16.180, enforcement of any notice and order of the building official issued under this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
Article VIII. - Conduct of Hearing on Appeals 
 
8.16.220 - Scope of hearing on appeal. 
Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant in the appeal notice shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.230 - Hearing on appeal—Generally. 
A.  Hearing by Abatement Hearing Officer. At the time fixed in the notice required by Section 8.16.350, the abatement hearing officer shall proceed to hear the testimony of the building official or designee and the testimony of the appellant and other competent persons, including members of the public, respecting those matters or issues specifically listed by the appellant in his/her notice of appeal. 
B.  Record. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording, or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the abatement hearing officer. If the appellant seeks judicial review of the decision of the abatement hearing officer, preparation of a record of the proceeding shall be governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1904.5, as presently written or hereinafter amended. 
C.  Reporting. The proceedings at the hearing may also be reported by a certified shorthand reporter if such reporter is provided by the appellant at his/her own expense. 
D.  Continuances. The abatement hearing officer may, upon request of the appellant or the building official, grant continuances from time to time for good cause shown, or upon his/her own motion. 
E.  Reasonable Dispatch. The abatement hearing officer and its representatives shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before him/her. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties or their representatives. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.240 - Conduct of hearing. 
A.  Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. 
B.  Exclusion of Evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
C.  Rights of Parties. Each party shall have these rights, among others: 
1.  To testify and call others to testify on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
2.  To introduce documentary and physical evidence; 
3.  To rebut the evidence against him/her; 
4.  To represent himself or herself or to be represented by anyone of his/her choice; 
5.  If a party does not proficiently speak or understand the English language, he/she may provide an interpreter, at the party's own cost, to translate for the party. An interpreter shall not have had any involvement in the issues of the case prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.250 - Inspection of property. 
A.  The abatement hearing officer may, with the owner(s)' consent, or by inspection warrant, inspect the building or premises involved in the hearing prior to, during, or after the hearing, provided that: 
1.  Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made; 
2.  The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; 
3.  The abatement hearing officer shall state for the record during the hearing, or file a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed and the conclusion drawn therefrom; and 
4.  Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the abatement hearing officer either for the record during the hearing or by filing a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record. 
B.  Neither inspection warrant nor the owner(s)' consent to inspect the building and surrounding properties is required if such inspection can be made from areas in which the general public has access or with permission of other persons authorized to provide access to the property on which the building is located. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.260 - Form and contents of decision—Finality of decision. 
A.  If it is shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the owner has violated provisions of this chapter, then the abatement hearing officer shall order the owner to correct the dangerous conditions or demolish the building within a reasonable time. The abatement hearing officer shall also order that if the owner fails, refuses or neglects to correct the dangerous conditions or demolish the building within the time set forth in its order that the city may repair, demolish or secure the building pursuant to this chapter or institute an action to compel compliance with its order. 
B.  The decision of the abatement hearing officer is a final decision subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, and shall be in the form of an order and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the requirements with which the owner shall comply. The order shall also inform the appellant that the decision of the abatement hearing officer is a final decision and that the time for judicial review is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
C.  The effective date of the decision and order and the period or periods within which the appellant must comply with the requirements of the decision shall be as stated in the decision. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.270 - Service of the final decision and order. 
A copy of the decision and order shall be served on the appellant or appellant's personally or sent to him/her/them at the address shown on the appeal(s) by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested and a copy shall be posted on the property. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
Article IX. - Enforcement of Decision and Order 
 
8.16.280 - Compliance with decision and order. 
A.  General. After the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer or the notice and order of the building official made pursuant to this chapter is final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any such order or decision. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order or decision is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Failure to Obey Order. If, after the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer or the notice and order of the building official has become final, the person(s) to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the building official may (1) cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection A of this section; (2) institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance; or (3) repair, demolish or secure the building in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or as provided in the order of the abatement hearing officer or building official. 
C.  Recovery of Attorney's Fees. If, at the initiation of any particular action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a nuisance, the city seeks attorney's fees, the prevailing party shall be entitled to seek the recovery of its reasonable attorney's fees and costs, whether or not the matter proceeds to judgment. In no event shall an award of attorney's fees to a prevailing party exceed the reasonable amount of attorney's fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. 
D.  Failure to Commence or Complete Work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced or completed within the time limits prescribed in the final decision and order of the abatement hearing officer or the notice and order of the building official, the following shall apply: 
1.  If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, or if the building official determines that repair or demolition of the building or structure cannot be accomplished without making it immediately dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated as provided in Section 8.16.170. 
2.  No person shall occupy any building which has been posted with a notice to vacate as specified in this subsection. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition, or removal ordered by the building official or the abatement hearing officer shall have been completed. 
3.  To the extent permitted by law, the building official may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions that render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; may cause the building or site to be secured as set forth in the order; or may cause the building to be demolished and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleared and graded to provide proper drainage and sediment control. Any such repair, demolition or work to secure the building or site shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter. 
4.  No action shall be taken by the building official to repair, secure, vacate or demolish a building pursuant to this chapter without prior approval of the city attorney's office. 
E.  Enforcement of the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer or the notice and order of the building official made pursuant to this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of a properly and timely filed appeal therefrom to the Superior Court. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.290 - Extension of time. 
Upon receipt of a building permit application accompanied by the required permit fees from the person required to conform to a final order and an agreement by such person that he/she will comply with the order if allowed additional time, the building official may, in his/her discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional one hundred twenty (120) days, within which to complete the required repair, rehabilitation, or demolition, if the building official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The building official's authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation, securement or demolition of the building and will not in any way affect or extend the time to appeal a final order or challenge any order of the abatement hearing officer or building official. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.300 - Interference with repair or demolition work prohibited. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered, repaired, secured, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this chapter whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or is performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.310 - Performance of work or repair, demolition or securement. 
A.  Procedure. When any work of repair, demolition or securement is to be done pursuant to Section 8.16.280 by the city or its agents or contractors, the building official shall provide the final order or decision to the city engineer and the work shall be accomplished by city personnel or by private contract under the direction of such engineer and the building official. Plans and specifications therefore may be prepared by such engineer, or he/she may employ such architectural and engineering assistance on a contract basis as he/she may deem reasonably necessary. 
B.  Costs. The cost of such repair, demolition or securement work shall be paid from the abatement repair and demolition fund, and may be made a lien against the property involved and may be made a personal obligation of the property owner, as the abatement hearing officer shall determine is appropriate pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
Article X. - Recovery of Cost of Abatement 
 
8.16.320 - Liability for costs of abatement. 
A.  Every owner of property within the city is liable to the city for the total cost of abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this chapter on his or her property accrued to the date of final resolution of the proceedings, including the recordation of liens pursuant to this chapter, if any. Such costs shall include without limitation, costs of inspection, including inspections which form the basis of the building official's notice and order; expenses associated with issuing and serving the building official's notice and order and the final decision and order, if any; expenses associated with the appeal of the building official's notice and order, if any; attorneys' fees pursuant to Section 8.16.280, if any; the cost of repair, securement, demolition or any other abatement of the dangerous building or structure; costs of title reports, placing or removing liens and closing the file, and any other related administrative costs. 
B.  The director of development services or his/her designee, in his/her sole discretion, may waive any portion of or all of the costs of abatement proceedings in the event the owner of the property voluntarily complies with the building official's notice and order. 
C.  All costs not otherwise paid by the owner or waived by the building official shall be collected pursuant to the procedures set forth in this part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.330 - Sale of materials. 
A.  In the event the city repairs, secures, demolishes or otherwise abates the dangerous building and the abatement consists in part of removal of materials or demolition of a building or structure, the city may, at the city's sole discretion, sell the removed materials or materials contained in the demolished building or structure at public sale to the highest responsible bidder. The city shall notice the sale by publication at least five days prior to the date of the sale. The notice shall be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice by publication may occur either before or after the removal of the materials or demolition of the building or structure. 
B.  Any monies received from the sale of such removed materials or materials contained in the demolished building or structure shall be deducted from the expense of abatement. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.340 - Account of expenses—Filing of report—Contents. 
A.  The building official shall keep an itemized account of all expenses incurred by the city in the abatement of the dangerous building, including without limitation, those costs and expenses set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The building official shall keep an itemized account of all revenue received by the city for any sale of materials pursuant to Section 8.16.330. 
C.  Upon the completion of the work, the building official shall prepare a report, verified by the city official in charge of doing the work, specifying the following information: 
1.  The work done in repairing, securing, demolishing or otherwise abating the dangerous building, if any; 
2.  The itemized and total cost of the abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this chapter, including without limitation those costs and expenses set forth in this chapter; 
3.  The itemized and total revenue received from any sale of materials pursuant to Section 8.16.330; 
4.  The net expenses of the abatement (gross expenses less the revenue from any sale of materials pursuant to Section 8.16.330); 
5.  A description of the real property upon which the building or structure is or was located; 
6.  The names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to Section 8.16.130; 
7.  Notice of the time, date and place when and where the abatement hearing officer will hear and pass upon the report, together with any objections or protests which may be filed by any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge, and shall confirm, reject or modify the report and determine whether the charge shall be made a personal obligation of the property owner(s) and charged as a lien against the property involved; 
8.  A statement that the decision and order of the abatement hearing officer after the hearing is a final decision and order and is subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.350 - Service of the report and notice of hearing. 
A.  The building official's report and notice of the hearing shall be posted on the property and served by certified return receipt mail and first-class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the persons entitled to notice pursuant to Section 8.16.130 as their names and addresses appear on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or supplemental roll whichever is more current, if such so appears, or as known to the building official. 
B.  Service of the report and notice shall be made at least ten days prior to the date set for hearing. 
C.  All costs associated with service of the report and notice shall be added to total expenses to be reviewed by the abatement hearing officer. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.360 - Making of protests or objections. 
Any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge may file written protests or objections with the building official at any time prior to the time set for the hearing on the report of the building official or may make an oral protest at the hearing. Each written protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the signer thereof is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. The building official shall endorse on every such protest or objection the date it was received by him/her. The building official shall present such protests or objections to the abatement hearing officer at the time set for the hearing, and no other written protests or objections shall be considered. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.370 - Nature of protests to be heard. 
The protests heard by the abatement hearing officer pursuant to Section 8.16.360 shall relate only to the charge to be made for abatement, and no protest concerning the action of the building official or the abatement hearing officer in ordering the repair, securement, demolition or other abatement of the dangerous building shall be heard at this time. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.380 - Hearing of protests and confirmation, rejection or modification of report. 
Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the abatement hearing officer shall hear and pass upon the report of the building official together with any such objections or protests and shall confirm, reject or modify the report. The abatement hearing officer may make such revision, correction or modification of the report or the charge as it may deem just; and in the event the abatement hearing officer is satisfied with the correctness of the charge, the building official's report (as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified) together with the charge, shall be confirmed or rejected. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.390 - Order of abatement hearing officer. 
The abatement hearing officer may order that the charge be made a personal obligation of each owner of the property and charged against the property involved as a lien. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.400 - Final decision and order— Service. 
A.  The decision and order of the abatement hearing officer is a final decision subject only to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
B.  A copy of the final decision and order of the abatement hearing officer shall be served, no later than five days from the date of final decision, by certified return receipt mail and first-class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the persons entitled to notice pursuant to Section 8.16.130 as their names and addresses appear on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or supplemental roll whichever is more current, if such so appears, or as known to the building official. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.410 - Personal obligation and lien against the property. 
A.  If the abatement hearing officer orders that the charge shall be a personal obligation of the property owner, it shall direct the city attorney or the finance division to collect the same on behalf of the city by the use of all appropriate legal remedies. 
B.  If the abatement hearing officer orders that the charge shall be charged against the property as a lien, then in the event the charge contained by the abatement hearing officer is not paid within five days after service of the decision of the abatement hearing officer, the charge shall constitute a lien on the property. The lien shall continue until the amount of the charge and interest thereof at the legal rate, computed from the date of confirmation of the charge, is paid or until it is discharged of record. 
C.  The lien shall have the priority of a judgment lien. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.420 - Recordation of lien. 
After notice to the property owner(s) as provided in Section 8.16.440, the city clerk shall record a notice of lien with the county recorder within sixty (60) days after the confirmation of the charge by the abatement hearing officer. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.430 - Form of notice of lien. 
The notice of lien shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that pursuant to Shasta Lake Municipal Code Chapter ___, the City of Shasta Lake undertook the following actions: 
1. On _____, the Abatement Hearing Officer of the City of Shasta Lake ordered the abatement of a dangerous building on the real property described herein. 
2. On _____, the City of Shasta Lake abated the dangerous building. 
3. On _____, the City of Shasta Lake confirmed the cost of the abatement of the dangerous building and charged such cost as a lien against the real property described herein. 
4. As of the date of recordation of this Notice of Lien, the cost of the abatement has not yet been paid, and the City of Shasta Lake does hereby claim a lien on the real property described herein for the net expense of abating the dangerous building on the property in the amount of ($_______) and this amount shall be a lien upon the real property described herein until the full amount, with interest at the legal rate, has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
5. As of the date of recordation of this Notice of Lien, the name and address of the record owner of the property described below is: 
___________ 
6. The real property upon which the lien is claimed is that certain real property commonly known as _______, Assessor's Parcel No. _______, and more particularly described in Exhibit "A", attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
Dated:_____       CITY OF SHASTA LAKE 
_______ 
Name of Officer 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.440 - Service of notice of lien. 
A.  The city clerk shall serve the notice of lien on the owner of record of the property on which the dangerous building was located based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. 
B.  The notice of lien shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and by publication in a local newspaper of general circulation pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
8.16.450 - Discharge of lien. 
In the event the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, the city clerk shall record a notice of discharge in substantially the following form: 
DISCHARGE OF LIEN 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that pursuant to Shasta Lake Municipal Code Chapter ___, the City of Shasta Lake undertook the following actions: 
1. On _______, the Abatement Hearing Officer of the City of Shasta Lake ordered the abatement of a dangerous building on the real property described herein. 
2. On _______, the City of Shasta Lake abated the dangerous building. 
3. On _______, the City of Shasta Lake confirmed the cost of the abatement of the dangerous building and charged such cost as a lien against the real property described herein. 
4. The amount of the lien claimed by the City of Shasta Lake was _______ ($_____), with interest at the legal rate. 
5. As of the date of recordation of this Discharge of Lien, the name and address of the record owner of the property described below is: 
___________. 
6. The lien claimed by the City of Shasta Lake has been discharged, released or satisfied and the City of Shasta Lake no longer claims a lien on the real property described herein. 
7. The real property upon which the lien was claimed is that certain real property commonly known as _______, Assessor Parcel No. ___, and more particularly described in Exhibit "A", attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
Dated:_____       CITY OF SHASTA LAKE 
_______ 
Name of Officer 
(Ord. 00-126 § 2 (part))  
Chapter 8.17 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT 
 
8.17.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of defining those conditions of real property in the city which constitute nuisances; and for the further purpose of establishing procedures for ordering the abatement of a nuisance; authorizing city personnel to undertake the work necessary to abate such nuisance in the event of noncompliance with such abatement order; levying an assessment against the owner of the property on which such nuisance abatement work was performed in the amount of city's abatement costs; and either causing a lien to be recorded against such property in the amount of such assessment costs or causing such assessment to be added to the county assessment rolls and collected at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.020 - Findings. 
The city council hereby finds: 
A.  That there are numerous buildings, structures and other conditions on or pertaining to real property located in the city which constitute nuisances as defined in this chapter; and 
B.  That continued existence of such nuisances is injurious to the public health, safety and welfare; and 
C.  That abatement of such nuisances in the manner provided by this chapter is a proper exercise of the city's police powers and is specifically authorized by Government Code (commencing with Section 38771); and 
D.  That abatement of such nuisances in the manner provided by this chapter is reasonable and affords to the owner of the property on which the nuisance is located all of the due process rights guaranteed by the federal and state constitutions. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.030 - Nuisance defined. 
A.  Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or its adopted codes, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city. 
B.  It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, occupying, leasing or having charge or possession of any property in the city to maintain or allow to be maintained on such property any of the conditions set forth in this section, regardless of whether the property or any structure thereon is vacant or occupied. 
1.  The exterior accumulation of growths, dirt, litter, rubbish or debris. 
2.  Broken, abandoned or discarded furniture or other household equipment or fixtures, packing boxes, lumber, junk, trash, rubbish, or other materials or debris, including the dumping, spillage or storage of solids or liquids which may negatively impact the visual or olfactory nature of the area. 
3.  Buildings, fences or other structures, the exterior walls or windows containing graffiti or other inscribed material or which are cracked, broken, leaning, fallen, decayed, deteriorated or defaced. 
4.  Any dangerous, unsightly or blighted condition. For purposes of this section, "blighted" shall mean characterized as being in a condition of decay, deterioration, disrepair, neglect or inadequate maintenance, including but not limited to conditions constituting a public nuisance, contributing to the diminution of the property values of surrounding properties, undermining the economic vitality of a neighborhood or creating health or safety dangers. 
5.  Neglected or improperly maintained landscaping, including but not limited to dead, debris laden, weed infested or overgrown vegetation, such as trees, shrubs, hedges, grass and ground covers, or vegetation dying as a result of physical damage, disease, insect infestation or lack of water, or the removal or failure to maintain in good condition any landscaping required as a condition to any permit or development approved or included in the project plans or application, without city approval; provided however, that the provision as to dead or dying vegetation due to lack of water shall not to be enforced during a drought year, as determined by the city. For purposes of this subsection, a lawn area shall be deemed overgrown if fifty (50) percent or more of its area exceeds twelve (12) inches in height. 
6.  A failing septic tank and/or leach field system. 
7.  An unprotected excavation and/or abandoned and uncovered well. 
8.  An unfenced or otherwise unprotected swimming pool. 
9.  Storage or maintenance in a residential zone, visible from public view point—a street, alleyway, sidewalk or right-of-way—of metal storage bins or containers larger than eighty (80) square feet for more than fourteen (14) days. 
10.  The exterior storage or maintenance of parts or machinery of any type or description unless specifically authorized by a city license or permit; building materials or merchandise unless specifically authorized by use permit; or construction equipment or garbage bins except while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit or other city projects are in progress on the subject or adjoining property. This subsection shall also apply to situations involving abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, and the abatement thereof. 
11.  The exterior storage of any number of tires in a manner that allows any accumulation of water or creates a fire hazard. 
12.  The parking or storage of any boat, trailer, camper, motor home, unregistered or non-operable vehicles or other mobile equipment, whether or not motorized, or portions or parts and components thereof, on property used or zoned for residential purposes, if either: 
a.  Located on any front lawn or front yard or driveway within the front yard set back measured from the property boundary line; or 
b.  Located in any side yard, so as to prevent a three-foot wide continuous access way from the front of the property; or 
c.  Located on any side yard within the required side yard set back measured from the property boundary line of any corner lot. 
13.  The use of any trailer, camper or motor home for residential occupancy except on property zoned for mobile home parks or camping. 
14.  Land, the topography, geology or configuration of which, whether in natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent properties. 
15.  Obstruction or encroachment upon any public property, including but not limited to any public street, sidewalk, highway, right-of-way, park or building, without prior city consent. Such obstructions or encroachments include, but are not limited to overgrown trees and shrubs; building materials; merchandise or other personal property; and buildings or portions of buildings or structures protruding onto public property. 
16.  A building or structure which is constructed, maintained or used in violation of the building, fire or zoning regulations adopted by or pursuant to this code. 
17.  Maintenance of any substance which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may either cause or substantially contribute to an increase in mortality or serious illness or pose a significant present or potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly managed. 
18.  Any condition recognized in law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance. 
19.  Any condition constituting a "substandard building" under Section 17920.3 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
20.  The existence of any property condition which is unlawful or declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to any other provision in this code. 
This subsection shall be construed to place an affirmative duty on property owners and occupants to maintain their property in conformity with all applicable codes. The city will have the power to require property owners and occupants to bring their property into compliance with applicable codes, regardless of whether or not the building is occupied. 
Each day that any condition which constitutes a public nuisance continues shall be deemed to be a separate violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.040 - Notice to abate. 
A.  In general, whenever any property is found by the code enforcement officer to contain a public nuisance as declared by this chapter, he or she will notify the owner of such property in writing by issuing a notice to abate. The notice will state the conditions which constitute the public nuisance, and will order the owner to abate said conditions within thirty (30) days after the date of notice. The notice may provide for a shorter period of time in which to abate the public nuisance in the event that (1) the condition which constitutes the public nuisance is not one which makes the property substandard housing as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3, or (2) prior notices to abate the same condition have been sent within the last ninety (90) days and the condition has not been abated. 
B.  Substandard Housing. Whenever the condition which constitutes a nuisance is a substandard residential building, as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3, then the notice to abate required by this section shall be sent not only to the owner, but also to any mortgagee or beneficiary under any deed of trust of record. The notice shall state the conditions which render the building unfit for human habitation and shall order the building or the affected portion of it vacated, and further order that it be either repaired or demolished within thirty (30) days after the date of notice. 
If such building is encumbered by a mortgage or deed of trust of record, and the owner does not comply with the notice to abate on or before the expiration of thirty (30) days after its mailing and posting, the mortgagee or beneficiary may, within fifteen (15) days after the expiration of said thirty (30) day period, comply with the requirements of the notice to abate, in which event the cost of the mortgagee or beneficiary in so doing will be added to and become a part of the lien secured by the mortgage or deed of trust and shall be payable as provided by Title 25 of the Code of California Regulations, Section 54. 
C.  Manner of Giving Notice. 
1.  The notices will be mailed by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid and return receipt requested, to the owner of the property at the address for the owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the county. The names and addresses of owners appearing on the assessment roll shall be conclusively deemed to be the proper person and address for the purpose of mailing such notices. In addition, if the property is other than vacant property, a copy of the notice shall be mailed to the property address. 
2.  Substandard Housing. Whenever the condition which constitutes a nuisance also constitutes a substandard residential building, as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3, then at least one copy of the notice to abate will be posted conspicuously on the building alleged to be substandard; and an additional copy will be mailed by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid and return receipt requested, to any mortgagee or beneficiary on any note or deed of trust of record. If the address of a mortgagee or beneficiary is unknown, then that fact will be stated on the copy so mailed, and the notice to abate will be sent to the mortgagee or beneficiary addressed to him or her. 
3.  Affidavits. The employee sending such notice to abate will file an affidavit with the city clerk certifying the time and manner in which notice was given and will also file with the city clerk any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of the notice to abate. 
4.  Failure to Receive Notice. The failure of any owner or other person to receive the notice to abate or other notices required by this chapter shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceeding taken under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.050 - Tenant notification. 
Tenants in a residential building shall be provided a copy of any notice served under this chapter concerning any violation which affects the health and safety of the occupants and which violates Civil Code Section 1941.1, any order declaring the premises to be substandard, the city's decision to repair or demolish, or the issuance of a building or demolition permit following the abatement order. Copies may be provided either by first class mail to each affected residential unit, or by posting a copy in a prominent place on the premises at the discretion of the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.060 - Order to show cause. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with a notice to abate issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  In the event the owner fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the notice to abate, the code enforcement officer may serve an "order to show cause" which shall order such person to either abate the conditions specified in the notice to abate or appear before a hearing officer, at a stated time and place, not less than fifteen (15) days from the date of the order, to show cause why the conditions should not be abated by the city at the owner's expense. The order to show cause will be served and posted, and an affidavit filed with the city clerk, in the manner specified in section 8.17.040. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.070 - Form of order to show cause. 
The order to show cause will be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE 
AND 
ORDER TO SHOW CAUSE 
Hearing Date: 
Time: 
Location: 
  
The initial determination that there exists upon the building, structure, lot or premises located at _________________________, City of Shasta Lake, California, condition(s) constituting a public nuisance(s) under section 8.17.030 of City of Shasta Lake Municipal Code. 
The conditions constituting the nuisance are: ____________________________. The methods of abatement available are: _____________________________. You have previously received a written Notice to Abate dated _________ requiring you to abate these conditions and have failed to do so. YOU ARE HEREBY ORDERED to either: (1) ABATE THE ABOVE CONDITION(S) by repairing, replacing, removing, destroying or otherwise remedying the condition(s) to the satisfaction of the undersigned enforcement officer within _____ days of the date of this order; OR, alternatively, (2) TO APPEAR AND SHOW CAUSE before a hearing officer at the offices of the located at _____________________, at ____ o'clock, on    (date)    to show why these condition(s) should not be abated by the city and the expenses of doing so be charged to you as a personal debt and/or made a special assessment and lien upon the premises. 
All persons having an interest in said matters are notified to attend the hearing, and their testimony and evidence will be given due consideration. WARNING! (1) If you do not either abate the conditions or attend the hearing, you will have waived your right to a hearing regarding the existence of the nuisance. In that case, the city will abate the nuisance and the expenses of doing so will be made a special assessment and lien upon the property. In addition, you may be cited for violations of the City of Shasta Lake Municipal Code and subject to a fine. (2) Once vehicles or other property are abated by the city, they may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as provided by law. (3) In accordance with Revenue and Taxation Code sections 17274 and 24436.5, a tax deduction may not be allowed for interest, taxes, depreciation or amortization paid or incurred in the taxable year if these conditions are not abated. 
  
Dated: ___________________ 
Code Enforcement Officer 
  
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017) 
  _____  
8.17.080 - Show cause hearing. 
The show cause hearing to determine whether a nuisance exists shall be conducted by a hearing officer as set forth in section 1.17.070. The hearing officer's decision shall be final unless challenged in superior court. Any action brought in superior court challenging the hearing officer's decision and order shall be commenced within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of service of such decision. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.090 - Waiver of abatement hearing. 
Failure of the owner or responsible party to either abate the conditions specified in the order to show cause or to appear at the hearing on the order to show cause after notice has been served shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing and an admission by such owner or responsible party of the existence of the nuisance conditions as specified. In the event of an unexcused failure to appear, the hearing officer may issue an order of abatement permitting the conditions to be abated by the city. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, there shall be no right to appeal such order following both a failure to appear and a failure to abate. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.100 - Hearing officer order of abatement. 
Upon the conclusion of the hearing on the order to show cause, the hearing officer will determine whether the activity or the premises, or any part thereof, as maintained, constitutes a public nuisance. If the hearing officer finds that a public nuisance does not exist, he or she will dismiss the proceedings. If the hearing officer finds that a public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to order the abatement of the public nuisance, the hearing officer will issue an order of abatement, which will contain findings of fact and will direct and order the public nuisance abated within the time, and in the manner set forth in the order. The order of abatement will be served in the manner set forth in sections 8.17.040. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.110 - Failure to comply with order of abatement. 
It shall be unlawful to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with an order of abatement issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.120 - Abatement by city. 
A.  If the nuisance is not completely abated by the owner in the time and manner set forth in the order of abatement, the nuisance shall be abated by city forces or private contractors retained in accordance with the provisions of this code; and entry upon the premises to which the order of abatement relates is expressly authorized for such purposes. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city whenever such person is engaged in the work of abatement, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work, as authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter. The cost, including incidental expenses, of abating the nuisance shall become a civil debt of the owner and other responsible persons and shall be billed to the owner and become due and payable fifteen (15) days thereafter. The term "incidental expenses" shall include, but not be limited to, personnel costs, both direct and indirect; attorney's fees; costs incurred in documenting the nuisance; the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications, and contracts and in inspecting the work; the costs of printing and mailing the notices required hereunder; and any administrative or recording costs charged by the county. 
B.  In the event that the owner or occupant fails to consent to the city entering his or her property for the purposes of inspecting and/or abating a nuisance under this chapter, the city may, if legally required, apply for and be granted a court warrant if cause exists, pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.52 or any other authority. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.130 - Summary abatement. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, whenever it is determined that a public nuisance is so imminently dangerous to life or other property that such condition must be immediately corrected or isolated, the city may institute the following procedures: 
A.  Notice. The enforcement officer will attempt to make contact through a personal interview, or by telephone, with the landowner or the person, if any, occupying or otherwise in real or apparent charge and control thereof. The enforcement officer will document all attempts to make contact. In the event contact is made, the enforcement officer will notify such person or persons of the danger involved and require that such condition be immediately removed, repaired or isolated so as to preclude harm to any person or property. 
B.  Abatement. In the event the enforcement officer is unable to make contact as required by this section, or if the appropriate persons, after notification by the enforcement officer, do not take action as specified by such official within seventy-two (72) hours, or a lesser period if deemed necessary, then the enforcement officer may, with the approval of the city manager and in consultation with the city attorney if feasible, take all steps necessary to remove or isolate such dangerous condition, or conditions, with the use of city forces or a contractor retained pursuant to the provisions of this code. Provided, however, that summary abatement shall be limited solely to those matters which are imminently dangerous to life or other property, and additional abatement, if necessary, shall utilize the other enforcement provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Costs. The enforcement officer will keep an itemized account of the costs incurred by the city in removing or isolating such condition or conditions. Such costs may be recovered to the same extent and in the same manner that abatement costs incurred pursuant to section 8.17.120 are recovered. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.140 - Recovery of costs of abatement. 
The costs of abatement incurred under this chapter shall be recouped through a civil action pursuant to section 8.18.040, a lien pursuant to section 8.18.070, or a special assessment pursuant to section 8.18.080. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.150 - Hearing officer. 
The city council will appoint hearing officers to conduct proceedings under this chapter. The hearing officer may be a city employee, but in that event the hearing officer will not have had any responsibility for the investigation, prosecution or enforcement of this chapter and will not have had any personal involvement in the proceeding to be heard within the past twelve (12) months or possess any disqualifying interest in the outcome of the proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.160 - Violation unlawful. 
In addition to any other remedies provided for in this chapter or under applicable law, violation of this chapter or a failure to comply with an order of abatement or notice to abate issued pursuant to this chapter shall be unlawful and an offense. Such violations shall be punishable as provided by chapter 8.18. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.170 - Recordation of notice of violation. 
Any city employee authorized to enforce this code may record a "notice of violation" against any property on which a public nuisance exists declaring the existence of the nuisance and describing it. In any case where such a notice has been recorded and the nuisance is later abated, the city employee will record a further notice declaring the nuisance abated. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.180 - Nonexclusive procedure and remedies. 
Any condition found to constitute a public nuisance may be abated pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter, other provisions of this code or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.17.190 - No city duty to enforce. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the city to enforce its prohibitions against any or all properties which may violate it. The city envisions that this chapter will be enforced, in the city's prosecutorial discretion, only as to a limited number of problem properties, as resources permit. Nothing in this section or the absence of any similar provisions from any other city law shall be construed to impose a duty on the city to enforce such other provision of law. This chapter is not intended to and shall not be construed or given effect in a manner that imposes upon the city or any officer or employee thereof a mandatory duty of care towards persons and property within or without the city so as to provide a basis of civil liability for damages, except as otherwise imposed by law. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
Chapter 8.18 - CODE ENFORCEMENT 
 
8.18.010 - Violations a misdemeanor or infraction. 
No person shall violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code, including its adopted codes. Every such person shall be guilty of a separate and distinct offense for each and every day, or any portion thereof, of which any violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly. Subject to chapter 1.17, every act prohibited, declared unlawful or declared substandard or unsafe and every failure to perform an act made mandatory shall constitute either a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.18.020 - Infraction. 
Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code, including its adopted codes, may be prosecuted for an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code shall be punished according to the fine schedule listed below: 
A.  One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, per section 1.17.06 of this chapter; 
B.  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second, or continuance of the same violation of the same provision (other than a building and safety code provision) within one year, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a violation of a building and safety code provision; 
C.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third, or continuance violation of the same provision (other than a building and safety code provision) within one year and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a violation of a building and safety code provision; 
D.  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional, or continuance of the same violation of a building and safety code provision. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.18.030 - Misdemeanor. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code, including its adopted codes, may be prosecuted for a misdemeanor. 
B.  Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1000.00), imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months or both. 
C.  In the event a person is imprisoned for violation of any of the provisions of this code, such person may be required to labor on public property or works within the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.18.040 - Civil action. 
The city attorney, by and at the request of the city council, city manager, or his/her designee, may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin or abate the condition(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this code, including its adopted codes, as provided by law. The city attorney, by and at the request of the city council or city staff, may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect a civil debt owing to the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.18.050 - Administrative citation. 
As set forth in chapter 1.17, the city may issue an administrative citation for any violation of this code. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.18.060 - Attorneys' fees and costs. 
A.  In any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding commenced by the city to abate a public nuisance, to enjoin violation of any provision of this code, including its adopted codes, or to collect a civil debt owing to the city, if the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys' fees, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred therein, including reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of suit. In no action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. 
B.  The city shall be considered a prevailing party entitled to attorneys' fees under subsection A. when it can demonstrate that: 
1.  Its lawsuit was the catalyst motivating the defendant to provide the primary relief sought; 
2.  The lawsuit was meritorious and achieved its result by "threat of victory;" and 
3.  The city reasonably attempted to settle the litigation before filing the lawsuit. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.18.070 - Lien procedure. 
A.  The code enforcement officer or other authorized city official will keep an itemized report of the costs incurred by the city in the abatement of any public nuisance in addition to any accrued fees and penalties due. The property owner may be invoiced for the total. If payment is not received, the itemized report will be submitted in writing to the city clerk no sooner than fifteen (15) days of the invoice date. Any such report may include the abatement costs, fees and penalties for any number of properties and abatements, whether or not such properties are contiguous. 
B.  Upon receipt of the itemized report, the city clerk, or his or her designee, shall serve notice of the lien in the same manner as summons in a civil action in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10 et seq. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days and publication thereof in Record Searchlight or other newspaper of general circulation in the county. The period of notice commences upon the first day of publication and terminates at the end of the tenth day, including therein the first day. Publication shall be made on each day on which the newspaper is published during the ten-day period. 
C.  After notice has been served, the lien shall be recorded in the county recorder's office and, from the date of recording, shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien. 
D.  The lien shall identify: 
1.  The amount of the lien; 
2.  The city as the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed; 
3.  The date of the abatement order or citation; 
4.  The street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed; and 
5.  The name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
E.  In the event that the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, through either payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge will be recorded by the city clerk. 
F.  A lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment. 
G.  The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred in the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.18.080 - Special assessment procedure. 
A.  The code enforcement officer or other authorized city official will keep an itemized report of the costs incurred by the city in the abatement of any public nuisance in addition to any accrued fees and penalties due. The property owner may be invoiced for the total. If payment is not received, the itemized report will be submitted in writing to the city clerk no sooner than fifteen (15) days of the invoice date. Any such report may include the abatement costs, fees and penalties for any number of properties and abatements, whether or not such properties are contiguous. 
B.  Upon receipt of the itemized report, the city clerk will serve notice by certified mail to the property owner, if the property owner's identity can be determined from the county assessor's or county recorder's records. The notice will be given at the time of imposing the assessment and will specify that the property may be sold after three (3) years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
C.  Subject to the requirements applicable to the sale of property pursuant to Section 3691 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the city may conduct a sale of the property for which the payment of that assessment is delinquent. 
D.  Notices or instruments relating to the special assessment shall be entitled to recordation. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
8.18.090 - Order for treble costs of abatement. 
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except for conditions abated pursuant to Section 17980 of the Health and Safety Code, relating to abandoned buildings, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement, as authorized by Government Code Section 38773.7. Costs of abatement shall include, without limitation by reason of enumeration, all administrative costs of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-260, § 2, 6-6-2017)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.02 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES 
Sections: 
 
9.02.010 - Reserved.  
9.02.020 - Reserved.  
9.02.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Alcoholic beverage" means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
"Open container" means a bottle, can or other receptacle which has been opened, or a seal broken or contents partially removed. 
(Ord. No. 11-220, 5-17-2011)  
9.02.040 - Offenses. 
It is prohibited any person to consume or have in his or her possession, an open container of any alcoholic beverage on: 
A.  Any public highway, alley, crosswalk, trail, greenbelt, street or sidewalk or other place open for pedestrian travel; 
B.  Any public property, including parks, unless a permit has been issued; 
C.  Any privately owned business parking lots or residential parking lots serving two or more units. 
(Ord. No. 11-220, 5-17-2011)  
9.02.050 - Exceptions. 
The prohibitions identified pursuant to Section 9.020.040 shall not apply to the following instances: 
A.  Participating in events in a city park for which a permit has been issued pursuant to Chapter 12.04 as long as the person is in compliance with the terms of the permit; or 
B.  Participating in events for which a special event permit has been issued by the city containing the following conditions: 
1.  Alcoholic beverages consumed or possessed at such events shall not be in glass or metal containers; 
2.  The organizer of the special event shall comply with all state and local laws relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages; 
3.  The organizer of the special event shall comply with all other conditions as required by local law enforcement; the parks and recreation department, and the city's risk management department. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to make unlawful any act or acts which are permitted by any law of the State. 
(Ord. No. 11-220, 5-17-2011)  
9.02.060 - Violations—Penalty. 
Chapter 1.16, general penalty shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 11-220, 5-17-2011)  
Chapter 9.04 - CURFEW 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council finds that a juvenile curfew ordinance is necessary and desirable because the protection of minors warrants a higher degree of governmental regulation. This higher degree of regulation is premised upon the peculiar vulnerability of children and minors' inability to make critical decisions in an informed and mature manner. The council recognizes a compelling interest in preserving the safety of the community generally and providing a higher degree of protection for its minors specifically during nighttime hours. 
(Ord. 97-89 § 1)  
9.04.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions are applicable to this chapter: 
"Curfew hours" means the period from ten p.m. any night until six a.m. the following morning. 
"Emergency" means unforeseen circumstances or a situation that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, an automobile accident, fire or explosion, natural disaster or any condition requiring immediate action to prevent bodily injury or loss of life. 
"Establishment" means any privately-owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
"Guardian" means (a) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the minor; or (b) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
"Minor" means any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
"Operator" means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of a minor. 
"Public place" means any place the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
"Remain" means to (a) linger, stay or be present; or (b) fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a peace officer, the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
"Responsible adult" means a person at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
(Ord. 97-89 § 2)  
9.04.030 - Offenses. 
It is unlawful for: 
A.  Any minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours; or 
B.  Any parent, guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours; or 
C.  Any owner, operator or employee of an establishment to knowingly permit a minor to remain in or upon the premises of an establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. 97-89 § 3)  
9.04.040 - Defenses. 
It is a defense to prosecution of the above offenses that the minor was: 
A.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or by a responsible adult; 
B.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian or responsible adult, without detour or delay; 
C.  In a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel; 
D.  Engaged in employment, or going to or returning home from employment, without detour or delay; 
E.  Involved in an emergency; 
F.  On the sidewalk adjacent to the minor's residence, providing the minor is not otherwise violating the law; 
G.  Attending an official school, religious or other adult supervised recreational activity sponsored by the city, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the safety of the minor, or going to or returning home from such an activity, without detour or delay; 
H.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; 
I.  Emancipated pursuant to law; 
J.  Actively engaged in patronizing a business, holding a city of Shasta Lake business license, located on private property. 
(Ord. 97-89 § 4)  
9.04.050 - Additional defense. 
It is a defense to prosecution under offense described in Section 9.04.030(C) of this chapter, that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police agency that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Ord. 97-89 § 5)  
9.04.060 - Enforcement. 
Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a peace officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in a public place or on the premises of an establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue citation or detain a minor under this chapter unless the officer reasonably believes an offense has occurred and based upon the minor's response(s) and other circumstances, no defense under this chapter appears present or applicable. 
(Ord. 97-89 § 6)  
9.04.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Any person who violates the offenses described in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Minors shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. 
(Ord. 97-89 § 7)  
Chapter 9.08 - WEAPONS 
Sections: 
 
9.08.010 - Prohibiting discharge of firearms. 
It is unlawful to discharge within the city limits any pistol, firearm, air gun, musket or instrument of any kind, character or description, which propels a bullet or missile for any distance by means of force of air or any explosive substance, except in a regularly licensed shooting gallery or range or in accordance with provisions of a permit authorized by the city council and issued by the chief of police or Shasta County sheriff. In granting such a permit, the city council shall impose such conditions in connection therewith as are reasonably necessary to protect the health and safety of persons and property. 
(Ord. 97-95 § 1: Ord. 95-60)  
Chapter 9.12 - MOTORCYCLES/OFF-HIGHWAY MOTOR VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The driving, riding and use of motorcycles, motor-driven cycles or off-highway motor vehicles on public and private property within the limits of the city is and can be the cause of noise, dust, erosion, sedimentation, degradation of water quality, destruction of view and the destruction of plants, landscaping and other personal and real property which adversely affect the comfort, enjoyment and privacy of occupants and residents of the city. Because such conduct may be intermittent, fleeting, moving or caused by persons who are minors, the other provisions of this code, as well as other legal remedies, are inadequate to control such conduct and its adverse effects. The provisions of this chapter relating to the regulations of motorcycles, motor-driven cycles or off-highway motor vehicles are, therefore, necessary for the public welfare. 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to exercise police power in order to protect the enjoyment and use of public and private property, to protect the rights of privacy, to preserve property and personal values, and to promote peace and quiet within the city by regulating the use of off-road motorcycles, off-road motor-driven cycles or other off-highway motor vehicles on public and private property within the city. 
C.  This chapter shall not apply to the driving, riding and use of motorcycles, motor-driven cycles or off-highway motor vehicles on streets and highways or in other areas which are specifically governed or preempted by the Vehicle Code, any other statutes of the state or any other regulations or ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 05-166 § 1 (part))  
9.12.020 - Operation—Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive, ride or use a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or off-highway motor vehicle, as such vehicles are defined in Sections 400, 405 and 38012, respectively, of the State Vehicle Code, including, but not limited to, motor scooters, motorbikes and minibikes, all-terrain vehicles, go-carts and four-wheel-drive vehicles, upon any public or private property which is not an improved public street or highway or an improved private street constructed in accordance with city standards and approved by the city. 
(Ord. 05-166 § 1 (part))  
9.12.030 - Exemptions. 
The prohibitions identified pursuant to Section 9.12.020 of this chapter shall not apply in either of the following instances: 
A.  Where such vehicle is being driven, ridden or used upon property by the owner, resident or tenant of such property or by an authorized visitor when such visitor is accompanied by or has a written authorization in his or her possession from the owner, resident or tenant of such property; and 
B.  Where such use is permitted pursuant to a use permit or otherwise in accordance with the zoning regulations of the city. 
(Ord. 05-166 § 1 (part))  
9.12.040 - Equipment of off-highway vehicles. 
The exemptions identified under Section 9.12.030 of this chapter do not relieve the vehicle from compliance with State Vehicle Code Chapter 6, Equipment of Off-Highway Vehicles, commencing with Section 38325. 
(Ord. 05-166 § 1 (part))  
9.12.050 - Coordination. 
The regulations contained in this chapter do not supersede or preclude the enforcement of the zoning regulations or any other regulations contained in this code which are applicable to any conduct regulated hereby. 
(Ord. 05-166 § 1 (part))  
9.12.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violations of this chapter are declared to be infractions, and violators shall be punished pursuant to Municipal Code Chapter 1.16, General Penalty. 
(Ord. 05-166 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 9.16 - COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL ALARMS 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The Shasta County sheriff's office responds to over one thousand seven hundred (1,700) alarms each year. In 2004, the Shasta County sheriff's office responded to three hundred forty-one (341) alarm calls in the city of Shasta Lake. Approximately ninety-eight (98) percent of the alarms are false alarms. Nearly sixty (60) percent of these are repeat alarms. Generally, the false alarms are a result of operator error or difficulty with alarm equipment. Responding to false alarm calls wastes thousands of dollars each year in salaries and vehicle expenses. In addition, an officer's availability for other duties and requests for service is restricted or delayed while simultaneously putting deputies and the public at risk while expediting response from multiple units. 
False alarms have risen approximately four percent each year for the past four years. As the Shasta County and the city of Shasta Lake's population continues to grow, calls for service that the sheriff's office responds to also increases; over fifty thousand (50,000) in 2004, with twelve thousand six hundred eighty three (12,683) calls in the city of Shasta Lake. Demand for responses and reporting actual crimes and other services also continue to rise. Increases in the cost of providing services coupled with a limited amount of patrol deputies to answer these calls stretches the sheriff's resources to the limit. This makes responding to a false alarm even more burdensome. 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and controls to reduce the incidents of false alarm calls (with the exception of fire alarms) responded to by the sheriff's office. Imposing fees for excessive false alarms would serve as a deterrent and recoup some of the costs for providing this service. 
(Ord. 05-169 § 1 (part))  
9.16.020 - Fee schedule for alarm systems (excluding fire alarms). 
Alarm System Permit Fee (permit is for a 3-year period) 	$ 25.00 
Application for alarm system permits, or the renewal thereof, shall be submitted to the sheriff/city of Shasta Lake on such forms as the sheriff/city of Shasta Lake may prescribe. The application shall contain pertinent information regarding the permittee. The information will be entered into an automated program and any activation of the permittee's alarm system causing response by the sheriff's office will be maintained and tracked. 	
Alarm System Permit Reinstatement Fee 	25.00 
If an alarm permit has been revoked, upon the expiration period of time the suspension was imposed, the alarm system permit may be reinstated upon payment of the reinstatement fee. 	
False Alarm Response Fee (alarm system) 	70.00 
This fee will be charged when more than two false alarms occur within any 365-day period actuated by an alarm system. 	
False Alarm Response Fee (panic alarm) 	100.00 
This fee will be charged when more than one false alarm occurs within any 365-day period actuated by a panic alarm. This type of alarm is an electrical or mechanical device designed to enable a person to instantly send a signal of the existence of an emergency. This type of alarm makes it an immediate response or the highest priority call. 	
Nonpermitted Alarm Response Fee 	50.00 
An alarm system user shall pay a nonpermitted alarm response fee for any response to an alarm, whether false or valid, when an alarm system is not authorized pursuant to a valid, unexpired, unsuspended and unrevoked alarm system permit. 	
 
(Ord. 05-169 § 1 (part))  
9.16.030 - Revision of fees. 
The city council, by resolution, may adopt and revise the fee schedule when necessary to cover reasonable costs incurred by the city in providing the services set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 05-169 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 9.20 - GRAFFITI ABATEMENT 
Sections: 
 
9.20.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The city council finds and determines that graffiti placed or inscribed on public and private property is a blighting factor which depreciates the value of the property which has been the target of such malicious vandalism, and also depreciates the value of the adjacent surrounding properties, with a resulting negative impact on the entire community. 
B.  The city council further finds and determines that abatement of graffiti will enhance the appearance of and benefit the use and enjoyment of properties in the City and appreciate the values and appearance of neighboring properties. 
C.  The city council finds and determines that graffiti must be abated in a rapid manner to prevent the further spread of graffiti to avoid detrimental impacts on the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of city of Shasta Lake. 
D.  It is the purpose and intent of this ordinance as authorized by Government Code Section 53069.3 to provide a procedure for the removal of graffiti from walls and structures on both public and privately owned property in order to reduce blight and deterioration within the City and to protect and promote the public safety. 
(Ord. No. 16-252, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
9.20.020 - Graffiti defined. 
"Graffiti" means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, symbol or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any structural component of any building, structure, sign or other facility, regardless of the nature of the material of that structural component. 
(Ord. No. 16-252, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
9.20.030 - Graffiti prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon any public or privately owned, permanent building, structure, sign or other facility located on publicly or privately owned real property within the city of Shasta Lake. 
B.  No person owning or otherwise in control of any real property as tenant, occupant or otherwise within the city shall permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or remain on any permanent building, structure, sign, or other facility located on such property when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property. 
C.  Any person applying graffiti within the city shall have the duty to remove the same within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the city or the public or private owner of the property involved. Failure of any person to promptly so remove the graffiti shall constitute a separate and additional violation of this ordinance. Where graffiti is applied by a person under the age of eighteen (18), the parent and/or guardian of such minor shall be responsible for the removal and for the payment therefor. 
(Ord. No. 16-252, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
9.20.040 - Graffiti removal at city expense. 
Whenever the community development director or his/her designated representative, determines that graffiti is so located on public or private property within the city so as to be capable of being viewed by persons utilizing any public right-of-way in the city, or other public or private property, the community development director or his/her designated representative is authorized to provide for the removal of the graffiti at the city's expense, upon the following conditions: 
A.  In removing the graffiti, the painting or repair shall be limited to the minimum necessary to properly restore the defaced area. 
B.  Where a structure is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized only after securing the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure. 
C.  When a structure is privately owned, the removal of the graffiti by City staff or by a private contractor under the direction of the city shall be authorized only after securing the consent of the owner. 
D.  Whenever graffiti has been removed from public or private property at the expense of the city, each person who placed any of the graffiti, and the custodial parents or guardians of any minor who placed any of the graffiti shall be legally responsible to reimburse the City for all costs for removal of such graffiti as well as for related staff investigation time. 
(Ord. No. 16-252, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
9.20.050 - Graffiti declared public nuisance. 
Graffiti which the community development director or his/her authorized representative had determined to exist on any permanent structure in the city and which is visible from a street or other public or private property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 16-252, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
9.20.060 - Abatement. 
Whenever the community development director or his/her authorized representative determines that graffiti on a particular building, structure, sign or other facility constitutes a public nuisance, whether or not the owner consents to removal of the graffiti by the city, such graffiti may be abated as follows: 
A.  Notice. The community development director or his/her authorized representative shall issue or cause to be issued a Notice to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have ten calendar days after the date of the Notice to remove the graffiti, or the property shall be subject to abatement by the City. 
B.  Service of Notice. The notice to abate shall be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises, as such owner's name and address appears on the last equalized property tax assessment rolls of Shasta County. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent in care of the property address. The notice required by this section may be served in any one of the following manners: 
i.  By personal service on the owner, occupant, or person in charge or control of the property. 
ii.  By certified mail addressed to the owner at the last known address of said owner. If this address is unknown, the Notice will be sent to the property address. 
c.  Content of Notice. The notice shall be substantially in the following form: 
_____
NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI 
To:_________________________________ Date:___________ 
  
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required by law and at your expense to remove or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as: 
  
___________________________________________________________, California 
which is visible to public view, within ten (10) calendar days after the date of this Notice. Said graffiti is hereby determined to constitute a public nuisance. If you fail to remove the graffiti, City personnel or private contractors employed by the City may enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by removal or painting over the graffiti. The cost of such abatement by City personnel or private contractors hired by the City shall be assessed upon your property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid. 
All persons having any objection to, or interest in, this matter are hereby notified to submit any objections or comments to the Community Development Director for the City of Shasta Lake or his/her designated representative at the address shown below within ten (10) days from the date of this Notice. At the conclusion of the ten (10) calendar days period, the City shall be authorized to proceed with the abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property and at your expense without further notice. An appeal to this notification can be filed for a City Council public hearing pursuant to Section 9.20.030E. of this Ordinance. 
_____ 
D.  Hearings. Within ten days from the date of mailing or personal service of the Notice, the owner or person occupying or controlling such premises or lot affected may request a hearing before the community development director. 
All hearings shall be held before the community development director or his/her designee acting as hearing officer, who shall not be a person who has been personally involved in the case. The hearing officer shall hear all facts and testimony he/she deems pertinent. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land or occupant may appear in person or by an agent at the hearing, and may present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing. 
The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such actions and issue such orders as he/she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He/she may delay the time for removal of the graffiti if, in his/her opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the hearing or within a reasonable time thereafter, the Hearing Officer shall issue his/her decision which shall be written and shall mail a copy thereof to the party requesting the hearing. 
E.  Appeal. Within ten calendar days from the receipt of the hearing officer's decision, the owner or person occupying or controlling such premises or lot affected may appeal to the city council of city of Shasta Lake. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
F.  Removal by City. Upon failure of the person or persons so notified to comply with the notice by the designated date or such continued date thereafter as the community development director or his/her designated representative approves, then the director is authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by city staff or by private contractors, and the City or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the City and or the contractor, and any paint used to obliterate the graffiti shall be as close as practicable to the background color(s) on which the graffiti has been painted or inscribed. 
G.  Record of Cost for Abatement. The community development director or his/her authorized representative shall keep an account of costs (including incidental and administrative expenses) of abating such graffiti on each separate parcel of land where the work is done, and shall render an itemized report, in writing, to the city council showing the cost of abatement; provided, that before the report is submitted to the city council a copy shall be served in accordance with the provisions of this section, together with a notice of time when the report shall be heard by the city council for confirmation. 
i.  The city council shall set the matter for hearing to determine the correctness and reasonableness of such costs. 
ii.  The term "incidental expenses" shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts and in inspecting the work, and the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder, and attorneys' fee, correctness and reasonableness of such costs. 
H.  Report/Hearing and Proceedings. At the time and place established for receiving and considering the report, the city council shall hear and pass upon the report of such costs of abatement, together with any objections or protests. Thereupon, the city council may take such revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just, after which, by motion the report as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified shall be confirmed. The decision of the City Council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. 
I.  Assessment of Costs Against Property. The total cost for abating such nuisance, as confirmed by the city council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the Office of Shasta County Recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such assessment unless paid in full. 
i.  After such confirmation and recordation, a copy shall be filed with the assessor and tax collector of Shasta County in order that said officials may add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against the respective lots and parcels of land, and thereafter said amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes; or 
ii.  After such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 16-252, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
9.20.070 - Private property consent. 
Property owners in the city of Shasta Lake may consent in advance to the city entry onto private property for graffiti removal purposes. The city shall make available forms for such consent. 
(Ord. No. 16-252, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
9.20.080 - Public property. 
Where a structure is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized only after securing the consent of an authorized representative of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure. 
(Ord. No. 16-252, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
9.20.090 - Limitation of filing judicial action. 
Any owner, lessee, occupant or other interested person having any objections or being aggrieved at any proceeding taken on appeal by the city council in ordering the public nuisance under the provisions of this chapter, must bring an action to contest such decision within thirty (30) days after the date of such decision by the City Council. Otherwise, all objections to such decision shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. No. 16-252, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
9.20.100 - Additional remedies and penalties. 
The additional remedies, penalties and procedures for violation of this chapter and for recovery of costs related to enforcement provided for in Ordinance No. CC-16-252 are incorporated herein by this reference. A person convicted under Ordinance No. CC-16-252 may also be ordered to render community service, including, but not limited to, cleaning up, painting over, or otherwise removing his/her own graffiti and/or graffiti of others. 
(Ord. No. 16-252, § 1, 11-1-2016)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this title shall, for the purpose of this title, have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them in this section. Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, such definitions shall apply: 
"City" means the city of Shasta Lake. 
"Council" means the city council of the city of Shasta Lake. 
"Holidays" means all Sundays, and such other holidays as established by federal, state, and local governments. 
"Loading zone" means space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this title, they mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be currently used in the city. 
"Official traffic devices" means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this title which are placed or erected under lawful authority for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
"Official traffic signals" means all devices, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed and which are erected under lawful authority. 
"Parking meter" means a mechanical device installed within or upon the curb or sidewalk area, immediately adjacent to a parking space, for the purpose of controlling the period of time of occupancy of such parking meter space by any vehicle. 
"Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
"Pedestrian" means any person on foot. 
"Police officer" means every law enforcement officer of the police department of the city, if same has been established, or of the county sheriff's department assigned to provide law enforcement services to the city, or any officer authorized to direct traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
"Police vehicle zone" means any on-street parking space adjacent to police facilities, where posted signs indicate that such parking is for police vehicles only. 
"Stop" means complete cessation of movement. 
"Vehicle Code" means the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 1)  
Chapter 10.08 - TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Enforcement authority. 
It is the duty of the police to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specifically imposed upon said department by this title. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 2)  
10.08.020 - Traffic and safety engineer. 
A.  The city engineer or such other official as designated by the city manager shall be the city traffic and safety engineer. The duties as city traffic and safety engineer will be in addition to the officer's other duties, and he or she shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this title. Whenever the city traffic and safety engineer is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic control devices or signals, he or she may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained. 
B.  Powers and Duties. It is the general duty of the city traffic and safety engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices and signals, to conduct engineering and investigation of traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. Whenever, by the provisions of this title, a power is granted to the city traffic and safety engineer or a duty imposed upon him or her, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his or her deputy traffic and safety engineer, before erecting, establishing, installing or removing any official traffic control device or sign must recommend such action to, and obtain the approval of, the city council. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 3)  
10.08.030 - Traffic accident studies and reports. 
A.  Whenever, in the opinion of the traffic safety engineer, accidents at any particular location become numerous, he or she shall conduct studies of such accidents and determine remedial measures. 
B.  The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed by month, year, and accident report number. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 4)  
10.08.040 - Traffic safety reports. 
A traffic report shall be prepared annually, which shall be filed with the city council. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows: 
A.  The number and location of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
B.  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
C.  The plans and recommendations of the department for future traffic safety activities. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 5)  
10.08.050 - School crossing guards. 
The city traffic and safety engineer shall determine and designate all locations where school crossing guards should be assigned or removed. All such determinations shall be based upon traffic engineering principles, studies and investigations. School crossing guards shall be appointed and administered by the police in conformance with the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 6)  
Chapter 10.12 - TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Authority. 
A.  The police and such officers as are assigned by appropriate authority are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible, or other signals in conformance with traffic laws; except that in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or pedestrians, officers of the police or members of the Shasta Lake fire department may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or Vehicle Code. 
B.  No person other than an officer of the police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 7)  
10.12.020 - Obstruction of or interference with officers prohibited. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police or other employee of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this chapter shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 8)  
10.12.030 - Exemption of certain vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public utility vehicle, or any private or public ambulance, which public utility vehicle or ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
B.  The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation, or delivery of the United States mail. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 9)  
Chapter 10.16 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Installation and removal authority. 
A.  When authorized by resolution or ordinance adopted by the city council, the traffic and safety engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained and to remove official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title. 
B.  Whenever the Vehicle Code requires, for the effectiveness of any provision thereof, that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the traffic and safety engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth herein or other law applicable thereto. 
C.  The traffic and safety engineer may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as he or she may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he or she shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this title, upon the approval by ordinance or resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 10)  
10.16.020 - Required for enforcement. 
No provisions of the Vehicle Code or this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 11)  
10.16.030 - Installation of signals. 
A.  The traffic and safety engineer is directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternatively interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve congestions or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
B.  The traffic and safety engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his or her determination therefrom shall be made with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the traffic manual issued by the State Department of Transportation. 
C.  Whenever the traffic and safety engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he or she shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any said intersection. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 12)  
10.16.040 - Relocation, removal and discontinuance authority. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this title whenever he or she determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the device no longer exist. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 13)  
10.16.050 - Hours of operation. 
The traffic and safety engineer shall determine which hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 14)  
10.16.060 - Lane markings. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface or the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 15)  
10.16.070 - Roadway markings. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings or sign and markings. Such markings are placed by the State Department of Public Works pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 16)  
10.16.080 - Unauthorized painting of curbs. 
No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this city pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 17)  
Chapter 10.20 - SPEED LIMITS 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - Establishments. 
The city council, on the basis of engineering and traffic investigation and surveys, has determined that the speeds permitted by state law, as applicable to certain streets in the city, are different than those necessary for safe operation thereon, under the conditions found to exist on such streets, and it is declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be set forth on those streets or parts of streets within the city when signs giving notice thereof have been erected upon those streets. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 18)  
10.20.020 - Signposting. 
The traffic and safety engineer is directed to have signs erected upon the streets at appropriate locations giving notice of the limits established. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 19)  
10.20.030 - Timing of signals. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of tragic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds at variance from speeds otherwise applicable within the districts or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 20)  
Chapter 10.24 - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
10.24.010 - Authority to place turning markers. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the traffic and safety engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right and left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 21)  
10.24.020 - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed where such turns are permitted. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 22)  
10.24.030 - Turning right on red signal. 
A.  No driver of a vehicle shall make a right-hand turn against a red or stop light at any intersection which is signposted giving notice of such restriction as provided in this section. 
B.  The traffic and safety engineer shall post appropriate signs giving the effect to this section where he or she determines that the making of right turns against traffic signal "Stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 23)  
Chapter 10.28 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
Sections: 
 
10.28.010 - Signposting. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the traffic and safety engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement or traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 24)  
10.28.020 - Authority to establish. 
The council may, by ordinance or resolution, at any time when traffic conditions warrant, close any public street or portion thereof to traffic in one direction and direct that any vehicle shall travel in one direction on or over such street. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 25)  
Chapter 10.32 - STOP AND YIELD REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 
 
10.32.010 - Signposting. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the traffic and safety engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: 
A stop sign shall be placed on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances to other intersection where a stop is required and at any railroad crossing so designated; provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such is controlled by an official traffic control signal. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 26)  
10.32.020 - Stop required when emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto a sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 27)  
10.32.030 - Yield right-of-way signs. 
When deemed necessary for the orderly and safe movement of traffic by the traffic and safety engineer, he or she may erect a yield right-of-way sign on any one of the approaches to an intersection of streets or highways which are not through highways. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 28)  
Chapter 10.36 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.36.010 - Applicability of provisions. 
A.  The provisions of this title prohibiting or regulating the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times specified in this title or by resolution, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
B.  The provisions of this title or any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 29)  
10.36.020 - Area maintenance. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb, all no-stopping zones, no-parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this title or established by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 30)  
10.36.030 - Habitation of parked vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle upon any street for purposes of human habitation. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 31)  
10.36.040 - Displaying vehicles or vessels for sale, hire or rental. 
A.  It is unlawful to park or place a vehicle or vessel upon any parking lot or public or private property for the purpose of displaying such vehicle or vessel for sale, hire or rental, unless such use of the real property is permitted by Title 17 and the owner of the real property is duly licensed to transact such business at that location. 
B.  Subsection A of this section shall not prohibit any person from: 
1.  Parking or placing the person's own vehicle or vessel on the person's private residential property or on a public or private street adjacent to the person's residence for the purpose of displaying the vehicle or vessel for sale, hire or rental; or 
2.  Displaying a "for sale, hire or rental" sign, not in violation of the California Vehicle Code on a vehicle while the vehicle is being used for normal transportation. 
C.  The terms "vehicle" and "vessel" shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined in the California Vehicle Code. 
D.  The parking or placing of any vehicle or vessel upon any parking lot or public or private property not exempted by subsection (B) of this section with any associated signing indicating that the vehicle or vessel is for sale, hire or rental shall constitute prima facie evidence that such vehicle or vessel was placed for the purpose of displaying such vehicle or vessel for sate, hire or rental. 
(Ord. 01-133 § 1: Ord. 97-90 § 32)  
10.36.050 - Parking adjacent to schools. 
A.  The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 33)  
10.36.060 - Parking on narrow streets prohibited. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, upon one side of the street as indicated by such signs or marking when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 34)  
10.36.070 - Parking on grades— Requirements. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when any grade exceeding three percent (within any business or residential district) without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 35)  
10.36.080 - Sidewalk vending. 
The city seeks to adopt a sidewalk vending ordinance in conformity with Government Code Section 51036 et seq. allowing such vending to occur within the city's jurisdiction, subject to other provisions of federal, state, and local law. 
A.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
"Cart" means, collectively, a stationary cart or a mobile cart. 
"Cart permit" (permit) means a written city approval required for each cart used for vending within the city. 
"Citation" means an administrative citation issued pursuant to Chapter 1.22 of this Code. 
"City" means the City of Shasta Lake, a municipal corporation. 
"Food" means any type of edible substance or beverage. 
"Goods or merchandise" (merchandise) means any item that is not food. 
"Mobile cart" means a piece of equipment used for vending which is mobile, has no motor and is capable of being propelled by a single person. 
"Roaming sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction. 
"Sidewalk" means any surface in the public right-of-way provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
"Sidewalk vendor" means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path. 
"Stationary sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location. 
"Stationary cart" means a piece of equipment used for vending, as specified in the Rules and Regulations, which has no motor and is not mobile, except when being pushed, carried, or transported to and from a space on a daily basis. 
"Vend," "vends" or "vending" means to sell, offer for sale, expose or display for sale, solicit offers to purchase, or to barter food or merchandise, or to require someone to negotiate, establish or pay a fee before providing food or merchandise, even if characterized as a donation. 
B.  Permit and License. 
1.  License. 
a.  All sidewalk vendors must obtain, and maintain, a valid city business license. 
b.  To apply for a business license, the vendor must present a valid California photo identification, such as a driver's license. The following information shall be provided: 
i.  The name, address and telephone number of the vendor. 
ii.  Proof of liability insurance in an amount no less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00); 
iii.  A vendor who sells food, in addition to the requirements of this subdivision, shall certify completion of a food handler course and present a copy of the course completion certificate. 
iv.  A complete list of the types of food and merchandise that will be sold. 
v.  The hours per day and days per week during which sidewalk vending will be conducted. 
vi.  An application for a mobile cart in a residential area of the city shall contain a sketch showing the route the vendor will travel. 
vii.  Proof of liability insurance. 
c.  A license must be renewed every year, prior to expiration. 
d.  No license is transferable. 
e.  The applicant must pay an application or renewal fee to the city which shall be the current business license fee. 
f.  Sidewalk vending shall not be allowed without possession of a valid city business license. 
2.  Cart Permit. 
a.  Every cart used for vending must obtain and display a valid cart permit. Every cart must be placed and used at all times in compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
b.  An applicant for a cart permit shall present a valid identification, such as a State of California identification or any other government-issued identification and provide the following information: 
i.  The name, address and telephone number of the vendor. 
ii.  A complete list of the types of food or merchandise that will be sold. 
iii.  The hours of operation said cart will be operate. 
iv.  An application for placement of a stationary cart in a commercial or industrial area of the city shall contain a site plan indicating the proposed location, marked by major cross streets, and either the north, south east or west side of the street and a photo of that location. 
v.  An application for a mobile cart in a residential area of the city shall contain a sketch showing the route the vendor will travel. 
vi.  Proof of liability insurance. 
c.  A person may apply for a maximum of three separate permits. 
d.  A permit must be renewed every year, prior to expiration. The vendor shall pay an application and renewal fee for the permit, which shall be the current business license fee. 
e.  Sidewalk vending shall not be allowed without a valid cart permit. 
f.  The permit must be attached onto the cart and be posted where visible. 
g.  A permit is not transferrable to another cart, location or route. 
C.  Additional Requirements. 
1.  Vendors must maintain compliance with applicable regulations at all times. 
2.  At no time shall any vendor/cart encumber statutorily mandated paths of travel as described within, but not limited to, the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-336) and other disability access standards. 
3.  No more than two stationary carts with approved permits may be used on the sidewalk of a single block face within commercial and industrial areas of the city. 
a.  Stationary carts shall not be allowed within residentially zoned areas. 
4.  Mobile carts operated within a residentially zoned area shall move continuously, except when making a sale, which shall last no longer than ten minutes. 
5.  Every cart must not exceed a length of seventy-two (72) inches, a width of fifty-four (54) inches, or a height, including roof or awning, of seventy-eight (78) inches. A permit application may request, and the city may approve, a small table for condiments to be used in conjunction with a cart selling food. 
6.  A sidewalk vendor who sells food must provide a trash receptacle for customers. Said vendor must ensure adequate capacity of such receptacles and proper disposal of customer trash. Existing trash receptacles located on any block for use by the general public may not be used by any sidewalk vendor. 
7.  A sidewalk vendor must maintain a clean and trash-free ten-foot radius from the cart during hours of operation and must leave the area clean by the approved closing time. 
8.  No cart, condiment table or vendor's trash receptacle may be left after the vendor's approved closing time. 
9.  No cart shall be chained or fastened to any pole, sign, tree or other object or left unattended by the vendor. 
10.  Vending within nine hundred (900) feet of any K-12 school is prohibited from 6:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m. when children are present. 
11.  Vending of illegal or counterfeit merchandise is prohibited. 
12.  Vending at a city special event, farmers' market, swap meet, or street fair market is prohibited unless permissions are granted directly with the event organizer. 
13.  Vending in a city park or facility when there is an exclusive agreement in place with the city and a food vendor is prohibited. 
14.  Vending in a city park or facility between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. is prohibited. 
15.  Vending of services is prohibited. 
16.  Vendor shall possess a valid California Department of Tax and Fee Administration seller's permit. 
17.  Vendor shall not advertise within Caltrans right-of-way. Vendor will have to contact Caltrans directly to obtain any necessary permits. 
D.  Placement of Carts. 
1.  Vending food or merchandise on city sidewalks shall be prohibited: 
a.  Within five feet of a marked crosswalk. 
b.  Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return. 
c.  Within ten feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box or other emergency facility. 
d.  Within five feet ahead and forty-five (45) feet to the rear of a sign designating a bus stop. 
e.  Within a marked bus zone. 
f.  Within five feet of a bus bench. 
g.  Within fifteen (15) feet of a driveway or driveway apron. 
h.  Within eighteen (18) inches from the edge of the curb. 
i.  Where placement impedes the flow of pedestrian traffic by reducing the clear space to less than six feet or impedes access to or the use of abutting property, including, but not limited to, residences and places of business. 
j.  On city-owned property without prior city approval. 
2.  Notwithstanding any specific prohibitions in this subsection, no vendor shall install, use or maintain a cart where placement endangers the health, safety, or welfare of persons or property. 
E.  Penalties. 
1.  General Violations. A violation of this section is punishable by the following: 
a.  An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation. 
b.  An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first violation. 
c.  An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first violation. 
d.  The city may rescind the permit issued to a vendor upon the fourth violation or any subsequent violation. 
2.  Failure to Obtain Permit. If a vendor fails to obtain a sidewalk vending permit from the city, vending on the sidewalk without a permit may be punishable by the following in lieu of the administrative fines set forth in Subsection 1 above: 
a.  An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first violation. 
b.  An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second violation within one year of the first violation. 
c.  An administrative fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first violation. 
F.  Severability. If any provision, paragraph, word or section of this article is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remains provisions, paragraphs, words, and sections will not be affected and remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 19-272, § 1, 1-15-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-272, § 1, adopted Jan. 15, 2019, amended § 10.36.080 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 10.36.080 pertained to peddler and vendor parking restrictions and derived from Ord. 97-90 § 36.  
10.36.090 - Emergency parking signs. 
Notwithstanding the limitations of Section 10.16.010 of this title, whenever the traffic and safety engineer shall determine that traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other purposes, he or she shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the traffic and safety engineer shall direct during such time temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the traffic and safety engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 37)  
10.36.100 - Parking on city property restricted. 
Whenever the city council determines that the orderly, efficient conduct of the city's business requires that the parking or standing of vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited, or restricted, the city council shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited, or restricted. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 38)  
10.36.110 - Parking on private property restricted. 
No person shall park a vehicle in a private driveway or on private property without the direct or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 39)  
10.36.120 - Angle parking. 
A.  On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the council as angle-parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such angle parking, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park any vehicle except: 
1.  At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space; 
2.  With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of said curb. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 40)  
10.36.130 - Twenty-minute parking. 
Green curb marking means no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty (20) minutes at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 41)  
10.36.140 - Limited-time parking. 
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park vehicle between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer that the time so indicated. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 42)  
10.36.150 - No-stopping zones. 
A.  The traffic and safety engineer shall designate no-stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited. 
B.  During the hours and on the day on the signs, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop said vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no-stopping zones. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 43)  
10.36.160 - Loading zones—Authority to establish. 
A.  The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
1.  At any place in the central traffic district or any business district; 
2.  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
B.  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
C.  Material loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon all curbs within such zones. 
D.  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon all curbs in said zone. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 44)  
10.36.170 - Authority. 
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice of the limitations or restrictions imposed by this title, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 45)  
10.36.180 - Loading zones—Effect of permission to use. 
A.  Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not exceed beyond the time necessary thereof, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes. 
B.  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery of pickup of express and parcel packages and United States mail. 
C.  Permission granted herein to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading and unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary thereof, and in no event for more than three minutes. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 46)  
10.36.190 - Curb markings. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title, to place, and when required herein, shall place the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meanings herein set forth. 
A.  Red shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
B.  Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials providing that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes, nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes. 
1.  When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times; 
2.  When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when the theater is closed. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 47)  
10.36.200 - Standing in alleys. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any alley for the purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 48)  
10.36.210 - Coach zones. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to establish bus zones opposite the curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the locations thereof. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 49)  
10.36.220 - Parking meter zones. 
The council may by resolution establish parking meter zones upon those streets or parts of streets or upon those municipal parking lots where it is determined that the installation of parking meters is required to regulate parking. Within such zones the parking of vehicles shall be regulated by parking meters between the hours specified by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 50)  
Chapter 10.40 - PEDESTRIANS 
Sections: 
 
10.40.010 - Crosswalks—Establishments and maintenance. 
A.  The traffic and safety engineer shall establish, designate, and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway as set out in this section. 
B.  Crosswalks shall be established at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such district and at other places within or outside said district where the traffic and safety engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway, subject to the limitation contained in subsection C of this section. 
C.  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred (400) feet in length and any such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable to midblock. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 51)  
10.40.020 - Crosswalks—Use required. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a route at right angles to the curb. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 52)  
10.40.030 - Standing or walking in roadways. 
No person shall stand or walk in any roadway other than a safety zone, in a crosswalk, upon a sidewalk, if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. This section shall not apply to any public officer or employee of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in the line of duty. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 53)  
Chapter 10.44 - TRUCKS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.44.010 - Use of private driveways prohibited. 
A.  No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any sidewalk, or on or across any private driveway without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. 
B.  For the purpose of this section, a "commercial vehicle" means a vehicle having a gross vehicular weight in excess of six thousand three hundred (6,300) pounds. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 54)  
10.44.020 - Truck parking. 
A.  No person shall park any truck for more than two hours on a street within a residential district, or move and repark such vehicle in such residential district to within three hundred (300) feet of the original parking site, within any twenty-four (24) hour period, except while loading or unloading property or in connection with, and in the aid of, the performance of a service to or on property adjacent to the block in which such truck is parked, and only for such time as necessary to complete loading, unloading, or service. 
B.  "Truck" means any truck or truck-tractor having three or more axles or any truck or truck-tractor drawing any other vehicle when the combination of axles is three or more. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 55)  
10.44.030 - Truck routes. 
The council may, by resolution, designate certain routes over certain streets to be truck routes for movement of vehicles exceeding a gross maximum weight of three tons. When any such street or portions thereof are designated as a truck route, the traffic and safety engineer shall cause appropriate signs to be placed alongside the route. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 56)  
10.44.040 - Signposting of prohibited streets. 
When appropriate signs have been posted, commercial vehicles shall be prohibited on those streets designated by resolution of the council as streets upon which commercial vehicles are prohibited. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 57)  
10.44.050 - Advertising vehicle prohibitions. 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used principally for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loudspeaking device upon any street or alley at any time without written permission from the city. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 58)  
Chapter 10.48 - REMOVAL OF VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.48.010 - Authority—Procedures. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police or other official designated by the city manager in writing, may remove or cause to be removed: 
A.  Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours; 
B.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement, provided, that signs giving notice of such restrictions are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal in the manner prescribed by the Vehicle Code. 
C.  Citations in lieu of removal may be issued for violation of the seventy-two (72) hours prohibiting against parking or standing when officer determines damage may result to vehicle when towed. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 59)  
Chapter 10.52 - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
Sections: 
 
10.52.010 - Driving through funeral procession or parade. 
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. All vehicles and traffic on any street over which a funeral procession or parade passes shall be subject to the orders of the police department or other authorized traffic control authority. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 60)  
10.52.020 - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
No person shall attach himself or herself with his or her hands, or catch on or hold onto with his or her hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 61)  
10.52.030 - Riding or driving on sidewalks. 
No person shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled any vehicle, bicycle, or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that said sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the traffic and safety engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon the sidewalk area during the hours from six p.m. to six a.m. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 62)  
10.52.040 - Driving on new pavement and markings. 
No person shall ride or drive any vehicle or animal over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker, or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 63)  
10.52.050 - Obedience to barriers and signs. 
No person shall erect or place any barrier or traffic sign on any street unless of a type approved by the traffic and safety engineer. No person shall disobey, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 64)  
10.52.060 - Obstruction of intersections. 
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 65)  
10.52.070 - Unauthorized use of limited access roadways. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 66)  
Chapter 10.56 - BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.56.010 - Use restrictions. 
No person upon a skateboard, rollerskates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device shall ride upon any roadway or publicly maintained place open to any vehicular traffic, and all sidewalks in the business district. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 67)  
10.56.020 - Sidewalk use prohibited—Penalty. 
Any person, excepting invalids or children of six years or under, who rides or propels any coaster, bicycle, or tricycle upon any sidewalk within the city is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 68)  
10.56.030 - Bicycle helmets required. 
No person eighteen (18) years of age or younger will ride a bicycle on any roadway or publically maintained place open to any vehicular traffic, without an approved bicycle helmet. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 69)  
Chapter 10.60 - TRAINS 
Sections: 
 
10.60.010 - Blocking crossings prohibited. 
No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway car or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purpose of travel for a period of time longer than ten minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car, or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. 
(Ord. 97-90 § 70)  
Chapter 10.65 - POLICIES AND PROCEDURES RELATING TO THE ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC AND PARKING CITATIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.65.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is to assign the city responsibility for traffic and parking citation processing and to implement a parking citation hearing examiner program as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-157 § 1 (part))  
10.65.020 - Payment and collection of fines. 
Fines paid for traffic and parking citations issued pursuant to this chapter shall be collected and processed administratively through the city of Shasta Lake finance department. 
(Ord. 04-157 § 1 (part))  
10.65.030 - Traffic hearing examiner. 
By resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter, the city council shall designate a traffic hearing examiner, for an indefinite term, subject to removal by a majority vote of the council. The traffic hearing examiner shall be a city or sheriff's department employee qualified to conduct the administrative review hearing objectively and in accordance with law. The traffic hearing examiner's continued employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits shall not be directly or indirectly linked to the amount of fines collected by the traffic hearing examiner or the city. 
(Ord. 04-157 § 1 (part))  
10.65.040 - Administrative adjudication manual. 
In order to provide for the hearing and disposition of contested cases involving traffic and parking violations of the California Vehicle Code and this code, the council by resolution shall adopt an administrative adjudication manual which shall set forth the policies and procedures for conducting administrative review hearings in accordance with all applicable law. The manual may be amended by the council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. 04-157 § 1 (part))  
10.65.050 - Fee schedule. 
By resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter, the council shall adopt a schedule of penalties, administrative fees and any other related charges. The schedule may be amended by the council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. 04-157 § 1 (part))  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.04 - PARK AND RECREATION AREA USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.04.010 - Purpose of provisions. 
Chapters 12.04 and 12.08 of this code provide rules and regulations to govern the operation of the city's parks and recreation department. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.04.010)  
12.04.020 - Ownership of acquired property. 
The city shall retain sole ownership of any property acquired by the city for park purposes. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.04.020)  
12.04.030 - Donations of property, materials, labor or other consideration. 
Donations of real property, materials, equipment, labor, cash, or any useful consideration, may be accepted for parks purposes, as determined by the city manager. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.04.030)  
12.04.040 - Enforcement of regulations at certain facilities—County authority. 
The city approves the enforcement by Shasta County of Chapter 12.32 of Title 12 of the Shasta County Code in the parks listed below, in accordance with Shasta County Code Section 12.32.020: 
Clair Engle Park, Central Valley; 
Wynne Price Ballfield and Tennis Court, Central Valley; 
Akard Park, Pine Grove; 
Shasta Park, Central Valley; 
Blue Canyon Park, Central Valley; 
Bizz Johnson Ball Park, Summit City; 
Fountain, Islands and Bus Stop Park, Central Valley; 
Margaret V. Polf Regional Park. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.04.040)  
12.04.050 - Policy for rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations governing the use and operation of the city's parks and recreational facilities shall be in accordance with the policies established by the duly elected city council of the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.010)  
12.04.060 - City manager's authority. 
The administration of the policies of the city relating to the use and operation of the parks and recreational facilities, and the carrying out of the intent and purposes of the parks, shall be the responsibility, and within the authority, of the city manager. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.020)  
12.04.070 - City personnel enforcement authority. 
City personnel, duly authorized and identified, shall at all times act as the representatives of the city, to uphold, protect and enforce the interests of the city, as related to the parks or recreational facilities. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.030)  
12.04.080 - Facilities open to public use. 
The parks and recreation facilities are for the use of the general public, and no person will be denied reasonable use, in accordance with the policies, rules and regulations of the city. Exceptions may be approved by the city manager or designee if deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. 08-191 § 1: amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.040)  
12.04.090 - Use—Determination of appropriateness. 
Use as being appropriate, or inappropriate, to the intent and purposes of the parks and facilities, shall, when necessary, be in accordance with the determination of the city manager. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.050)  
12.04.100 - Use—Denial authorized when. 
Use of the parks or facilities may be denied to any person or persons found guilty of improperly using such facilities. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.060)  
12.04.110 - Hours and curfew. 
A time for curfew shall be established by the city, posted and enforced for use in the city's parks and facilities. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.070)  
12.04.120 - Closure authorized when. 
At the discretion of the city manager, when in his or her opinion just cause and reason exists, and it is in the best interest of the public, of city personnel, of parks property or facilities, or of other city concerns, the parks areas and recreational facilities may be closed to public use, for such period of time as is indicated by the cause for closure. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.080)  
12.04.130 - Posting of regulations. 
Rules and regulations, hours of curfew, and information on the use of the parks by the public shall be posted, or otherwise made available in reasonable locations, for persons using the parks or recreational facilities. 
(Prior code § 15.08.090)  
12.04.140 - Park buildings—Arrangements for use. 
Use of the parks' buildings shall be arranged with the parks department. 
(Prior code § 15.08.100)  
12.04.150 - Park areas—Arrangements for use. 
Use of parks areas for public events shall be arranged with the parks department. 
(Prior code § 15.08.110)  
12.04.160 - Park areas—Reservation procedures. 
The city may reserve areas of the parks for specific usage upon request by private parties or persons, and by arrangement with the parks department. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.120)  
12.04.170 - Park areas—Insurance required for public events. 
General liability insurance, listing the city as co-insured with the applicant, in an amount sufficient to insure the city's adequate coverage for any occurrence connected with the event, and in a form satisfactory to the city's attorney, shall be provided at the applicant's cost as a condition to the approval of any parks area for use for a public event. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.130)  
12.04.180 - Compliance with health regulations. 
The applicant shall, as a condition subsequent to the granting of use of city parks area or areas, comply with all health and safety requirements, and all applicable rules and regulations, for the benefit and protection of the public, of the city, county and state. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.140)  
12.04.190 - Alcoholic beverage restrictions. 
No alcoholic beverage of any sort may be sold within the permitted use area by the applicant or any agent, employee, sublessee or concessionaire, without first obtaining the express written permission of the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.150)  
12.04.200 - Alcohol consumption banned without permit. 
Alcohol consumption in the city parks and facilities is banned, unless an alcohol consumption permit is obtained from the city parks department. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.160)  
12.04.205 - Smoking. 
A.  The smoking of any substance is not allowed in or upon any park facility during public events. "Smoke or Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco, chemical substance or plant product intended for inhalation, including hookahs and marijuana, whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. "Smoking" also includes the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or in any form which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substance to the user. 
B.  It shall be unlawful to dispose of any smoking material upon the grounds of any park facility or to fail to extinguish smoking material in any park facility when requested to do so by a city official or by any law enforcement official. A violation of this subsection shall be punishable as an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 16-250, 4-19-2016)  
12.04.210 - Bicycle riding. 
No person or persons shall ride a bicycle or bicycles, within the boundaries of the parks except in paths or trails appropriate for bicycle use, and in such areas and manner as not to create a hazard to any person or persons using the parks, or to parks property or facilities. 
(Prior code § 15.08.170)  
12.04.220 - Camping or loitering. 
No person shall remain, stay, camp, lodge or loiter in any city park between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. 
(Prior code § 15.08.180)  
12.04.230 - Dogs. 
No dog should be permitted to enter the city's parks unless it is led by a leash of suitable strength, not more than six feet in length, and the owner or person responsible for the dog shall be responsible for, and may be required to make good, any damage caused in any event by such dog, even if on a leash. 
(Prior code § 15.08.190)  
12.04.240 - Fires. 
No person shall make or kindle a fire for any purpose, except in places provided for such purpose. 
(Prior code § 15.08.200)  
12.04.250 - Firearms, fireworks and similar items. 
No person shall discharge any firearms, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes or any other fireworks, airgun, slingshot, or bow and arrow, in the city's parks. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.210)  
12.04.260 - Handbills, circulars or advertising. 
No person shall distribute any commercial handbills or circulars, or post, place or erect any commercial bills, notices, papers or advertising devices, or commercial advertising devices or any commercial matter of any kind. 
(Prior code § 15.08.220)  
12.04.270 - Horse riding and livestock. 
No person shall ride, or bring within the boundaries of the parks, horses or other livestock. 
(Prior code § 15.08.230)  
12.04.280 - Hunting or molesting animals or birds. 
No person shall hunt, pursue, annoy, throw stones or missiles at, or molest or disturb in any way any animal or bird within the confines of any city park. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.240)  
12.04.290 - Littering. 
No person shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, any paper, fruit, rubbish, debris, trash, or any waste material of any kind in any city park except in receptacles provided therefor. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.250)  
12.04.300 - Motorized vehicles prohibited— Exceptions. 
Motorized vehicles shall not be permitted within the boundaries of any city park, except as needed by parks crews for work in the parks, or by permission of the city manager for exceptional circumstances. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.260)  
12.04.310 - Restroom use restrictions. 
No male person over eight years of age shall enter or use any toilet or restroom designated for women in a city park. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.270)  
12.04.320 - Nuisance activities prohibited. 
No person or persons shall make use of the city's parks or recreational facilities in such way as to create a nuisance to the surrounding area. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.280)  
12.04.330 - Removing wood, plants or soil prohibited. 
No person shall cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel from any city park. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.290)  
12.04.340 - Breaking or injuring structures, plants or other property prohibited. 
No person shall cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, structure, monument, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property, or pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub, bush, plant or flower, or mark or write upon any building, monument, fence, bench or other structure, or carry any plants, flowers, shrubs or branches into any city parks. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.300)  
12.04.350 - Opening water, sewer or other service fixtures prohibited. 
No person shall open, expose or interfere with any water or gas pipe, hydrant, valve, sewer, basin, or any other service fixtures in any city park. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.310)  
12.04.360 - Reward for information leading to conviction of persons for vandalism. 
A reward may be offered by the city to any person providing information which leads to the arrest and conviction of any person or persons who commits an act or acts of vandalism, or of a destructive nature, to any parks or recreational facilities. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.320)  
12.04.370 - Vehicle parking regulations. 
No vehicle shall park in any city park enumerated in Section 12.04.040 of this chapter between the hours of 11:45 p.m. and eight a.m. without a permit obtained from the city manager. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.400)  
12.04.380 - Removal of vehicles. 
Any vehicle parked in violation of Section 12.04.370 of this chapter may: 
A.  Be removed by any peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code; or any regularly employed and salaried employee who is engaged in directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations in the city; 
B.  Be removed to the nearest public garage upon the instruction of city staff designated by the city manager after telephone notification, or the most expeditious means available to staff, to the Shasta County sheriff. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.410)  
12.04.390 - Posting of signs. 
Twenty-four (24) hours prior to enforcing Section 12.04.370 of this chapter shall cause to be posted in plain view at all entrances to the parks set forth in Section 12.04.040 of this chapter a sign which: 
A.  Is at least seventeen (17) by twenty-two (22) inches in size; and 
B.  Sets forth in lettering not less than one inch in height: 
1.  That vehicles parked on the premises between the hours of 11:45 p.m. and eight a.m. are subject to removal at the owner's expense, and 
2.  The telephone number of the Shasta County sheriff, and 
3.  That a citation may also be issued for the violation. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.08.420)  
Chapter 12.08 - PARK AND RECREATION AREA FEES AND CHARGES 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Authorization for fees and charges. 
This chapter provides for rates, fees and charges which may be charged and collected for the use of or admittance to the city's parks and facilities. 
(Ord. 99-110 § 1: amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.12.010)  
12.08.020 - Fees generally. 
To assist in providing for and maintaining public parks, playgrounds, and facilities in the city areas, the following user fees are established as provided in this chapter. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.12.020)  
12.08.030 - Fees—Collection. 
Fees shall be collected from any league, group, or individual using the city facility or parks at a time specified under the use agreement. 
(Ord. 99-110 § 2: amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.12.030)  
12.08.040 - Fees—Establishment—Basis. 
Organizational fees shall be established and adopted by the city council by resolution following review and recommendation of the park and recreation advisory commission, and shall be based upon the wholesale cost of utilities, trash disposal, and other terms as specified in the use agreement. 
(Ord. 99-110 § 3: prior code § 15.12.040)  
12.08.050 - Groups holding large, day-long activities—Park employee attendance requirements. 
It may be required that any group or groups using a city park or facility for a large, day-long activity, have in attendance one or more public works employees of the city. The group or groups using the park facilities for the day shall deposit with the city an amount equal to the estimated employee's wages and benefits provided that a reconciliation of costs will occur at the conclusion of the event with any excess deposit amount to be returned to the user or any unpaid portion of the employee's cost to be paid by the user. 
(Ord. 99-110 § 4: amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 15.12.050)  
12.08.060 - Exemptions. 
A.  The city council following review and recommendation by the park and recreation advisory commission shall determine exemptions at its discretion. 
B.  Nonprofit Community-Oriented. The city council reserves the right to exempt nonprofit, nonpolitical use of the facilities from fees and charges. 
(Ord. 99-110 § 5)  
12.08.070 - Reciprocal agreements. 
This is no charge to nonprofit political entities providing service within the city if reciprocal agreement is recommended by parks and recreation citizens' advisory commission and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 99-110 § 6)  
12.08.080 - Disposition of fees and charges. 
Fees and charges collected through this chapter shall be used for park and facilities costs. 
(Ord. 99-110 § 7)  
Chapter 12.12 - VEHICLE CONGESTION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
12.12.010 - Applicability. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter, which may be referred to as the "city of Shasta Lake congestion management program trip reduction and travel demand management ordinance," applies to any significant trip generator (as defined in Shasta County air quality management district ("AQMD" or "district" Rule 3:24 and the definitions of this chapter) having one hundred (100) or more specified persons at an elevation of less than one thousand (1,000) feet, within the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. 94-35 § 1)  
12.12.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this regulation is to improve air quality, minimize traffic congestion, and reduce the number of single-occupant motor vehicle trips taken by residents of the city of Shasta Lake by encouraging ridesharing through public education and requiring annual trip reduction reports from significant vehicle trip generators. This chapter is enacted for the purpose of meeting trip reduction and travel demand management ordinance requirements of the county-wide congestion management program, as adopted by the Shasta County regional transportation planning agency ("RTPA") pursuant to Government Code 65089 et seq. 
(Ord. 94-35 § 2)  
12.12.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
"Alternative commute mode" means bicycle, buspool, carpool, telecommuting, transit, vanpool, or walking. 
"Congestion management agency" means that regional agency referred to as the regional transportation planning agency (RTPA) responsible for determining if the cities and county are complying with provisions of the Shasta County congestion management program. 
"District" means the Shasta County air quality management district (AQMD). 
"Employer" means any person(s), firm, business, educational facility, nonprofit agency or corporation, government agency, or other entity which employs one or more persons at a work site. 
"Employment complex" means a place of employment that may accommodate several employers all under one structure or a group of structures where such structure(s) is owned or managed by a single entity. 
"Flexible work hours" means a work schedule where employees are given the freedom to choose their starting and leaving times, as long as they work the required number of hours and perform their responsibilities. 
"Ridesharing" means two or more people traveling together, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, taxipools, public and private buses, and rail transit. 
"Significant trip generator" means any employer, educational facility, employment complex, or other entity identified by the district that has one hundred (100) or more persons scheduled to arrive at one site between the hours of six a.m. and ten a.m., Monday through Friday. 
"Single-occupant motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle occupied by one person. 
"Site" means a building or grouping of buildings located within the district which are in actual physical contact or within walking distance (i.e., one-half mile) of each other. 
"Shasta County regional transportation planning agency (RTPA)" means the designated congestion management agency for Shasta County. 
"Telecommuting" means working at home or at a satellite work station using electronic or other means to communicate with the usual place of work or outside clients or customers. 
"Vanpooling" means several (typically six or more) employees routinely utilizing a motor vehicle designed for carrying more than six but fewer than sixteen (16) persons for work-related transportation for the purpose of ridesharing. 
(Ord. 94-35 § 3)  
12.12.040 - Requirements. 
A.  Trip Reduction Report. 
1.  Each significant trip generator shall submit an initial trip reduction report to the district for review. 
2.  The report is due no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the significant trip generator has received public notice or written notification that they are subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Each significant trip generator shall annually provide persons arriving at the site with written notice and access to written information on alternate commute modes, commuter matching services, carpooling, vanpooling, public transit, bicycling routes, and incentives on walking programs. 
C.  City Notification. 
1.  Any significant trip generator who becomes subject to this chapter due to an increase in work force, establishment of a new business, or increase in facility use must notify the district within six months of becoming subject to Rule 3:24 and this chapter. All notices shall be in writing and shall include the name of the employer, business, or facility; mailing address; the total number of persons arriving at the site between six a.m. and ten a.m.; and the name of the supervising management person at the site. 
2.  To assist in identifying the significant trip generators subject to this chapter, the district will publish an order to comply with the provisions of the chapter during the first week of January of each year in a newspaper of general circulation. 
D.  District Review of Report. After the significant trip generator submits a trip reduction report, the district will review the report with the staff of the regional transportation planning agency to analyze the progress being made at each specific site to reduce single-occupant motor vehicle trips. Suggestions may be offered by the district on measures to be investigated for implementation prior to the next annual update of the report. 
E.  Report Contents. The report must include the following: 
1.  The name of the individual to be contacted concerning the report contents; 
2.  An inventory of current measures used by the significant trip generator to reduce single-occupant motor vehicle trips and/or traffic congestion. The measures may include one or more of the following: 
a.  A monthly subsidy for a public transit pass, 
b.  Telecommuting program, 
c.  Guaranteed ride-home program, 
d.  Flex-time program, 
e.  Compressed work-week schedule, 
f.  Financial travel allowances and rideshare subsidies, 
g.  Non-work related, lunchtime trip-reduction program, including bicycle and walking incentives listed in subsection (E)(9) of this section, shuttle service to common local trip sites (shopping, restaurants, etc.), and on-site amenities, such as food services, ATM machines, postal services, childcare services, fuel sales at cost from fleet pumps to carpools and vanpools, and gym or workout room, 
h.  Alternate mode commute time compensated (partially or fully) as work time, 
i.  Bicycling and walking incentives and amenities such as bicycle lockers, on-site showers, subsidized walking shoes, bicycle parts and repair program, and company "fleet" bicycles for employee loan, 
j.  Development of a van or buspool program, 
k.  Monthly or quarterly prize drawings for ridesharers; 
3.  A list of any special trip-reduction measures that are being implemented to reduce motor vehicle trips in single-occupant motor vehicles during the high ozone season (i.e., May through October); 
4.  A list of any special trip-reduction measures that are being implemented specifically to reduce motor vehicle trips in single-occupant motor vehicles during the lunch period each day. 
F.  Trip Reduction Report Annual Update. 
1.  Each significant trip generator must review its implementation of trip reduction measures, and submit to the district annually no later than November 1st a trip reduction report update on a survey form to be provided by the district. 
2.  The trip reduction report update shall include information on the trip reduction measures implemented during the last year since the previous report and quantify to the extent feasible any measured success of the program. The update shall evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the measures implemented and provide a listing of any new or revised measures that will be implemented in the following year. 
G.  Record-Keeping and Auditing. 
1.  The significant trip generator shall keep detailed records of all documents that may be used to verify the success of the trip reduction program for a period of at least two years from the date of the applicable report. 
2.  The district may perform random on-site audits at each significant trip generator site to verify the accuracy of reports. 
(Ord. 94-35 § 4)  
12.12.050 - Monitoring. 
A.  In order to monitor the results of this traffic control measure ("TCM"), the regional transportation planning agency (RTPA) shall coordinate the following monitoring activities as appropriate and as needed on an annual basis: 
1.  Spot traffic counts; 
2.  Origin/destination studies; 
3.  Travel time and delay studies; 
4.  On- and off-street parking surveys; 
5.  Vehicle-occupancy studies; 
6.  Home-based travel surveys; 
7.  On-board transit passenger counts and surveys. 
B.  The district shall annually review the transportation-related information provided in the RTPA studies and surveys to determine the progress being made in reducing single-occupant motor vehicle trips and associated air emissions. 
C.  All significant trip generators shall cooperate to the extent feasible in providing information and site access to RTPA representatives in order to complete monitoring activities. 
(Ord. 94-35 § 5)  
12.12.060 - Violations—Penalty. 
A.  It is a violation of this chapter if: 
1.  A significant trip generator does not submit a trip reduction report within one hundred twenty (120) days of notification. 
2.  A significant trip generator does not submit a trip reduction report update annually no later than November 1. 
3.  A significant trip generator fails to maintain records or falsifies records. 
4.  A significant trip generator does not otherwise comply with this chapter. 
B.  Violations of this chapter are subject to the penalties outlined in Article 3, Chapter 4, Part 4 of Division 26 of the California Health and Safety Code and as otherwise provided in this code. 
(Ord. 94-35 § 6)  
Chapter 12.20 - STREET DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - Statutory authority. 
This division is enacted pursuant to the powers given to the city council by Section 1020 of the Streets and Highways Code of California, and the street district or districts hereinafter provided for shall be subject to all provisions of Chapter 3 of Division 2 of the Streets and Highways Code concerning such districts. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.04.010)  
12.20.020 - Finding. 
It is found and determined by the city council of the city that public convenience and necessity render it suitable to create one street district out of all the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.04.020)  
12.20.030 - Street district established. 
All the incorporated territory and area of the city shall be, and here is, constituted to be one street district. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.04.030)  
Chapter 12.24 - ENCROACHMENTS 
Sections: 
 
12.24.010 - Administration—Department of public works. 
The provisions of Chapter 5.5 (commencing with Section 1450) of Division 2 of the Streets and Highways Code shall be administered by and the permits therein provided for shall be issued by the department of public works. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.08.010)  
12.24.020 - Permit issuance. 
No encroachment permit shall be issued unless the applicant has first signed an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all liability which may arise for injury or damage to the person or property of the applicant or others resulting from the work done or the encroachment placed pursuant to the permit, or the manner in which the work is done or the encroachment placed or the manner, extent or lack of maintenance of the encroachment. The director of public works or his or her designee may execute on behalf of the city the agreements provided for by this section. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.08.020)  
12.24.030 - Mailbox exemption. 
Mailboxes may be placed on city street rights-of-way outside the roadbed area without a permit, provided the mailboxes and their placement comply with applicable rules and regulations of the United States Post Office and the director of public works. No mailbox shall be placed pursuant to this section in a place or manner which endangers the safety of persons lawfully using a city street for pedestrian or vehicular purposes. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.08.030)  
Chapter 12.28 - STREET NAMING 
Sections: 
 
12.28.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare of the city's residence by establishing requirements for naming of public and private roads, streets and highways in incorporated areas of the city in order to: 
A.  Allow for locating of principal access to dwellings and businesses rapidly and with certainty; 
B.  Allow for emergency vehicles to respond quickly to calls, expedite postal and other delivery services; 
C.  Eliminate confusion and error and enable customers and friends to locate principal access to business establishments and residents. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.16.010)  
12.28.020 - Street name administrator designated. 
A.  All streets, whether public or private, whether dedicated or not, shall be named or renamed pursuant to this chapter and such streets shall be known by the names assigned. The director of the department of planning, or his or her designee, shall serve as a street name administrator (administrator) and shall ensure implementation of this chapter. The administrator shall proceed with a program to officially name all existing streets for which no name has been officially assigned, shall be responsible for officially naming all newly created streets and shall effect name changes where required by provisions of this chapter. 
B.  In performing duties required by this chapter, the administrator shall provide and maintain necessary standards to effect this chapter and the orderly and efficient management of the city street name program, including, but not limited to: 
C.  Standards for petitions, notification of proposed and new street names, posting for public hearings, maintenance of a city street index, and standards for name selection and street identification signs and signing for street limitations. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.16.020)  
12.28.030 - Naming of city streets—Notice and hearing on adoption of name or change of name. 
Any city street may be officially named or renamed upon petition of two-thirds of the owners of each parcel adjacent to and served by the street or by recommendation of the administrator. 
A.  A petition for naming or renaming a city street shall be reviewed by the administrator for its compliance with this chapter including street name standards, upon which the administrator shall make a recommendation within thirty (30) days after receipt of a valid petition. In case of an existing unnamed city street where no written protest has been received, the administrator may determine no hearing is necessary and authorize the naming of the street pursuant to Section 12.28.040(B). 
Upon the administrator's recommendation for a hearing on a petition, the matter shall be set for public hearing before the city council. In absence of a petition, the administrator may also provide a recommendation pursuant to this chapter and then set a public hearing before the city council. The administrator may elect to schedule a public hearing before the planning commission prior to setting a hearing before the city council. 
B.  Notice of the public hearing shall be given by posted notice in at least three roadside locations within view of the street. Such posting shall be completed at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
C.  Fees for processing street name requests for renaming of streets shall be in accordance with those set by the city council. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.16.030)  
12.28.040 - Naming of streets without hearing or notice. 
Existing and new city and private streets which have not been officially named are to be named according to one of the following procedures: 
A.  Any existing city or private street within the incorporated area of the city which has not been officially named by the city council may be officially named upon recommendation by the administrator and by motion of the council and without any resolution, hearing or notice. Such naming shall be by an order duly made and entered in the minutes of the council. Thereafter the street shall be known by the name thus designated. 
B.  Upon making a determination that no public hearing is necessary pursuant to Section 12.28.030(A), the administrator shall take action to approve a petition for naming a previously unnamed city street, after which the street shall be known by the name on the petition. 
C.  A petition for naming or renaming a private street may be submitted to the administrator if it contains at least two-thirds of the owners of each parcel adjacent to and served by the private street. The administrator shall review the petition for compliance with the city's street naming standards and make a determination of approval or disapproval of the proposed street name within thirty (30) days. Upon the administrator's approval, the street shall be known by the name of the petition. 
D.  All unnamed streets which are newly created as a result of satisfied conditions of a land division map pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act shall be officially named by the administrator consistent with the conditions of the approved map. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.16.040)  
12.28.050 - Unlawful acts. 
No person shall mark, deface or alter any city street or private street sign which has been officially named pursuant to this chapter. No person shall mark or post any sign for any officially named street with any name other than the approved official name. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.16.050)  
Chapter 12.32 - HOUSE NUMBERING 
Sections: 
 
12.32.010 - Uniform numbering system. 
A uniform system of numbering properties and principal buildings, as shown on the map identified by the title "City of Shasta Lake House and Property Numbering Map," which is filed and maintained in the offices of the administrator, as defined in Chapter 12.28 of this title, is adopted for use in the city. All numbering of properties and principal buildings shall comply with this map's uniform numbering system. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.20.010)  
12.32.020 - City name administrator— General duties. 
The city name administrator (administrator), as defined in Chapter 12.28 of this title, shall be responsible for maintaining the numbering system. In the performance of this responsibility, the administrator shall be guided by the map and guidelines of this chapter. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.20.020)  
12.32.030 - Administration. 
The administrator will assure that the city's uniform numbering system is managed in an orderly and efficient manner which is consistent with this chapter. 
A.  The administrator shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this chapter. These records shall be open for inspection of the public during regular business hours. 
B.  The administrator shall issue to, upon the request of any property owner in an incorporated area of the city whose property contains a principal structure or permit for a principal structure, a number or numbers in accordance with this chapter. 
C.  Prior to the issuance of any property number, the administrator shall assure that the principal access to the property has been named pursuant to Chapter 12.28 of this title. 
D.  The administrator shall maintain guidelines for numbering of properties and principal dwellings and make such guidelines available to the public. 
E.  Fees for processing applications for numbering of properties shall be in accordance with those set by the city council. 
F.  The administrator shall assure appropriate notice to other affected agencies of addresses and street names and any street renaming. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.20.030)  
12.32.040 - Unlawful acts. 
No person shall mark, deface or alter any city street or private street sign which has been officially named pursuant to this chapter. No person shall mark or post any sign for an officially named street with any name other than the approved official name. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; Shasta County Code § 12.20.040)  
Chapter 12.36 - TREE CONSERVATION* 
Sections: 
 
12.36.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The city council finds that it is necessary and in the interest of the public, health, safety, and general welfare to enact an ordinance for the conservation and planting of trees on public and private property, and to prevent the indiscriminate removal of certain healthy trees, in a manner which allows for maximum reasonable use and enjoyment of property by its owners. 
B.  Trees are recognized as important to the general well being of the citizens of the city for their shade, cooling, noise and wind reduction, soil stabilization, protection of surface water quality, aesthetic value, air filtering and release of oxygen, benefits to wildlife and the area's ecology, and their economic enhancement to property. 
C.  It is the intent of this chapter to promote the conservation of a healthy tree population and to maintain and enhance tree canopy throughout the community. This is to be accomplished through (1) the preservation of existing native and nonnative trees where feasible; (2) the replacement or transplanting of trees removed where appropriate; and (3) the planting of new trees in locations, number, and kind compatible with local conditions. 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part))  
12.36.020 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to "protected trees" on developed, underdeveloped, and vacant parcels of land within the city. Protected trees may only be removed under specific circumstances as identified in Section 12.36.050 (Exemptions), and as provided for in Section 12.36.060 (Tree conservation and replacement). Trees which are not defined as protected trees are not covered by this chapter. 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part))  
12.36.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them, unless the context otherwise requires. 
"Arborist" means: 
1.  A person currently certified by the Western Chapter of the International Society of Arboriculture as an expert on the care of trees; 
2.  A consulting arborist who satisfies the requirements of the American Society of Consulting Arborists; 
3.  A registered professional forester; or 
4.  Such other qualified professionals who the director determines have gained through experience the qualifications to identify, remove or replace trees. 
"Critical root zone" means a circular region measured outward from a tree trunk representing the essential area of the roots that must be maintained or protected for the tree's survival. The circumference of the critical root zone is established by drawing a circle around the base of the tree with one foot of radial distance for every inch of tree diameter at breast height (DBH), except that the minimum critical root zone shall be no less than eight-foot radius. The critical root zone shall extend to a depth of five feet beneath the surface ground level. 
"Damage" means any action undertaken which may cause death or significant injury, or which places the tree in a hazardous condition or in an irreversible state of decline. This includes but is not limited to cutting, topping, girdling, or poisoning. 
"DBH" (diameter at breast height) means the diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches at a height of 4.5 feet above ground. See Appendix A for a diagram that defines the measuring of DBH in various situations. 
"Developed parcel" means any individual lot that is occupied by a principal building or use. 
"Director" means the director of the development services department or his or her designee. 
"Discretionary permit" means and includes, but is not limited to, those projects subject to: a use permit (including administrative use permit), a parcel map, a tentative subdivision map, a site-plan review, a variance, a rezone, or a planned development. 
"Drip line" means a vertical line extending from the outermost edge of a tree's foliage to the ground. 
"Fire department" means the Shasta Lake Fire Protection District or other fire protection agency providing mutual-aid during a fire event within the city. 
"Major project," for purposes of this chapter, means any use of land requiring approval of a discretionary land use application leading to the issuance of permits for grading and/or construction, including but not limited to conditional use permit, variance, land subdivision, a modification to such project, or an extension of time for such project; and any project which is subject to environmental review under the California Environmental Quality Act. 
"Mass clearing" means the removal of seventy-five (75) percent or more of the vegetation, including protected trees, within a total area. 
"Minor project," for purposes of this chapter, means a project for which a grading permit and/or building permit is sought, but which does not require approval of a discretionary land use application. Such projects include but are not limited to single-family residences on existing lots of record, or modifications thereto, grading permits where no construction is proposed, encroachment permits, and demolition permits. 
"Police" means any law enforcement agency with jurisdiction within the city limits, or an outside law enforcement agency providing mutual-aid during an emergency. 
"Protected tree" means: 
1.  Any living tree, except digger pine or gray pine (pinus sabiniana), having at least one trunk of ten inches or more DBH; or, 
2.  A tree that is required to be preserved under discretionary project approval or under a site development tree plan that is approved administratively by the director. 
"Slash material" means any vegetation debris that has been cut for land clearing or other purposes. 
"Tree" means a perennial plant having a self-supporting woody main stem or trunk usually characterized by the ability to grow to considerable height and size and to develop woody branches at some distance above the ground. It is usually distinguished from a bush or shrub by its size, manner of growth, and usual botanical nomenclature. Perennial shrubs are not classified as trees in this chapter. 
"Tree removal" or "removal of a tree" means the physical removal of a tree, or causing the death of a tree through damage, poison, or other direct or indirect action. 
"Underdeveloped parcel" means any parcel that can be more intensively developed under the zoning regulations of the city. 
"Vacant parcel" means an individual lot that is not occupied by a principal building or use. 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part))  
12.36.040 - Prohibition on tree removal. 
Any tree which qualifies as a protected tree shall not be removed from a property or damaged except as provided for in Section 12.36.050 (Exemptions), or as provided for in Section 12.36.060 (Tree conservation and replacement). 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part))  
12.36.050 - Exemptions. 
The removal of a protected tree is allowable and exempt from the requirements of this chapter under the following circumstances: 
A.  The property is developed with a single-family residence and the tree removal will not result in the mass clearing of more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
B.  The tree removal is required to make way for improvements related to the construction of an allowable single-family residence, on a lot that existed prior to the initial adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and: 
1.  Building permits have been issued; 
2.  The trees proposed to be removed are not required to be preserved as part of a discretionary permit; and 
3.  The construction work will not require the mass clearing of more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
C.  The tree is in a condition that presents an immediate or imminent hazard to life or property and the city manager, development services director, public works director, electric department director, or a member of the police or fire department has ordered the tree removed. 
D.  The removal of a tree has been determined necessary by the fire department for an existing structure to comply with local or state fire safe regulations. 
E.  The removal or pruning of trees by the electric department, or other municipal, private, or public utility to maintain proper clearances from existing utility lines when necessary to comply with applicable city, state, or federal safety regulations, to prevent potential future interruption of service, to provide a residential service connection, to repair damage to facilities, or to restore interrupted service. 
F.  The removal of a tree within the public right-of-way by the public works department when necessary to prevent damage to existing public improvements. 
G.  Removal of trees on property owned by the federal government, the state of California, the county of Shasta, the city of Shasta Lake, or any school or special district. 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part))  
12.36.060 - Tree conservation and replacement. 
A.  Subdivisions and other development projects subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be designed to the extent possible to minimize destruction or damage to protected trees. Project design shall recognize the desirability of conserving trees. Plans for grading and infrastructure improvements shall reflect this consideration, and shall include the following safeguards: 
1.  Location of minimum growing areas as required by individual species. 
2.  Minimal disruption or removal of structural or feeder roots. 
3.  Minimal filling, cutting, development, or compaction of soils within the drip line. 
4.  Any other special measures as recommended by an arborist to ensure efforts to save a protected tree are adequate. 
B.  It is recognized that the preservation of healthy trees will sometimes conflict with normal land development considerations such as proper drainage, grading, circulation, safety, lot configuration, and utilities. Within most developments it will not be practical to preserve all healthy trees given the necessity of addressing other design and public safety requirements. In such instances, the developer is required to utilize creative land-planning techniques to retain the most desirable and significant healthy trees, and notable stands of such trees. The set-aside of a natural area or areas within a project site which is particularly suitable for the planting, retention, and/or natural regeneration of trees is considered to be a desirable means of accomplishing the goals of this chapter. The area of any set-aside shall be roughly equivalent to or exceed the area which would be occupied within the drip line if individual trees had been preserved. Set-aside areas shall be in addition to any area classified as "open space" under the policies of the Shasta Lake general plan. 
C.  If a protected tree must be removed from a property to facilitate development allowed by zoning, replacement trees shall be provided to compensate for the loss. Replacement trees shall be provided in accordance with the standards provided in Section 12.36.070. 
D.  If a property owner desires to remove a protected tree from a vacant or underdeveloped parcel without the submittal of a site development plan to the city for establishment of a primary use, a use permit shall be required prior to the removal of the tree. The use permit shall include conditions requiring a tree inventory of the site, provisions for the removal of slash material, and appropriate replanting and erosion control measures. The type of use permit required pursuant to this section shall be as follows: 
1.  An administrative use permit shall be required if the proposed activity will not result in the loss of more than three protected trees. 
2.  A planning commission issued use permit shall be required if the proposed activity would result in the removal of more than three protected trees. 
E.  The planning commission may consider tree preservation as adequate grounds to approve variances associated with building setbacks, building separations, parking requirements, and driveway grades if the commission determines that (1) the preservation and retention of a protected tree outweighs the disadvantages associated with any variance granted to save it, and (2) there is a real expectation that the tree will survive for more than five years. 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part))  
12.36.062 - Pre-development review for major projects. 
A.  Pre-development Review. 
1.  For any major project where it is proposed to remove more than five protected trees, a pre-development review shall be required. The purpose of this review is to ensure that tree conservation is considered early in the planning process with respect to placement of buildings, roads and driveways, parking, utilities, and other site improvements. 
2.  A tree delineation map shall be required for the pre-development review meeting with the development services director or his or her designee. This map shall show existing grades, location and size of groups of similar trees (stands), and any trees which may be significant due to their size. 
3.  Conceptual development plans submitted at the pre-development review phase shall show one or more methods of ensuring that tree conservation has been considered in project design. In general, development plans shall consider the following: 
a.  Stands of trees shall be preserved where feasible, rather than individual trees, as they provide better habitat and have a more likely chance of survival than individual trees surrounded by development. Where possible, stands of trees shall be left in place so as to connect with other stands of trees on adjacent properties, rather than separating natural treed areas with developed areas. 
b.  For residential subdivisions, the development shall consider potential neighborhood park areas and subdivision entrance areas in designating set-aside areas for the purpose of preserving trees throughout the project boundaries. 
c.  The development shall be designed such that suitable land will be set aside in an open space area which will (1) retain as many protected trees as are proposed to be removed; or (2) be particularly suitable for the planting and/or natural regeneration of trees. The set-aside area shall be in addition to any area classified as "open space" under the policies of the Shasta Lake general plan. 
d.  In evaluating tree preservation with respect to building placement, the development shall consider the relative health and viability of trees. Healthy trees of varying ages shall be considered for preservation, rather than removing several younger trees in order to save an older specimen tree, which may be over-mature. 
e.  Tree locations shall be reviewed in relation to planned roads, driveways, pavement, structures, overhead utility lines and underground utility trenches, to ensure that trees will not be damaged by construction or development. If the root system of any existing tree will be significantly damaged during construction, or if the tree will conflict with any structure or improvement, the site shall be redesigned or the tree shall be designated for removal. At least forty (40) percent of the critical root zone shall remain undisturbed from construction for any tree proposed to remain on site. 
f.  The base of a tree shall not be paved over or encased in planters or other enclosures, which could change the grade at the base of the tree. 
g.  Grading or landscaping techniques that involve backfilling of soil around trees shall be avoided. 
h.  The design of structures, improvements and site grades shall conform to the natural topography of the site to the extent feasible, to ensure survival of remaining trees. 
i.  The proposed site drainage plan shall be reviewed for changes to surface water runoff that would affect trees. Final site drainage shall not allow surface water to pond around the base of trees. 
j.  Utility trenches shall avoid the critical root zone of any mature tree to be retained on site, or minimize encroachment to the extent feasible. The width or depth of utility trenches is not a consideration, since the cutting of roots for any size trench may damage a tree severely. To the extent feasible, utilities shall be run along the edge of driveways or other paved areas to minimize impacts to trees. 
k.  Fire safety standards shall be considered in design of residential projects (i.e., setback from proposed main and accessory structures, fire breaks, clearance from the canopy of other trees on the property). 
B.  Tree Removal and Replacement Plan for Major Projects. 
1.  For major projects on sites containing existing protected trees, a Tree Removal and Replacement Plan shall be submitted concurrently with the formal application. Failure to provide this information will result in a determination that the application is incomplete. The Tree Removal and Replacement Plan shall contain the following information, except as otherwise waived by the development services director or his or her designee, based on inapplicability to the proposed project: 
a.  A plan showing the location of each tree ten inches or greater DBH on the site. In cases where a project site includes a stand or stands of trees closely grouped, having a common and unbroken canopy, the entire stand rather than individual trees may be depicted, provided that the total canopy is accurately delineated; 
b.  A table keyed to the tree location plan, which indicates species, diameter, condition and health; 
c.  The location of existing or proposed lot lines, buildings, roads, driveways and other improvements; 
d.  Grading information of sufficient detail to ascertain whether proposed cuts and fills will affect trees proposed to be saved; 
e.  Trees proposed to remain after development, and trees proposed for removal; 
f.  Details on the species of trees to be used in replanting or the trees proposed to be transplanted and their proposed location. Include a timing schedule for replanting, any special irrigation or planting requirements, and provisions and responsibility for ongoing maintenance after construction; 
g.  Except in cases of residential subdivisions where the information is not known at the time of tentative map submittal, locations of construction equipment staging and materials storage during construction; 
h.  Except in cases of residential subdivisions where the information is not known at the time of tentative map submittal, locations of proposed underground utilities or other trenching, including storm drains, sewers, area drains, gas lines, electrical service, cable TV and water mains. All lateral lines serving the site shall be shown and shall be located so as not to damage remaining trees; 
i.  Except in cases of residential subdivisions where the information is not known at the time of tentative map submittal, locations of overhead utility lines which could impact existing or proposed trees; 
j.  Locations of proposed areas of new landscaping which could impact existing trees, including type of vegetation and irrigation proposed; 
k.  Locations of streams, wetlands or drainage courses, and any proposed changes to drainage patterns, which could impact trees; 
l.  If deemed appropriate by the development services director or his or her designee, a photographic record of trees affected by development may be required. 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part))  
12.36.065 - Findings required. 
An application for a discretionary project shall also be considered an application for tree removal in those instances where trees will be affected by the development. Upon review of the application and consideration of the written and oral evidence received at the public hearing for a discretionary permit, the planning commission shall render its decision. The application shall be approved only if the applicant demonstrates and the commission affirmatively finds: 
1.  The condition of the trees, with respect to disease, form, general health, damage, public nuisance, danger of falling, proximity to existing structures, interference with utility services, good forestry practices, or damage to existing sidewalks and driveways, warrants their removal. 
2.  The preservation of the trees unreasonably restricts the economic potential of the property upon which the trees are situated. 
3.  The development has been designed such that suitable land will be set aside in an open space area which will: 
A.  Retain as many protected trees as are proposed to be removed; or 
B.  When the preservation of as many protected trees as are proposed to be removed unreasonably restricts the economic potential of the property upon which the trees are situated, the set-aside area is particularly suitable for the planting and/or natural regeneration of replacement trees required to be planted by the developer. 
The set-aside area shall be in addition to any area classified as "open space" under the policies of the Shasta Lake general plan. 
4.  Trees proposed for removal interfere with utility services or streets and highways either within or outside of the subject property and no reasonable alternative to such interference exists other than removal of the tree(s). 
5.  Construction proposed within the drip line of any tree will not cause harm or damage to such tree and any construction on the property can be accomplished without endangering the health of the remaining trees on the subject property. 
6.  Tree removal as proposed will not result in soil erosion through the diversion or increased flow of surface waters that cannot be satisfactorily mitigated. 
7.  Tree removal will not result in the degradation of any scenic resource and will not substantially degrade the existing visual character or quality of the site or its surroundings. 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part))  
12.36.070 - Tree-planting standards. 
A.  The following tree-planting provisions shall apply to all new construction and to projects that result in the removal of a protected tree. 
1.  New Construction Standards. 
Property Zoned For: 	Minimum Planting Standard: 
a. Residential: (Subdivisions and Multifamily) 	Three 15-gallon trees shall be planted for each proposed single-family unit/lot; and, two 15-gallon trees for each multifamily unit. 
b. Commercial and Public 	Two 15-gallon trees shall be planted for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or covered space. 
c. Industrial 	One 15-gallon tree shall be planted for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor area or covered space. 
 
2.  If the provisions in the table above do not apply to a project involving tree removal (such as clearing to expand a parking lot or to create a storage area), then as an alternative, a minimum of two fifteen (15) gallon trees shall be planted for every one protected tree removed. 
3.  In addition to the tree-planting standards set forth above, three fifteen (15) gallon trees shall be planted for each protected tree removed that exceeds ten inches DBH. 
B.  The planning commission may allow for a different tree-planting requirement as a condition of a discretionary permit upon a finding that the alternate standard is consistent with the intent of this chapter. This could include credit towards the above noted planting standards for significant trees (such as mature valley oaks) that are preserved. 
C.  Trees required pursuant to this section shall be planted prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final permit in those instances where planting is in conjunction with construction under a valid building permit, unless alternate timing for planting is recommended by an arborist. 
D.  The species of any tree used for replacement pursuant to this section shall be suited to the city's climate zone and be chosen with consideration of any site specific limitations. The use of native shade trees is preferred but not required. A list of trees that are suitable to the area is included as Appendix B. The replacement tree shall be planted in a manner that is recognized as standard accepted practice unless a specific method is prescribed by an arborist. 
E.  If the standards of this section conflict with any other tree-planting requirements applicable to the proposed development, such as those set forth in Section 17.84.040 (Landscaping) of the city zoning code, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part))  
12.36.080 - Construction standards. 
The following standards shall be followed during construction activities to ensure preserved trees will not be damaged: 
A.  Before the start of any clearing, excavation, construction, or other work on the site, every tree designated for preservation which is located outside of any existing or required open space area or dedication shall be clearly delineated in the field. The delineation markers shall remain in place for the duration of all work. Where deemed appropriate by the approving authority, a barrier of posts and flagging or other appropriate materials may be required to be erected around protected trees. A plan shall be established for the removal and disposal of brush, earth, and other debris in order to avoid injury to any protected tree which is to be saved. 
B.  Where the approval of a proposed development or other site work will result in encroachment within the drip line of a protected tree, special measures shall be incorporated to allow the roots to obtain oxygen, water, and nutrients. The director may require the applicant to provide recommendations by an arborist setting forth the measures necessary to minimize impacts to the tree. 
C.  No storage of materials or substances that may be harmful to trees shall occur within the drip line of any protected tree. 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part))  
12.36.090 - Maintenance. 
The property owner or successors-in-interest shall be responsible thereafter for the care and maintenance of trees required to be planted under this chapter in a live and healthy condition. The replacement of trees which may die or otherwise be destroyed is explicitly a requirement of this chapter. However, developed single-family residential lots in a new subdivision that have been sold by the developer are subject to the exemption provided in Section 12.36.050(A). 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part))  
12.36.100 - Nonconforming developed parcels. 
Developed commercial or industrial parcels that are nonconforming with the tree-planting standards of Section 12.36.070, shall provide tree-planting that satisfies these standards as a requirement for the issuance of a building permit, for any new construction on the property that is greater than fifteen (15) percent of the existing gross floor area or an equivalent expansion of use. The planning commission may reduce or waive this requirement based on a finding that conforming to the applicable tree-planting standards is not physically possible on the subject property. 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part))  
12.36.110 - Enforcement and penalty. 
It has been determined that trees within the city are valuable assets to the community. The removal or killing of any protected tree in violation of the terms of this chapter shall be punishable by either or a combination of the following means, at the discretion of the city: 
A.  Payment of a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per tree for the unauthorized removal or damage to trees. 
B.  Replacement of trees removed in a manner at a ratio of 4:1 (twenty-four (24) inch) box. 
C.  Prohibition of further development of the property, other than corrective action measures, for a period of up to two years from the date notice of the violation is given by the city. 
The penalty shall be determined initially by the director; however, appeals of his or her decision shall be available to the planning commission by filing a written appeal with the planning division within ten days of the date of delivery or mailing of the decision of the director. A decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council if the appeal is submitted in writing to the city clerk within five days following the planning commission's action. The fee for filing an appeal shall be the same as that required for appeals of actions related to a use permit pursuant to the zoning code. 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part))  
12.36.120 - Nonliability of city. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability for damages, or a duty of care and maintenance, upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees. The person in possession of any private property shall have a duty to keep the trees upon the property and under his or her control in a safe and healthy condition. 
(Ord. 04-165 § 1 (part)) 
APPENDIX A 
TREE DIAMETER MEASUREMENT 
Measure diameters with a diameter-tape at a point 4.5 feet above the ground level or root collar on the uphill side of the tree. 
In the case of irregularities at DBH, such as swelling, bumps, depressions, branches, measure the diameter immediately above the irregularity at the place where it ceases to affect the normal stem form. (See Figure 1 Below). 
  
  
When two trees have grown together, treat them as two trees. They sometimes will have the appearance of a forked tree. This is very common in coastal redwood and sprouting hardwood species. Such trees shall be treated as separate trees and recorded as such. Diameter will be determined by driving in two nails halfway around the circumference from each other, measuring the distance with a diameter tape, and doubling the results. 
  
If it is physically impossible to measure the diameter of a tree with a diameter tape because of forking or huge root collars, then the diameter will be estimated as follows: 
1. Determine where the diameter should be measured and mark it. 
2. Using a prism or angle gauge as a guide, move to a point on the ground at which the tree becomes borderline. 
3. Measure the horizontal distance from this point on the ground to the center of the tree from that point (limiting distance). 
4. Using diameter-limiting tables, look up the diameter for that limiting distance. 
5. Record this diameter and note in comments that DBH was estimated for the tree. 
Excerpt from Forest Inventory and Analysis User's Guide, May 1997 
APPENDIX B 
The following listing includes trees which are appropriate for the climate conditions of the area and do not require intensive maintenance. This listing is not all-inclusive, and other varieties of trees may be appropriate. 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 
American Linden 	Tilia americana 
American Sweetgum 	Liquidambar 
Chinese Pistache 	Pistacia chinesis 
European Hackberry 	Celtis australis 
Goldenrain-tree 	Koelreuteria paniculata 
Green Ash 	Fraxinus pennsylvanica 
Honey Locust 	Gleditsia triancanthos 
Magnolia 	Magnolia grandiflora 
Norway Maple 	Acer platanoides 
Pin Oak 	Quercus palustris 
Raywood Ash 	Fraxinus oxycalpat 
Red Horsechestnut 	Aesulus carnea 
Scarlet Maple 	Acer rubrum 
Scarlet Oak 	Quercus coccinea 
Sycamore Maple 	Acer pseudoplatanus 
Shamel Ash 	Fraxinus uhdei 
Tulip Tree 	Liriodendron tulipifera 
Italian Alder 	
Chinese Tallow Tree 	
  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - UTILITY SERVICES GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
13.04.010 - Title and effect of provisions. 
The ordinance codified in Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code shall hereafter be known as the "city of Shasta Lake utility service ordinance," and shall take effect in accordance with the law, and shall supersede any and all service fees, rates, rules and regulations previously used or in effect in the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.010)  
13.04.020 - Definitions. 
As used in Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code: 
"City" means the city of Shasta Lake. 
"City council" or "council" means the duly elected city council of the city of Shasta Lake. 
"Customer" means the person(s) responsible for the utility account. 
"Manager" means the person appropriately designated by the city council of the city to administer and enforce the conditions of Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, company, partnership, association or entity. 
"Residence, multiple-family" means a building or buildings containing two or more dwelling units, such as duplexes, apartments, apartment hotels, flats, or similar uses. 
"Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
(Ord. 08-194 § 2: amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.020)  
13.04.030 - City manager—Administration and enforcement authority. 
The city council of the city delegates to the city manager of the city the authority and the duty to enforce and uphold the provisions of Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code and, in his or her discretion, to make determinations, as necessary, in circumstances which may not be provided for in Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.030)  
13.04.040 - Regulations—Copy on file in city office. 
The district shall keep a copy of the ordinance codified in Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code in the city office, and make it available for inspection upon request of any member of the public. The city shall provide a copy of the ordinance codified in Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code for the use of any member of the public upon their request, at a reasonable charge. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.040)  
13.04.050 - Regulations—Right to effect changes. 
The city expressly reserves the right to amend the conditions or charges provided by Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.050)  
13.04.060 - Regulations—Amendment by resolution. 
Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code may be amended by the city council by their duly adopted resolution. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.060)  
13.04.070 - Utility design and construction—Standard specifications. 
All utility service design and construction work within the city shall conform to the city's Construction Standards and Construction Standard Exceptions as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.070) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.04.080 - City representatives—Right of access to premises. 
A.  The city's authorized and identified representatives or employees shall have access to the customer's premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of reading meters, inspecting, testing, repairing, removing, exchanging or otherwise giving necessary attention to all equipment belonging to the city. 
B.  In case any authorized representative or employee is refused admittance to any premises, or being admitted shall be hindered or prevented from making such examination, the city manager of the city may cause the utilities to be turned off in accordance with the applicable laws. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.080)  
13.04.090 - City representatives—Observance of safety rules. 
While performing the necessary work on private premises referred to in Section 13.04.080 of this chapter, the duly authorized representatives or employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable, and the city shall indemnify the owner of the premises against loss or damage to the premises, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner of the premises to maintain safe conditions as required. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.090)  
13.04.100 - Unauthorized representatives and return of identification. 
A.  No person not an authorized representative or employee of the city shall have, wear or exhibit any credentials of the city. 
B.  It shall be the duty of each representative or employee of the city, upon resignation or dismissal, forthwith to surrender and deliver to the city all credentials of the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.100)  
13.04.110 - Service—Charges required. 
No water, sewer or electric service of the city shall be furnished to any premises or to any person free of charge. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.110)  
13.04.115 - Lifeline customers—Lifeline service income guidelines. 
To be eligible to receive lifeline service for qualifying utilities, the applicant must qualify under the eligibility criteria set forth in categories A. and B., below, and meet the certification requirements thereof to the satisfaction of the utility. Individually metered applicants/customers may qualify for lifeline service at their primary residence only. Applicants must be recertified annually. 
Applicants meeting both A. and B. below, qualify for lifeline service: 
A.  Applicant must be a senior citizen (age sixty-two (62) or older) or be a disabled person as evidenced by receiving Supplemental Security Income (SSI) or State Supplemental Payment (SSP). 
B.  All applicants must have incomes at or below seventy-five (75) percent of Shasta County's area median income (AMI), adjusted for household size, as published by the state of California Department of Housing and Community Development. 
Qualifying applicants for lifeline service may be placed on the lifeline rate starting with the next regular meter reading date following receipt of such application by the utility. 
(Ord. 08-196 § 1)  
13.04.120 - Prorating of charges for service of less than one month. 
Customers that open or close utility accounts with less than one month of service will be charged for only the number of days the account was open in that billing month. Charges shall be for water, sewer, and electric service. 
(Prior code § 6.04.111)  
13.04.130 - Charges—Responsibility for payment. 
The person responsible for payment of charges for the city's services shall be that person who requested such services, his or her successor in interest or assigns, or any person requesting that such bill be charged to him or her and who has been recognized by the city as having established valid cause to receive such services and be billed therefor. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.120)  
13.04.140 - Guarantees for certain businesses required when. 
Personal guarantees for the liability of payment of city charges may be required in writing by the principal owners of sole-proprietorship businesses, partnership businesses, and Subchapter S corporations. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.140)  
13.04.150 - Service—Customer requirements. 
Prior to establishing city utility service the customer must: 
A.  Fill out completely and sign the utility service agreement; 
B.  Show personal identification; 
C.  Pay all outstanding balances for past city services; 
D.  Pay all required fees and deposits. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.140)  
13.04.160 - Payment responsibility—Multiple occupancies. 
In the event of multiple occupancy or joint tenancy of a unit, any and all persons receiving city services at that location shall be liable for payment of city charges. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.150)  
13.04.170 - Property management/realty group—Owner disclosure. 
The city requires disclosure of the legal owners of property administered by a property management/realty group. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.160)  
13.04.180 - Property management/realty group—With power of attorney—Service prerequisites. 
Property management/realty groups with a power of attorney to contract on behalf of the legal property owner are required to submit to the city an original executed instrument signed by the legal property owner representing such contract for agent as attorney in fact to validate the city's utility service agreement. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.170)  
13.04.190 - Property management/realty group—Without power of attorney—Service prerequisites. 
Property management/realty groups without a power of attorney to contract on behalf of the legal property owner are not recognized by the city as the legal contracting party to provide utility services, unless the property management/realty group executes the city's utility service agreement and personal guarantee to accept full financial responsibility for utility charges. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.180)  
13.04.200 - Service agreement for property administered by property management/realty group. 
Legal owners of property administered by a property management/realty group must personally execute the city's utility service agreement, unless the property management/realty group accepts full financial responsibility as provided in Section 13.04.190 of this chapter. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.190)  
13.04.210 - Service established before contract submitted—Discontinuance. 
If, for any reason, the utility service is established before a contract for agent is submitted to the city, and a customer fails, upon written notice of not less than seven days, to provide such contract for agent as attorney in fact, the city may discontinue utility service. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.200)  
13.04.220 - Failure to provide contract for agent as attorney—Discontinuance. 
If a noncomplying customer, as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, fails upon written notice of not less than seven days to provide such contract for agent as attorney in fact, the city may discontinue utility services. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.210)  
13.04.230 - New customer—Deposit requirements. 
A.  When a new customer requests city services the following will apply, unless otherwise stated: When any new nonindustrial customer requests city services, such person, prior to the commencement of services, shall be required to establish credit with the city by making a money deposit, i.e., cashier's check, money order, or cash, for water, electric and/or sewer services, as applicable, as set forth below. Such deposit shall be paid into the city's deposit account and held for the customer's account. "New customers" are defined as those customers who have not previously established a utility account with the city. 
B.  When any new industrial customer requests city services, such customer, prior to the commencement of services, shall be required to establish credit with the city by making a money deposit, i.e., cashier's check, money order, or cash for water, electric and/or sewer services, as applicable, as set forth below. Such deposit shall be paid into the city's deposit account and held for the customer's account. In lieu of a money deposit an industrial customer may provide a valid letter of credit from a current or prior utility company. Industrial customers shall be determined by the city and qualify for industrial rates for services, as applicable. 
(Ord. 99-109 (part): amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.220)  
13.04.240 - Deposit—Schedule of amounts. 
When a deposit is due, the following is required, unless otherwise stated: 
A.  Residential Deposit Amounts Required per Single-Family Unit. 
Sewered Territory 	Unsewered Territory 
Water $ 25.00 	Water $ 25.00 
Electric 120.00 	Electric 120.00 
Sewer 35.00 	Solid waste 25.00 
Solid waste 25.00 	
 
B.  Residential Deposit Amounts Required per Multifamily Unit. Residential deposit amounts required for each unit in a multifamily residence. 
Sewered Territory 	Unsewered Territory 
Water $ 25.00 	Water $ 25.00 
Electric 120.00 	Electric 120.00 
Sewer 35.00 	Solid waste 25.00 
Solid waste 25.00 	
 
C.  Commercial Deposit Amounts Required per Unit. 
Sewered Territory 	Unsewered Territory 
Water $ 55.00 	Water $ 55.00 
Electric 175.00 	Electric 175.00 
Minimum monthly bill as established by sewer rates in effect. 
 
D.  Industrial Deposit Amounts Required per Unit. 
1.  Water. The minimum required deposit shall be at least one month's estimated charges as determined by the city. 
2.  Electric. The minimum required deposit shall be at least one month's estimated charges as determined by the city. 
3.  Sewer. The minimum required deposit shall be at least one month's estimated charges as determined by the city. 
(Ord. 99-109 (part): Ord. 98-103: Ord. 95-56 § 1; prior code § 6.04.230)  
13.04.250 - Deposit—Required for additional service when. 
When any customer who has previously established a utility account with the city requests city services at another location, the city may require a money deposit for water, electric and/or sewer services, as applicable as set forth below, if: 
A.  A customer has not paid for service previously rendered by the city; or 
B.  A customer's service has previously been terminated for nonpayment of utility charges; or 
C.  A customer has previously tendered a check for payment which has been returned for insufficient funds, unless a notice of bank error is received from customer's bank by the city; or 
D.  A customer has illegally unsealed his or her own utility meter(s); or 
E.  A customer has opened, damaged, rewired, altered or changed, or in any way interfered with any sewer line, water and/or electric meter, and/or appurtenances thereto. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.240)  
13.04.260 - Deposit—Increase following nonpayment, bad checks or unlawful activities. 
The city may require an increase of twice the stipulated deposit amounts required in Section 13.04.240 of this chapter, or a minimum of at least two months' estimated utility charges for applicable city services, if: 
A.  A customer has tendered a check for payment which has been returned for insufficient funds, unless a notice of bank error is received from customer's bank by the city; or 
B.  A customer's service has previously been terminated for nonpayment of utility charges; or 
C.  A customer's original deposit has previously been applied to a delinquent account to avoid discontinuance of service; or 
D.  A customer has not paid for service previously rendered by the city; or 
E.  A customer has illegally unsealed his or her or their own utility meter(s); or 
F.  A customer has opened, damaged, rewired, altered or changed, or in any way interfered with any sewer line, water and/or electric meter and/or appurtenances thereto. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.250)  
13.04.270 - Deposit—Increase related to rate of usage. 
The above stipulated deposit amounts required may be increased if the customer's utility usage or current rates so justify an adjustment such that the minimum required in any case shall be at least one month's estimated charges for applicable city services. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.260)  
13.04.280 - Start of service without deposit— Remedies. 
If for any reason the utility service is established before a customer deposit is remitted to the city, or utility service is continued before a deposit is reestablished, and a customer fails upon written notice of not less than seven days to establish or reestablish a deposit, the city may discontinue utility service. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.270)  
13.04.290 - Deposit—Return on termination of service. 
Customer deposits shall be returned upon full payment of all utility services owed to the city at the time such utility service account is terminated. Customer deposits shall first be applied to any unpaid delinquent closing bills before refund of the remaining balance to any customer who has not paid the final bill. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.280)  
13.04.300 - Deposit—Return residential customers. 
Customer deposits for property owners of residential single-family units may be returned at the end of one year of service with the city, at the customer's request, if: 
A.  A customer has not previously tendered a check for payment which has been returned for insufficient funds, unless a notice of bank error is received from the customer's bank by the city; and 
B.  A customer's service has not previously been terminated for nonpayment of utility charges; and 
C.  A customer's original deposit, prior to reestablishment, has not previously been applied to a delinquent account to avoid discontinuance of service; and 
D.  A customer has not had any previous accounts unpaid for service previously rendered by the city; and 
E.  A customer has not illegally unsealed their own utility meter(s); and 
F.  A customer has not opened, damaged, rewired, altered or changed, or in any way interfered with any sewer line, water and/or electric meter, an/or appurtenances thereto; and 
G.  A customer's utility account has always been paid in full on a current basis. 
H.  A customer resides at the property for which a deposit applies. 
(Ord. 99-109 (part): amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.290)  
13.04.305 - Deposit—Return industrial customers. 
Industrial customer deposits may be returned at the end of six month's service with the city, at the customer's request, if: 
A.  A customer has not previously tendered a check for payment which has been returned for insufficient funds, unless a notice of bank error is received from the customer's bank by the city; and 
B.  A customer's service has not previously been terminated for nonpayment of utility charges; and 
C.  A customer's original deposit, prior to reestablishment, has not previously been applied to a delinquent account to avoid discontinuance of service; and 
D.  A customer has not had any previous accounts unpaid for service previously rendered by the city; and 
E.  A customer has not illegally unsealed their own utility meter(s); and 
F.  A customer has not opened, damaged, rewired, altered, or changed or in any way interfered with any sewer line, water and/or electric meter, an/or appurtenances thereto; and 
G.  A customer's utility account has always been paid in full on a current basis. 
(Ord. 99-109 (part))  
13.04.310 - Meters and other equipment— Property of city—Customer responsibility. 
All meters, service connections and other equipment furnished by the city shall be, and remain, the property of the city. The customer shall provide a space for and exercise proper care to protect the property of the city on its premises, and in the event of loss or damage to the city's property arising from neglect of customer care for the same, the cost of necessary repairs or replacement shall be paid for by the customer. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.300)  
13.04.320 - Turn-on charges. 
A nonrefundable turn-on charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be collected each time a person or entity has a city service account opened in his or her or their name. The turn-on charge shall be required prior to the commencement of services. The turn-on fee may be an amount larger than twenty dollars ($20.00), not to exceed actual costs, if unusual problems cause more than normal turn-on expenses to the city, such as two trips due to restricted meter access or after-hours service requests. The turn-on charge will not be applicable when the account is opened for a new service connection installation for which service connection fees have been paid to the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.310)  
13.04.330 - Meter reading and billing. 
A.  Meter reading and billing will be done for utility services on a monthly basis. The meter-reading date will be the same each month, except that there will be a four-day allowance each way to adjust for Sundays, holidays and unusual conditions. Demand meters will be read each month on as nearly the same day as practicable. The city will make such exceptions to monthly billing as may be required for the efficient conduct of its business. 
B.  When the meter reader cannot gain access to read the meter on regular reading dates, the reading will be estimated. In periods when meters are not read, the bills may be rendered on the basis of estimated charges. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.320)  
13.04.340 - Combined billing for all services. 
Whenever possible, all charges for all services provided by the city shall be combined, and one monthly bill shall be rendered. The bill shall state the services rendered (water service, sewer service and electric service) and shall give the name and last known address of the person responsible for payment, and shall list separately the charge for each service, and the total for all services. No one service charge may be paid separately from any other service charge. Failure to receive a bill will not release the customer from payment of charges. Bills will be rendered for service for the time service has been made available, at the request of the customer, until service has been requested to be disconnected, and the final meter readings and charges have been obtained. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.330)  
13.04.350 - Bill payment deadline— Delinquency. 
All bills for utility services are due and payable at the designated office of the city when rendered, and shall become delinquent twenty (20) days after the date rendered. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.340)  
13.04.360 - Service charges for rental properties—Landlord interim service agreement. 
A.  Owners of rental property units who request that utility service not be terminated between a former tenant terminating utility service and a new tenant requesting utility service may execute the city's landlord interim service agreement, whereby the property owner assumes full responsibility for utility charges between tenants. 
B.  The landlord interim service agreement provides that the property owner assume full financial responsibility for utility charges between the time a tenant requests service termination and a new tenant requests beginning of service. 
C.  The city will charge a one-time service charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each account and/or unit, and an additional one-time charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each account and/or unit added to an existing agreement, for those property owners who have executed a landlord interim service agreement. 
D.  Cancellation of a landlord interim service agreement must be a written notification to the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.350)  
13.04.370 - Advance payments to avoid service discontinuance. 
Utility customers may arrange to avoid discontinuance of utility service for delinquent charges for an absence of an extended period of time by notifying the city in writing and making an advance money deposit of the estimated charges (or more) of the period that the customer expects to be absent. The customer's past payment history may be used by the city as an evaluating factor in determining whether the city will grant this convenience to the customer and/or the amount of a required deposit. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.360)  
13.04.380 - Service discontinuance— Conditions. 
Service may be discontinued in accordance with the law when bills are delinquent. If a customer has a deposit with the city, this deposit will only be applied to the customer's account on the closing bill, in accordance with Sections 13.04.230 through 13.04.300 of this chapter. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.370)  
13.04.390 - Service discontinuance— Exceptions. 
Service shall not be discontinued for nonpayment if the city has erred and if: 
A.  In the case of a disputed bill which has been outstanding for three months, a plan arranged within seven days for the payment has been made with the city, from the date at the end of the three months; and 
B.  The customer has not violated any city ordi- nances or other civil laws. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.380)  
13.04.400 - Service discontinuance— Amortization of debt procedures. 
A.  No city furnishing its inhabitants with light, water, power, heat, or means for the disposition of garbage, sewage or refuse matter, may terminate residential service for nonpayment of a delinquent account unless the city first gives notice of the delinquency and impending termination, as provided in Section 16482.1 of the California Public Utilities Code. 
B.  Any residential customer who has initiated a complaint, or requested an investigation within five days of receiving the contested bill, or who has, within thirteen (13) days of mailing of the notice required by the California Public Utilities Code, made a request for extension of the payment period of a bill asserted to be beyond the means of the customer to pay in full during the normal period for payment, shall be given an opportunity for review of the complaint, investigation, or request by a review manager of the city. The review shall include consideration of whether the customer shall be permitted to amortize the unpaid balance of the account over a reasonable period of time, not to exceed twelve (12) months. No termination of service shall be effected for any customer complying with an amortization agreement if the customer also keeps the account current as charges accrue in each subsequent billing period. 
C.  If a residential customer fails to comply with an amortization agreement, the city shall not terminate service without giving notice to the customer at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to termination of the conditions the customer is required to meet to avoid termination, but this notice does not entitle the customer to further investigation by the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.390)  
13.04.410 - Advance payment requirement authorized following delinquent payments. 
Pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 16468, if account payments are delinquent for two or more consecutive months, advance payment may be required based upon the average of the past two months' billings of actual use prior to the delinquency. Advance payments may be required in addition to delinquent and current utility charges. The utility service may be discontinued for nonpayment of demanded delinquent, current and advance charges upon written notice of impending termination of seven days. 
(Prior code § 6.04.400)  
13.04.420 - Restoration of service charge. 
When a city service has been discontinued for nonpayment, as provided above, a nonrefundable restoration of service charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be collected before service is restored. The restoration of service charge may be an amount larger than twenty dollars ($20.00), if unusual problems cause more than normal turnoff and turnon expenses to the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.410)  
13.04.430 - Returned-check fee and cash-only accounts. 
A.  A returned-check fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be charged for each check, and for each time a check tendered in payment is returned for insufficient funds, unless a notice of bank error is received from the customer's bank by the city. 
B.  Utility accounts may be placed on a "cash-only" basis if checks tendered in payment have been returned for insufficient funds more than three times in any twelve (12) month period. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.420)  
13.04.440 - Field collection call charge. 
A field collection call charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be made whenever it becomes necessary for a city representative to make a field collection call at the customer's premises to enforce payment of a billing or security deposit. The charge is required regardless of whether the bill is collected or the service is terminated. The field collection call charge shall be required in advance, and in addition to any delinquent utility charges or required security deposit, in order to maintain utility service without termination. The field collection charge shall be required in addition to restoration of service charge in the event of utility discontinuance for nonpayment of delinquent charges. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.430)  
13.04.450 - Shutoff notice charge. 
A shutoff notice charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be made whenever it becomes necessary for city personnel to begin processing a shutoff notice to post the customer's premises notifying them of a pending termination of utility services due to nonpayment of a utility bill or security deposit. The shutoff notice charge shall be required in advance, and in addition to any delinquent utility charges or required security deposit, in order to maintain utility service without termination. The shutoff notice charge shall be required in addition to field collection and restoration of service charges in the event of the utility discontinuance for nonpayment of delinquent charges. This fee will not be charges to customers who, within the allowable time, have been granted an extension for payment of utility billings by the city's customer service manager. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.435)  
13.04.460 - Deposit of revenues. 
All revenues received by the city under the provisions of Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code shall be deposited in the bank selected for the deposit of these funds. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.440)  
13.04.470 - Refusing or terminating service— Following customer noncompliance. 
The city may refuse any or all services and may turn off or terminate any or all services in accordance with the law in the event a customer violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions and requirements of Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code, his or her service application, or fails to pay any or all of the service charges when rendered or due. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.450)  
13.04.480 - Refusing or terminating service— Following impairment, theft or other conditions. 
A.  The city reserves the right to refuse to supply any service of a nature which may seriously impair a service to any other customer, or to the city's service facilities, and the city shall have the right to discontinue service to any customer who shall continue to use equipment detrimental to the service after being notified by the city. 
B.  The city may discontinue service to the customer for theft of service, or for the appearance of theft devices on the premises of the customer. 
C.  The discontinuance of service by the city for any cause, as set forth in Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code, shall not release the customer from his or her obligation to the city for the payment of charges which have been charged to him or her in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.460)  
13.04.490 - Unauthorized turn-on of service— Penalty. 
Should the occupant of any premises, or any person acting for him or her, turn on or cause to be turned on any service after it has been turned off by the city, such person or occupant may be charged with a violation of the applicable California Penal Code provisions. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.470)  
13.04.500 - Appeal from enforcement of provisions. 
A person aggrieved by the enforcement of the conditions of Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code may appeal the decision to the city council in accordance with procedure worked out with the manager of the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 6.04.480)  
13.04.510 - Trespass prohibited—Exception. 
Trespass on city utility properties and facilities is banned unless the parties entering the city utility properties and facilities has obtained authorization in writing, accompanied by a city staff member, or performing services for the city authorized by the supervising city staff member responsible for the property and/or facilities. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 1.08.010)  
13.04.520 - Properties posted. 
The properties and facilities that shall be posted for NO TRESPASS include: 
A.  Electrical substation; 
B.  Wastewater treatment plant; 
C.  Water treatment plants; 
D.  City warehouse and shop; 
E.  Water storage tank areas. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 1.08.020)  
Chapter 13.08 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT AND SERVICE FEES AND CHARGES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior history: Prior code §§ 7.04.010—7.04.100 as amended by Ords. 98-102 and 04-154. 
 
13.08.010 - Scope of chapter provisions. 
This chapter fixes rates for water and sewer, establishes charges for capacity provided within water, sewer, transportation, and for parks and recreation and fire protection. 
Plant and facility capacity charges (P&FCC) are established to pay for the capacity in the city's plants and facilities, including but not limited to capacity in the city's wastewater treatment plant, wastewater collection system, water filtration plans, water distribution system, water storage facilities, transportation, parks and recreation facilities and fire protection facilities. (Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 09-200, § 1, 3-17-2009; Ord. No. 16-248, § 2.1, 3-15-2016)  
13.08.020 - Establishment, payment and review of rates, charges and compensation. 
A.  The following rates, fees, and charges are established, and shall be charged and collected at the time of issuance of the building permit or other special permit or at such other time as agreed to by the applicant and the city: 
1.  Payment of rates, fees and charges provided in this chapter shall be based on the fee schedule in effect on the date a complete application is submitted. 
2.  This chapter shall not apply to fees and charges that are included in an assessment district. 
3.  Where an expanded use (e.g. expansion of a commercial or industrial use) causes an increased impact on the city services or facilities, as determined by the city engineer, the applicant shall pay applicable charges for the increased impact. 
4.  A.  Where the use is a replacement for a use that has been inactive for more than three years prior to the date of filing of the application, the following fees shall be paid: 
Water service impact fee (capacity charge) ..... $350.00 
Wastewater service impact fee (capacity charge) ..... 500.00 
B.  No fees shall be charged for connection fees, tap charges, distribution charges, transportation system impact, or park and recreation facilities impact fees. 
C.  No credit shall be given for impact fees (capacity charges) or connection fees previously paid. 
5.  Where the use is a replacement for a use that has been inactive for less than three years prior to the date of filing of the application, no impact fees (capacity charges), connection fees, tap charges or distribution charges shall be paid. 
6.  This chapter shall not apply to homes that have suffered an unforeseen circumstance (e.g., fire, flood, seismic event) that has destroyed or rendered the home uninhabitable and the homeowner is not requesting a changed or expanded use, if the home is reconstructed within ten years of the event that caused the destruction/damage. 
7.  It is solely the responsibility of the owner of the parcel desiring reconnection to prove an inactive utility once served their property. 
8.  Inactive service connections may not be transferred to another parcel. 
9.  This section does not create a future reservation for capacity. 
(Ord. 08-197 § 1 (part); Ord. 08-192 § 1: Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 10-208, § 1, 1-5-2010; Ord. No. 16-248, 2.1, 3-15-2016)  
13.08.030 - Water system impact fees. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the water system impact fee is to further and protect the health and safety of the citizens of the city by providing for facilities to ensure a continuing supply of potable water, including new water mains and storage reservoirs. Federal, state and city regulations establish minimum standards for potable water required to adequately serve residential and other land uses, as well as to provide for fire protection. As the population increases and new development locates or existing development expands in the city, there will be an attendant demand to expand the facilities necessary to provide an adequate supply of potable water for domestic consumption, fire protection and non-domestic purposes such as industry and commerce. Charges and fee in this section were developed in conjunction with the "Water and Wastewater Capacity Fee Report, March 2018." 
B.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section: 
1.  "AWWA" means the American Water Works Association. 
2.  "Meter Hydraulic Capacity Ratio of 1" means any premises served by a standard five-eighths inch water meter. Typically, this would include single-family residences, duplex dwelling units, and small commercial businesses served by a standard five-eighths inch meter. Meter Hydraulic Capacity Ratios for larger meters: three-fourths inch, one-inch, one and one-half inch, two-inch, three-inch, four-inch, six-inch and eight-inch, have been computed using the ratio of the larger meter's rated capacity to the rated capacity of a standard five-eighths inch meter. These rated capacities are obtained from AWWA's Manual M-1. 
3.  "User" means any person or persons, all entities, public or private, residential, industrial, commercial, governmental, or institutional, who receive water as defined by the California State Department of Health Services, Division of Drinking Water, as either potable or reclaimed at a service connection, fire hydrant or fire service system. 
4.  "Frontage" means the actual distance that the parcel of property bears along the water main from which service is to be obtained. 
(Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 18-271, 5-1-2018)  
13.08.031 - Water capacity charges. 
The charge represents a contributive share of the costs to provide funds for use in constructing all or a portion of capital improvements necessary to serve new customers. Each premise as defined in this chapter applying for a new or larger water service, as distinguished from a change in location, shall pay the current capacity charge, based on meter size, per the "Meter Hydraulic Capacity Ratio," as follows: 
A.  Assessment of Meter Hydraulic Capacity Ratios. 
Meter Size 	Meter Hydraulic Capacity Ratio 
5/8 in. 	1 
3/4 in. 	1.5 
1 in. 	2.5 
1 1/2 in. 	5 
2 in. 	8 
3 in. 	16 
4 in. 	25 
6 in. 	50 
8 in. 	80 
 
B.  The capacity charge shall be the meter size hydraulic capacity ratio times five thousand three hundred sixty-seven dollars ($5,367.00). 
(Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 18-271, 5-1-2018)  
13.08.032 - Water distribution main charge. 
A.  Where water service is to be obtained from an existing main funded by the city, a water distribution main charge shall be imposed. 
B.  The water distribution main charge shall be sixteen dollars ($16.00) per fronting foot of the parcel. When the main does not and will not run the entire front of the property, the fee shall be charged for a minimum of sixty (60) feet. 
C.  Where the main has been installed pursuant to a reimbursement agreement with the city, the city may impose fees and charges consistent with that agreement. 
(Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part))  
13.08.033 - Water service connection and meter charge. 
The charge for a water service connection and meter shall be levied at city cost, and shall be paid before the meter is unsealed for customer use. A deposit based on the city's estimate of expected cost may be required before installation of services larger than one inch. The charge for a meter only (service lateral already exists and connection fees are paid) shall be levied at city cost. 
(Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 15-239, § 1, 2-17-2015)  
13.08.040 - Sewer system impact fees. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the sewer system impact fee is to further and protect the health and safety of the citizens of the city by providing for the construction of sewage and wastewater facilities, including new sewer or expanded mains, lift stations, treatment plants and effluent disposal facilities. As new development occurs, or existing development expands, there will be an additional burden placed on the existing sewer and wastewater collection, treatment and disposal systems. Federal, state and city health requirements set minimum standards for effluent treatment that results in the demand for new sewer and wastewater facilities. Fees and charges in this section were developed in conjunction with the "Water and Wastewater Capacity Fee Report, March 2018." 
B.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section: 
1.  "Single-family dwelling unit or equivalent" means a building containing only one kitchen, designed for or used to house not more than one-family, including all domestic employees of the family. 
2.  "Lateral" means a public sewer that receives wastewater from one or more sewer connections. 
3.  "Sewer tap" means the action by the city of installing an opening in a sewer main to accommodate a building sewer connection. 
4.  "POTW" means publicly owned treatment works of the city, including the entire facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating and disposing of domestic and industrial wastewaters, located within and outside the city limits and either owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the city. 
5.  "Sewer" means only those conduits intended to carry sewage and wastewater (commonly called sanitary sewers), and does not mean conduits used to carry stormwater (commonly called storm sewers). 
6.  "Building sewer" means a privately owned and maintained conduit that conveys wastewater from a single premise to a public sewer. 
7.  "Trunk sewer" means a public sewer which transports sewage away from a general area, neighborhood, or subdivision. 
8.  "User" means any person or persons, all entities, public or private, residential, industrial, commercial, governmental or institutional, who discharge or cause to be discharged wastewater and waterborne wastes into the POTW of the city, or who directly or indirectly cause impact or potential impact to the POTW of the city. 
9.  "Wastewater" means the spent water from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, institutions and business offices, including liquid and waterborne waste, but excluding uncontaminated groundwater, surface water and stormwater. 
(Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 18-271, 5-1-2018)  
13.08.041 - Wastewater capacity charges. 
A.  A fee shall be imposed for the computed reasonable contributive share of the cost of construction of sewer system improvements (trunk sewer, interceptors and pumping facilities) and treatment plant expansion shall be paid per household equivalents as follows: 
1.  Assessment of Household Equivalents. 
a.  Residential Connections. 
i.  Single-family dwelling units shall be assessed at the rate of one single-family equivalent connection per unit, including: 
(A)  Apartments and condominiums. 
ii.  Transient multiple housing units such as hotels, motels, and boarding houses shall be assessed at the rate of one single-family equivalent plus 0.332 single-family equivalent per unit. Commercial trailer parks and overnight camper and trailer parks shall be assessed at the rate of one single-family equivalent plus 0.332 household equivalents per pad. 
b.  Nonresidential Connections. Each nonresidential unit shall be assessed a household equivalent value as determined by one or more of the procedures identified below, but no connection shall be assessed less than one household equivalent: 
i.  Similarity to like discharges served by the city's POTW; 
ii.  Field measurement of wastewater flow and wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
iii.  Calculation of wastewater flow based on expected or actual water consumption, and taking into account water used in manufacturing products and for irrigation, cooling and evaporation; 
iv.  Typical values reported in the literature when the procedures identified above are inadequate to characterize the expected discharge. 
2.  The capacity charge for treatment plant and collection system improvements per single household equivalent shall be five thousand three hundred fifty dollars ($5,350.00). 
(Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 18-271, 5-1-2018)  
13.08.042 - Sewer connection permit fee. 
A sewer connection permit shall be required for all new, altered or relocated sewer connections to the city sewer system. The permit fee shall cover the cost of city engineering, administration, inspection and associated services. The permit fee is sixty dollars ($60.00). 
(Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part))  
13.08.043 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-271, adopted May 1, 2018, repealed § 13.08.043, which pertained to trunk sewer capacity charge and derived from Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part).  
13.08.044 - Sewer tap charge. 
A.  A charge shall be made for installation by the city of a tap fitting for parcels that were not provided with and did not pay for a sewer tee fitting during construction of the sewer main. The city shall not be responsible for construction of the sewer service connection or excavation for the tap fitting installation. 
B.  The charge for the installation of a sewer tap for a four-inch connection and for a six-inch connection is as set forth as follows: 
4" tap 	$100.00 
6" tap 	$125.00 
 
(Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part))  
13.08.045 - Sewer connection charges—Flow reduction incentive discount. 
A.  Upon review by the director of public works, in consultation with the city engineer, industrial and commercial customers who incorporate low-flow technology into new construction or building additions may receive a proportionate discount in wastewater connection charges. 
B.  The director of public works, in consultation with the city engineer and based on satisfactory data supplied regarding low-flow fixtures and appliances, may determine reduction in the single-family equivalent wastewater connection charge on a flow proportionate basis. 
(Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part))  
13.08.050 - Park and recreation facilities impact fees. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the parks and recreation facilities impact fee is to provide for the planning, acquisition, improvement, expansion and financing of public parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities. If this need were not met, the well-being of city residents could be adversely affected. In order to address this potential and to meet city recreation standards, it is appropriate that new development pay for additional park and recreation facilities attributable to the impact of such development. 
B.  Fee Schedule. A fee for each residential building permit shall be paid to the city as required by this section, except for permits issued covering work performed on buildings or structures owned by any city, county, state or federal agency or any public agency or district. Fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be based on the fee schedule in effect on the date the appropriate building permit is issued. All fees shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
C.  Park Facility Impact Fees. The park facility impact fees for one single-family dwelling unit or equivalent shall be three thousand one hundred seventy-eight dollars ($3,178.00). 
The park facility impact fees for one multi-family dwelling unit or equivalent shall be two thousand eight hundred ninety dollars ($2,890.00). 
The park facility fees for any structure or building other than a single-family or multi-family dwelling, as defined above, shall be computed by multiplying the fee for one single-family dwelling unit by an equivalency factor for park and recreation and summing the results to obtain the number of equivalent single-family dwelling unit charges to be made. 
The equivalency factor for park and recreation shall be determined by the following Equivalency Factors Table: 
Item Description 	Equivalency Factor 
Multiple lodging structures: Hotel, motel, or rooming house. 	1.000 
Plus each additional room. 	.332 
Commercial trailer park 	1.000 
Plus each additional trailer space 	.332 
Hospital or convalescent homes. 	1.000 
Plus each bed 	.386 
Any other premises of an institutional owner 	1.000 
 
(Ord. 08-197 § 1 (part); Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part))  
13.08.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-248, § 2.1, adopted March 15, 2016, repealed former § 13.08.060 in its entirety which pertained to electric system impact fees and derived from Ord. No. 06-170, § 1, Ord. No. 06-180, § 1.  
13.08.070 - Transportation system impact fees. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this fee is to provide for a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of the design, upgrading or improvement of the traffic network, including any required acquisition of land related to new development in accordance with the development forecast under the city of Shasta Lake general plan. As the amount of new development contemplated by the general plan occurs, there will be an additional burden on the citywide surface transportation system. Without funding identified capital improvements, there will be an unacceptable level of traffic congestion, delays, accidents and generally reduced public safety throughout the city. 
B.  Transportation Impact Fee Zone. There is established the transportation development impact fee zone, with its boundaries being the incorporated limits of Shasta Lake, California, as they may exist from time to time. 
C.  Fee Schedule. The following fee schedule is based on an inflation factor using the year; the current fees were developed (1991) through 2005. Based on the impact fee study dated April 19, 2005, the fee imposed pursuant to this section shall be based on the fee schedule in effect on the date of the fee payer's application for the appropriate building permit and shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of a building permit or a permit for mobile home installation, as follows: 
1.  Single-Family—Base Fee is Per Dwelling Unit. 
a.  The base fee in effect 2/2/06 shall be one thousand one hundred seventy-seven dollars ($1,177.00) to be escalated as follows: one hundred (100) percent of base fee increased each year by the Construction Cost Index as published in the most recent November Engineering News Record. 
2.  Multiple-Family—Base Fee is Per Dwelling Unit. 
a.  The base fee in effect 2/2/06 shall be eight hundred twenty-eight dollars ($828.00) to be escalated as follows: one hundred (100) percent of base fee increased each year by the Construction Cost Index as published in the most recent November Engineering News Record. 
3.  Commercial—Base Fee is Per Square Feet. 
a.  The base fee in effect 2/2/06 shall be three dollars and ninety-seven cents ($3.97) per square foot to be escalated as follows: one hundred (100) percent of base fee increased each year by the Construction Cost Index as published in the most recent November Engineering News Record. 
4.  Office—Base Fee is Per Square Feet. 
a.  The base fee in effect 2/2/06 shall be two dollars and ninety-six cents ($2.96) per square foot to be escalated as follows: one hundred (100) percent of base fee increased each year by the Construction Cost Index as published in the most recent November Engineering News Record. 
5.  Industrial—Base Fee is Per Square Feet. 
a.  The base fee in effect 2/2/06 shall be one dollar and sixty-seven cents ($1.67) per square foot to be escalated as follows: one hundred (100) percent of base fee increased January 1 each year by the Construction Cost Index as published in the most recent November Engineering News Record. 
D.  Exemptions. Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of issuance of a building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
The following shall be exempted from payment of the impact fee: 
1.  Alterations or expansion of an existing building where no additional dwelling units are created, where the use is not changed, or where no additional vehicular trips will be produced over and above those produced by the existing use; 
2.  The construction of accessory buildings or structures which will not produce additional vehicular trips over and above those produced by the principal building or use of the land; 
3.  The replacement of a demolished, destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use; provided, that no additional trips will be produced over and above those produced by the original use of the land and provided a building permit application is submitted to the city within three years from the date the building or structure was demolished, destroyed, or partially destroyed. 
E.  Credits. 
1.  An application for a new development project shall be entitled to a credit against the amount of the traffic impact fee required by this chapter, if the applicant agrees to dedicate non-site-related right-of-way and/or to construct non-site-related roadway improvements which are included in the general plan or traffic impact fee program. 
2.  No credit shall be given for site-related improvements or site-related right-of-way dedications. 
3.  A separate application shall be filed for each adjustment request made pursuant to this section. Such application shall be filed with the development services director or his or her designee on a form provided by the director, not later than: 
a.  Thirty (30) days prior to the first planning commission public hearing on an applicable discretionary permit application for the development project, pursuant to the city zoning and subdivision ordinance; or 
b.  If no such discretionary permit is required, at the time of application for a building permit for the development project. Each application shall provide the documentation and assurances specified below. 
4.  The planning commission shall consider the fee adjustment application at the same public hearing as the application for a discretionary development permit for the development project, or, if no such permit is required, the development services director or his or her designee shall consider the application within sixty (60) days after the application for credit is deemed complete by the director. 
5.  Credit for the Dedication of Non-Site-Related Right-of-Way. Credit for the dedication of non-site-related right-of-way for streets or street segments listed in the general plan or traffic impact fee program shall be valued at one hundred fifteen (115) percent of the most recent assessed value as determined by the Shasta County assessor, or at the fair market value established by a private appraiser acceptable to the city. Credit for the dedication of right-of-way shall be provided when the property has been conveyed at no charge to, and accepted by, the city. 
6.  Credit for Construction of Non-Site-Related Improvements. Applicants for credit for construction of non-site-related road improvements shall submit acceptable engineering drawings, specifications and construction cost estimates to the director. For discretionary permits, the director shall recommend to the planning commission the amount of the credit for improvement construction based on either these cost estimates or alternative estimates if the director determines that the estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate. 
7.  The director shall provide the applicant with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the reason for the credit and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate indicating his or her agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate and return such signed document to the director before credit will be given. The failure of the applicant to sign, date and return such document within sixty (60) calendar days shall nullify the credit. 
8.  No final inspection or certificate of occupancy for the development project shall be issued until: 
a.  The roadway improvements are completed and accepted by the city or state, whichever is applicable; 
b.  A suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and accepted by the city when applicable; and 
c.  All design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding and acceptance procedures are in strict compliance with the then-current city or state design standards, whichever are applicable. 
9.  Credit may be provided before completion of specified roadway improvements if adequate assurances are given by the applicant that the standards set out in subsection (E)(9) of this section will be met and if the fee payer posts security as provided below for the costs of such construction. Security in the form of a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement shall be posted with and approved by the city attorney in an amount determined by the planning commission or director. 
If the road construction project will not be constructed within two years of the acceptance of the offer by the planning commission or director, the amount of the security shall be increased by ten percent compounded for each year of the life of the security. The security shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney prior to acceptance of the security by the director. 
10.  Credits shall not be transferable from one project or development to another without the approval of the city council. 
11.  Any person may appeal the decision of the planning commission to the city council, and the decision of the director to the planning commission by filing a written appeal with the director together with a fee established by resolution of the city council, within ten calendar days of the decision. 
(Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part))  
13.08.080 - Dust mitigation fees. 
A.  Purpose. See Section 17.84.080, Paved street requirements. 
B.  Fee Schedule. The following fee schedule is based on an inflation factor using the year; the current fees were developed (1985) through 2005, based on the dust mitigation fee study dated May 16, 2005. 
1.  The base fee in effect 2/2/06 shall be one thousand three hundred thirteen dollars ($1,313.00) per parcel, to be escalated as follows, one hundred (100) percent of base fee increased January 1 each year by the Construction Cost Index as published in the most recent November Engineering News Record. 
(Ord. 06-170 § 1 (part))  
13.08.090 - Shasta Lake Fire Protection District Impact Fees.*[] 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this fee is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community and to ensure that adequate capital fire facilities are provided and maintained for the residents of the city. As new development occurs, there will be an additional burden and increased demand for fire protection services. So that new development in the city pays its fair share of the cost of providing these facilities, the levy of fees to fund fire protection facilities is necessary. 
B.  Establishment of Fee. A fire protection facilities impact fee is established in the incorporated area of the city to pay for the improvement of fire protection facilities. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated costs of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments, and set forth the time of payment of fees. 
C.  Collection of Fees. 
1.  It shall be a condition of approval of any new development project proposed within the city that the identified development fee be paid to the Shasta Lake Fire Protection District for the benefit of the owners or residents of the development. In development projects subject to such a condition, a certificate issued by the fire protection district stating that the requirements of the district have been satisfied must be presented to the city building division prior to issuance of a building permit. 
2.  In relation to collection of the fire protection facilities impact fee, the responsibility for compliance with the requirements of Government Code Section 66000 et seq. (Mitigation Fee Act) and for the collection, receipting, and management of fees collected from new development projects shall rest with the Shasta Lake Fire Protection District. 
(Ord. No. 09-200, § 2, 3-17-2009) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
*Note—California Environment Quality Act (CEQA): The city council hereby determines that the fire protection facilities impact fee established by this section is solely a mechanism to finance future activities which may or may not each be subject to the provisions of CEQA. The fee is not, itself, a project subject to provisions provided in Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 15378(b)(4). (Ord. No. 09-200, § 3, 3-17-2009) 
 
Chapter 13.12 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections:  
Article I. - Water Service Regulations 
 
13.12.010 - Application of chapter provisions. 
This chapter fixes rates for water furnished by the city water department, and provides rules and regulations governing the furnishing of water by the city's water department. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.010)  
13.12.020 - Water not supplied outside city. 
In accordance with the conditions of the city's contract with the United States Bureau of Reclamation, no water shall be supplied to any property located outside of the city's boundaries. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.020)  
13.12.030 - Service to premises—Limitations. 
A.  No water shall be served to two or more parcels of property separately owned through a common service pipe or water meter. 
B.  Each applicant for a water service connection shall be notified that a single meter may serve only one residence, or one residential building, or one commercial or one industrial building. However, residential or commercial building groups, the individual buildings of which cannot be owned separately, and which are located on parcels which cannot be divided into smaller portions, may be served from the same single meter. 
C.  If the use to which the building is intended indicates that a meter larger than a five-eighths-inch meter will be needed, it will be the responsibility of the city manager to determine the size of meter needed, and to inform the applicant that he or she will be required to install such a specified meter. Building plans, as approved by the Shasta County building department, must be submitted by the applicant for determination of meter size required. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.030)  
13.12.040 - Meter—Attachment conditions. 
A.  The city's water department may attach a meter to any service, or service pipe, at any time it shall be deemed expedient to do so, and render corrected bills from the date of installation of such meter according to the meter rates set forth in this title. After the meter is so attached, any damage to such meter resulting from malice, carelessness or neglect of the customer, or any member of his or her family or anyone employed by him or her, and any damage which may result from hot water or steam from a boiler or otherwise, shall be paid for by the consumer to the city on presentation of a bill therefor; and in case such bill is not paid, the water shall be shut off from the premises without further notice, and shall not be turned on until all charges are paid. 
B.  It is unlawful to interfere with or remove a water meter from any service where it has been attached, without first notifying and receiving permission from the meter and service clerk of the city. Such permission shall be granted only for the purpose of tests, replacements, repairs to the meter or service pipe, readjustment of service, or similar emergency. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.040)  
13.12.050 - Meter—Use required when—Bypassing prohibited. 
A.  All city water used on any premises where a meter is installed must pass through the meter, except as provided in case of private fire services. No bypass or connection between the meter and the main shall be made or maintained. 
B.  Consumers will be held responsible and charged for all water passing through their meters. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.050)  
13.12.060 - Meter—Inaccurate registration—Customer charges. 
If a meter fails to register during any period, or is known to register inaccurately, the consumer shall be charged with an average daily consumption as a season, as shown by the meter when in use and registering accurately. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.060)  
13.12.070 - Meter—Testing by city— Adjustment of charges. 
Any consumer may demand that the meter through which water is being furnished be examined and tested by the city, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering correctly the amount of water which is being delivered through it. Such demand shall be made in writing to the city. The written demand shall be accompanied by a deposit in an amount determined by the current chargeout rate for one-half hour of city staff time. Upon receipt of such demand, it shall be the duty of the city to cause the meter to be examined and tested for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering correctly the water being delivered through it. If, on such examination and test, the meter shall be found to register over three percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefor, the deposit fee shall be repaid to the person making the application, and the water bill for the current period adjusted in such a manner as the city manager may deem fair and just. If the meter is found to register not over three percent fast, the deposit shall be forfeited to the city and the water bills paid as rendered. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.070) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.12.080 - Tapping or connections—City permission required. 
No person shall tap or connect with any water main or pipe which forms any part of the water storage, transmission, or distribution system of the city, without first notifying and obtaining written permission to do so from the public works director of the city, who shall issue no such permit to or for any person or firm whose indebtedness to the city for water or other charges is delinquent. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.080) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.12.090 - Services and meters—Property of city—Damage responsibility. 
All services and water meters installed by the city shall remain at all times the property of the city, and shall be maintained and repaired and renewed by the city when rendered unserviceable through fair wear and tear; provided, that where replacements, repairs or adjustments of any meter are rendered necessary by the act, negligence or carelessness of the consumer, or any member of his or her family or person in his or her employ, any expense caused to the department thereby shall be charged against and collected from the consumer. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.090)  
13.12.100 - Installation at applicant's expense when. 
In all cases where an installation is requested for any purpose not covered by other provisions of Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code, such service shall be installed at the expense of the applicant, at city cost. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.100)  
13.12.110 - Check valve requirements. 
The placing of an approved reduced pressure principle (RPP) device on the property side of the water meter of any consumer is for the safety and protection from damage of the water system, meters and piping of the city, and such approved RPP devices shall be installed by and at the expense of the consumer. If the consumer fails to comply with this section, all costs to repair the damage to the city's water system, meters and piping will be billed to the consumer. In addition, the water will be shut off to the property until an approved RPP device is installed. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.110) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.12.120 - Shutoff valves. 
All shutoff valves on the city's side of the water meter are installed by the city for the use of the city. Such shutoff valves shall not be used or in any way molested or manipulated by consumers of water, except in case of emergency. For ordinary usage, all consumers shall provide their own shutoff valves and pressure regulators on the property side of the meter. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.120)  
13.12.130 - Vacant houses or businesses. 
In case a house or business building becomes vacant, the regular minimum rate shall be charged and collected from the owner thereof, whether water is used or not, unless the water department is notified in writing of the fact that the property is unoccupied and is requested to cut off water therefrom. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.130)  
13.12.140 - Standby charges. 
A standby charge shall be charged and collected from the owner of a vacant lot which has a water meter in place. The charge shall be the regular minimum monthly service charge. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.135)  
13.12.150 - Temporary water service. 
A.  Where temporary water service is requested to be furnished through fire hydrants or other existing connections, a portable meter will be installed and water charged for at the following rates: 
The sum of the (meter surcharge) plus (demand charge for one unit) plus (consumption charge), in accordance with the surcharge, demand charge and consumption rates currently in effect. 
B.  Such service shall be installed by the water department at the expense of the applicant, at city costs. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.140)  
13.12.160 - Customer restrictions and city rights. 
A.  No consumer shall supply water to any person, firm or corporation other than the occupant or occupants of the premises of such consumer. 
B.  No person shall transport, or cause to be transported, water supplied by the City of Shasta Lake for any use outside the city service territory unless: 1) use is for the personal consumption of the transporter, and 2) the transporter is a customer of the City of Shasta Lake. The purpose of this restriction is to prevent the transportation and use of water to areas outside the city for other than personal use such as drinking, bathing, and personal sanitation of the customer. 
C.  No consumer shall permit leaks or waste of water. The city reserves the right to bill the property owner of substandard dwellings or other type buildings for water service where the city records show consistent financial losses due to billing the tenants of these substandard dwellings or other type buildings. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.150) 
(Ord. No. 14-237, § 1, 12-2-2014)  
13.12.170 - Backflow prevention requirements—Leaks and waste prohibited. 
The city is required by laws of the state of California, the California Administrative Code, Title 17, Chapter V, Sections 7583 through 7622 inclusive, and by the Shasta County health department to enforce regulations to safeguard its drinking water supply by preventing backflow into the water system. If a property served water by the city has a well or other source of water supply, it must provide a state-approved reduced pressure principle (RPP) device on the property side of the city water meter service. The RPP device must be tested and certified by a certified backflow device tester at least once each year for backflow leaks. If leakage is found, a new RPP device shall be installed immediately. The California Department of Public Health sanitary engineering personnel, the Shasta County health department personnel and the city's personnel may also inspect the RPP device at various times each year, and if found to be defective, the property owner will be notified to make repairs at once. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.160) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.12.180 - Water for steam boilers, hydraulic elevators, power pumps and similar apparatus. 
A.  No person shall draw water from the city pipes directly into any stationary steam boiler, hydraulic elevator, power pump, or similar apparatus. 
B.  Where city water is used to supply a steam boiler, hydraulic elevator or power pump, its owner shall provide a tank of sufficient capacity to afford a supply for at least twelve (12) hours, into which the service pipe shall be discharged. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.170)  
13.12.190 - Service turnoff authority. 
The water department shall have the power to turn off water from mains and pipes of the system without notice. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.04.180)  
Article II. - Rates and Charges 
 
13.12.200 - Rates for service. 
The following rates and compensation are fixed and established as the rates to be charged and collected by the city's water department for water furnished by the department: 
Monthly Service Charges: 
Meter Size 	FY 2017 	FY 2018 	FY 2019 	FY 2020 	FY 2021 
5/8 " 	$24.56 	$28.25 	$31.08 	$31.08 	$31.08 
1" 	$55.68 	$64.04 	$70.45 	$70.45 	$70.45 
1.5" 	$107.55 	$123.69 	$136.06 	$136.06 	$136.06 
2" 	$169.79 	$195.26 	$214.79 	$214.79 	$214.79 
3" 	$315.03 	$362.29 	$398.52 	$398.52 	$398.52 
4" 	$522.50 	$600.88 	$660.97 	$660.97 	$660.97 
6" 	$1,041.20 	$1,197.38 	$1,317.12 	$1,317.12 	$1,317.12 
8" 	$1,663.64 	$1,913.19 	$2,104.51 	$2,104.51 	$2,104.51 
10" 	$3,012.24 	$3,464.08 	$3,810.49 	$3,810.49 	$3,810.49 
12" 	$4,464.59 	$5,134.28 	$5,647.71 	$5,647.71 	$5,647.71 
 
  
Consumption Charges: 
Customer Class 	FY 2017 	FY 2018 	FY 2019 	FY 2020 	FY 2021 
Lifeline Tier 1 	$1.53 	$1.76 	$1.94 	$1.94 	$1.94 
Lifeline Tier 2 	$2.20 	$2.53 	$2.79 	$2.79 	$2.79 
Lifeline Tier 3 	$2.76 	$3.18 	$3.50 	$3.50 	$3.50 
Residential Tier 1 	$1.92 	$2.21 	$2.44 	$2.44 	$2.44 
Residential Tier 2 	$2.20 	$2.53 	$2.79 	$2.79 	$2.79 
Residential Tier 3 	$2.76 	$3.18 	$3.50 	$3.50 	$3.50 
Multi Family & Mobile 	$2.03 	$2.34 	$2.58 	$2.58 	$2.58 
Commercial & Industrial 	$2.07 	$2.39 	$2.63 	$2.63 	$2.63 
Commercial Irr. & Government 	$2.26 	$2.60 	$2.86 	$2.86 	$2.86 
Schools 	$2.42 	$2.79 	$3.07 	$3.07 	$3.07 
 
  
(hcf = 100 cubic feet of water or approximately 750 gallons) 
Irr. = Irrigation 
Consumption Charge Tiers: 
Customer Class 	Rate Tiers 
Lifeline and Residential 	
 Tier 1 	1,000 cu. ft. 
 Tier 2 	2,000 cu. ft. 
 Tier 3 	>2,000 cu. ft. 
All other Classes 	
 Tier 1 	Uniform rate 
 Tier 2 	Uniform rate 
 
  
Drought Rates: 
Drought Rate Summary 	Stage 1 	Stage 2 	Stage 3 	Stage 4 	Stage 5 
Surcharge 					
 Tier 1 (Lifeline) 	$0.03 	$0.07 	$0.10 	$0.37 	$0.47 
 Tier 1 (SFR) 	$0.04 	$0.09 	$0.13 	$0.47 	$0.59 
 Tier 2 	$0.05 	$0.10 	$0.15 	$0.54 	$0.68 
 Tier 3 	$0.06 	$0.13 	$0.19 	$0.67 	$0.85 
Multi Family & Mobile 	$0.05 	$0.09 	$0.14 	$0.50 	$0.62 
Commercial & Industrial 	$0.05 	$0.09 	$0.14 	$0.51 	$0.64 
Commercial Irr. & Government 	$0.05 	$0.10 	$0.15 	$0.55 	$0.70 
Schools 	$0.06 	$0.11 	$0.17 	$0.59 	$0.74 
 
  
Pass-Through Rates: 
The city will also pass-through any wholesale water rate increases imposed on the City by its wholesalers starting in FY 2017. The pass-through for FY 2017 is currently estimated to be $0.01/hundred cubic feet (hcf) and the rates shown in the Consumption Charges table above includes the pass-through for FY 2017. However, the table above does not include wholesaler pass-throughs for FY 2018-2021 since wholesaler water costs are not known at this time. Assuming 5% wholesaler cost increases each year, the pass-through would range from $0.03/hcf in FY 2018 to $0.08/hcf in FY 2021. The exact pass-through charge for FY 2018 (and subsequent FYs) will be calculated based on actual wholesale purchased water costs imposed on the city. The pass-through calculation is the difference in wholesale water purchase costs for each FY divided by the estimated water use for that FY. 
(Ord. 07-187 § 1: Ord. 04-158 § 1: Ord. 97-97 § 1: Ord. 94-31 § 1: prior code § 9.08.010) 
(Ord. No. 09-201, § 1, 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 16-251, § 1, 8-16-2016)  
13.12.210 - Unit determination—Property under one ownership with single use. 
For a property under one ownership, having a single building or use, served by a single meter, as: One dwelling, one commercial enterprise or building, one business enterprise or building, one public service or public service building, one industrial operation or building, one school or school building, one church or church building, one nonprofit organization or building, one office or office building not in a multiple unit, or for any other single use or building, the unit determination shall be: One unit per meter. 
(Prior code § 9.08.020)  
13.12.220 - Unit determination—Properties under one ownership having multiple uses. 
A.  For properties under one ownership, having multiple uses or buildings, served by a single meter, as: Homes, mobile homes, apartments, complex dwelling units, mobile home parks, two or more commercial enterprises or buildings, two or more business enterprises or buildings, two or more public services or public service buildings, two or more industrial operations or buildings, two or more churches or buildings, two or more schools or school buildings, or any combination of the above or other uses, the unit determination shall be: 
One unit per occupancy, per proprietorship, per building, or per use. 
B.  When a unit is deleted, at the owner's request, from the multiple unit demand charge, no water shall again be served to the deleted unit, and a separate water service connection and meter must be installed to serve the deleted unit if water is served to it, unless the buildings or uses meet the requirements of subsection B. of Section 13.12.030 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 9.08.030)  
13.12.230 - Unit determination—Properties under one ownership providing rooms, guest homes or travel trailer parks. 
Properties under one ownership, served by a single meter, providing rooms, spaces or suites, for rent or use, as: Rooming houses, hotels, motels, rest or guest homes, travel trailer parks, office or public buildings renting out rooms or suites, or any building or business with rooms, suites or spaces, the unit determination shall be: 
Per room, suite, space or use division: 
One-quarter, one-half, three-quarters, or one full unit, to be determined by the city according to estimated water required by the room, space, suite or division. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.08.040)  
13.12.240 - Unit determination— Nonpermanent, self-contained mobile homes used as domiciles. 
All nonpermanent, self-contained, travel or mobile homes, used as a domicile for other than the property owner's family, occupying the same lot or property served with water by the city, shall be charged as one unit, in addition to the property owner's unit charge. Charges made for water to a nonpermanent trailer will be dropped when the city has been notified at the city's office, or in writing, that the trailer has been moved from the property, and no longer supplied with water. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.08.050)  
13.12.250 - Unmetered water rates. 
The city shall charge for unmetered water delivered to any public or private customer as follows: 
A.  Water for commercial: regular city rates; 
B.  Water for street-sprinkling or flushings, and other nondomestic or noncommercial uses: three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) per one thousand (1,000) gallons; 
C.  Water for park purposes: regular city rates. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.08.060)  
Article III. - Fire Protection Services 
 
13.12.260 - Fire hydrants—Placement and maintenance. 
Fire hydrants shall be placed, maintained and repaired by the Shasta Lake fire protection district and/or the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.12.010) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.12.270 - Fire hydrants—Opening and use restrictions. 
Fire hydrants are provided for the sole purpose of extinguishing fires, and shall be opened and used by the city water department and the Shasta Lake fire protection district, or such persons as may be authorized to do so by the public works director and/or the fire chief, respectively, in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 12.04 and 12.08 and Title 13 of this code. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.12.020) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.12.280 - Fire service—Monthly rates—Use of hydrants prohibited when. 
A.  The monthly rates to be charged and collected for service used for unmetered fire protection shall be as follows: 
Monthly Private Fire Line Rates: 
Size 	Charge 
2" fire line or less 	$5.53 
3" fire line or less 	$16.06 
4" fire line or less 	$34.22 
6" fire line or less 	$99.42 
8" fire line or less 	$211.86 
10" fire line or less 	$381.00 
12" fire line or less 	$615.41 
 
  
B.  In no case shall private fire hydrants be used for other purposes than fire protection. Violation of this rule will be cause for water service to be discontinued to the premises. 
C.  No charge will be made for private fire protection where water used passes through a metered service. 
(Prior code § 9.12.030) 
(Ord. No. 16-251, 8-16-2016)  
13.12.290 - Private fire protection services and charges. 
Private fire protection, when installed by the city, shall be installed at the expense of the applicant at city cost. Such services shall be used only in case of fire. Any person using such fire service for other than fire purposes shall be subject to the penalty provisions contained in Section 1.16.010 for each such use. Additionally, the city is authorized to enforce this provision by cutting off all water from the property where such use occurs. When water is cut off by virtue of this provision, no further water shall be served to such property until any estimated water consumption and penalties have been paid, plus the turn-on charges in accordance with Sections 13.04.330, 13.04.370 and 13.04.380 of this title. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.12.040) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Article IV. - Water Main Extensions 
 
13.12.300 - Agreement and charge for installation. 
In general, whenever extension of a water main within the city boundaries is required because a principal part of the premises to be served does not lie along an available water main with adequate capacity and proper pressure, the extension will be installed after an agreement has been executed by the applicant and the city, and the applicable charge paid by the applicant. The manner of determining this charge is set forth in this chapter. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.16.010)  
13.12.310 - Installation—By owner or city— Specifications and costs. 
A.  A water main extension may be installed by the city at its option, or the city may require the applicant to install the water main extension. 
B.  In the case of an applicant installation, the material installed and the work performed must comply with the specifications furnished by the city, and shall be subject to city inspection at all times. The applicant will be required to pay for all inspection services. 
C.  Upon completion of the installation in accordance with the agreement, title to the extension shall be transferred to the city by the applicant upon acceptance of the extension by the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.16.020)  
13.12.320 - Specifications determined by city. 
The specifications, point of commencement, charge to the applicant, and all other requirements for main extensions shall be determined by the city, with proper allowance being made for future demand. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.16.030)  
13.12.330 - Financing by city when. 
Main extensions installed for general improvement of the distribution system will be financed by the city. Such improvements will not be installed upon the request of one or more applicants to serve a particular premises. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.16.040)  
13.12.340 - Charges to applicants for main extensions—Determination. 
A.  In general, the following provisions shall be in effect for determining the charges to the applicant for a main extension: 
1.  The maximum length of main extension for which the applicant will be required to pay shall not exceed the distance from the location of service to the nearest available main six inches or larger in diameter with adequate capacity and under proper pressure to supply the expected demand. However, the applicant will be required to pay for extension of mains to front completely the premises to be served. 
2.  The charge shall be for an extension adequate to serve the applicant, but shall not be less than the charge for installing a main six inches in diameter, and appurtenant structures and costs. 
3.  The city will sustain that portion of the cost for an extension which exceeds the charge for the main required to serve the development proposed. The city may require a guarantee of revenue whenever enlargement of existing facilities is needed behind the point of commencement of an extension. 
B.  When a main extension is requested by a property owner for fire service, the extension will be paid in full by the property owner (owners) requesting the extension. 
C.  When the city determines to install water main extensions and the extension benefits the water distribution system as a whole and offers a particular benefit to adjacent property owners: 
1.  The city shall install the extension. 
2.  Thirty (30%) percent of the construction cost will be attributed to any adjacent properties specially benefited by the extension. This portion will be distributed to the specially benefited adjacent properties based on each property's linear foot frontage as it relates to the total footage of the extension. 
3.  Payment from the specially benefited properties will be due when the property connects to the water system and will be paid along with the then existing fees and charges required of all new meters. 
4.  In the event a property owner can demonstrate that the owner's property was benefited less than the share of costs attributed to the property, the city council may reduce the share of costs to the appropriate amount. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.16.050) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.12.350 - Front foot charges—Requirements and procedures. 
A.  The city will collect a front foot charge, where applicable, before granting a standard service or a private fire service to premises which lie along and may be served directly from any main extension installed under the provisions of this chapter. The front foot charge for a main extension shall be in effect for a period of twenty (20) years from the date of execution of the contract, if the extension is installed by the applicant. This provision shall apply to all water mains installed under contracts executed on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code. 
B.  The front foot charge shall not be applied more than once to any premises. Except for unusual conditions, premises already served at the date of installation of the extension will be excluded in determining the front foot charge. 
C.  If a main extension is installed by an applicant, the front foot charge will be determined by dividing the charge for the extension by the front footage of all premises which lie along and may be served directly from the extension. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.16.060)  
13.12.360 - Front foot charges—Refund conditions. 
A.  The applicant who has financed a main extension (or his or her assigns) is entitled to the front foot charges collected by the city on such extension where it is necessary for the city to connect a standard service or a private fire service to such extension. The amounts collected will be refunded without interest within ninety (90) days following the date of collection. 
B.  No front foot charge refunds will be made after twenty (20) years from the date of execution of the contract for an applicant-installed extension, except those refunds which have accrued during such twenty (20) year period. 
C.  The total amount of all refunds made by the city to the applicant (or his or her assigns) may not exceed the charge to the applicant, computed as if the installation were made by the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.16.070)  
Article V. - Cross-Connection Control 
 
13.12.370 - Purpose of chapter provisions. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.  Protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within its customers' internal distribution system(s), or within its customers' private water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon into the public water supply system; 
B.  Promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between its customers' in-plant potable water system(s) and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; 
C.  Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.20.010)  
13.12.380 - Responsibility for city adherence to regulations. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from such contamination or pollution as could otherwise be caused by the backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connections. The city manager shall further be responsible for the city's adherence, where possible, to Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections, as contained in the California Administrative Code, Title 17; Public Health, Chapter 5; Sanitation (Environmental), Subchapter 1; Engineering (Sanitary), Group 4, Drinking Water Supplies. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.20.020)  
13.12.390 - Authority to order installation of backflow prevention devices. 
If, in the judgment of the city manager, an approved backflow prevention device is required for the safety of the water system at the city's water service connection to any customer's premises, the city manager or his or her designated agent shall give notice in writing to such customer, ordering the customer to install such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to his or her premises. The customer shall, within thirty (30) calendar days following delivery of the written notice, install, or cause to be installed, such approved device or devices at the customer's expense, and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, or cause to be installed, such device or devices within that period of time shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the customer's premises until such device or devices have been properly installed. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 9.20.030)  
13.12.400—13.12.404 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-236, § 1, adopted Sept. 16, 2014, repealed former §§ 13.12.400—13.12.404 in their entirety. Former § 13.12.400 pertained to the declaration of water shortage emergencies, former § 13.12.401 pertained to enforcement, former § 13.12.402 pertained to penalty for violations, and former § 13.12.403 pertained to appeals. These former sections all derived from Ord. No. 08-194, § 1.  
Chapter 13.14 - WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Sections: 
 
13.14.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the city's water shortage contingency plan detailing the stages of action to be undertaken during a reduction in available water supply, either due to reductions in the city's available water supply during drought years, or due to catastrophic interruption due to flooding, major fire emergencies, earthquake, regional power outages, water contamination or other situations that could impact the city's water supply. 
(Ord. No. 14-236, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.14.020 - Definitions. 
A.  The following words and phrases as used in this Chapter have the following meanings: 
1.  "Available water supply" means the amount of potable water available to the city in any given water year, including water available through long-term water purchase agreements/contracts, taking into consideration reductions to the allocations during drought years, and any supplemental water purchased from other water purveyors under short-term agreements. 
2.  "Bubbler" means an irrigation device that bubbles water only a short distance from the device, generally used for watering trees and shrubs on a per-tree/shrub basis. 
3.  "City" means the City of Shasta Lake. 
4.  "Drip irrigation" means a landscape watering system using low water pressure and flexible tubing placed on the ground to target the roots of plants, thereby conserving moisture that would be lost to evaporation with sprinkler systems 
5.  "Emitter" means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil. 
6.  "Landscape irrigation system" means an irrigation system with pipes, spray heads or sprinkling devices that are operated through an automated or manual valving system. 
7.  "Large water user" means schools, commercial, industrial, civic/social/fraternal and government customers with a one-inch meter or larger, or more than one meter serving a property or facility, and single-family residential users with a water use of over ten thousand (10,000) cubic feet per month over the prior 12-month period. 
8.  "Ornamental pond" or "ornamental fountain" means a design element where open water performs solely an aesthetic function. 
9.  "Person" means property owners, occupants, tenants, lessees, sub-lessees, individuals, partnerships, corporations, joint ventures, receivers, limited liability companies, trust, estates, cooperatives, associations public or private agency, government agency or institution, school district or any other user of water provided by the city. 
10.  "Potable water" means water that is provided to customers through the city's water treatment and distribution system. This does not include reclaimed water. 
11.  "Reclaimed water" means former wastewater that is treated to remove solids and impurities pursuant to state water quality requirements and used for landscape irrigation and/or to meet commercial and industrial water needs. 
12.  "Retrofit kit" means water saving devices that can assist customers to save water, including, but not limited to, low-flow showerheads, faucet aerators, spray hose nozzles, and hose timers. 
13.  "Shut-off nozzle" shall mean a device attached to the end of a hose that must be manually operated, pressed or otherwise held in place to allow water to flow out of the hose. 
14.  "Soaker hose" means a garden hose with small holes that allow water to seep into the ground to the roots of plants, conserving moisture that would be lost to evaporation with sprinkler systems. 
15.  "Station" means a landscaped area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
16.  "Unnecessary and wasteful use of water" means the application or usage of water for functions or activities which do not have any health or safety purpose, are not required by regulation, and are not part of the core function or business process at a site. 
17.  "Water year" means the period from and including March 1 of each calendar year through the last day of February of the following calendar year as established by the long-term water contract between the City of Shasta Lake and the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation. 
(Ord. No. 14-236, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.14.030 - Declaration of water shortage emergency. 
By resolution adopted after a noticed public hearing, city council may declare a water shortage emergency and impose voluntary or mandatory water conservation restrictions by identifying the applicable Stage outlined in Sections 13.14.040 through 13.14.080. Unless the resolution specifies an ending date, the declaration of water shortage emergency shall remain in effect until rescinded or otherwise modified by subsequent resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 14-236, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.14.040 - Stage 1: Water shortage alert. 
In Stage 1, there is a ten percent reduction in the city's available water supply. The city's water supply (treatment) and/or distribution system is able to meet much of or most of the water demands of its customers in the immediate future. The following restrictions are state mandated regardless of drought stages in an effort to reduce water consumption. 
Stage 1: Water Shortage Alert 
1. Free-flowing hoses for any use shall be prohibited. Customers shall use automatic shutoff devices on any hose or filling apparatus. 
2. Faulty sprinklers and/or breaks within the customer's plumbing system shall be repaired within twenty-four (24) hours after the customer is notified or discovers the break. 
3. All large water users, such as industrial uses, schools, supermarkets, civic/government buildings, etc., shall develop a water conservation plan indicating a ten percent reduction in water usage and submit the plan to the city's water conservation coordinator for approval within thirty (30) calendar days. 
4. Use of landscape irrigation systems for all customers, including parks and school grounds, shall be limited to the hours between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. to reduce evaporation. 
5. Irrigated landscaped areas shall include efficient irrigation systems (e.g., drip irrigation systems, timed sprinklers, rain sensors, low-flow spray heads, etc.). 
6. All new development shall be required to install low flow devices (i.e., toilets and shower heads) pursuant to California Building Code standards. 
 
(Ord. No. 14-236, § 2, 9-16-2014; Ord. No. 17-263, 9-5-2017)  
13.14.050 - Stage 2: Moderate water shortage. 
In Stage 2, there is an eleven (11)—twenty (20) percent reduction in the city's available water supply. There is a probability that the city's supply (treatment) and/or distribution system will not be able to meet all water demands of city customers with the city's available water supply for the current water year. Mandatory restrictions apply in an effort to increase conservation by ten percent above Stage 1. 
Stage 2: Moderate Water Shortage 
All measures from Stage 1 become mandatory in Stage 2 unless noted as more restrictive. 
1. Water use for ornamental ponds and fountains shall be prohibited. 
2. All large water users, such as industrial uses, schools, supermarkets, civic/government buildings, etc., shall develop or update their water conservation plans and submit the plan to the city's water conservation coordinator for approval within thirty (30) calendar days. The plan shall address all rationing stages of this chapter as follows: Stage 2: Demonstrate a twenty (20) percent reduction in water usage; Stage 3: Demonstrate a thirty (30) percent reduction in water usage; Stage 4: Demonstrate a forty (40) percent reduction in water usage; Stage 5: Demonstrate a fifty (50) percent reduction in water usage. 
3. Parks and school grounds shall be watered at night only between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., no more than three nights per week, and shall achieve a twenty (20) percent reduction in water use. The reduction shall be measured based on the amount of water used in the previous calendar month compared to the same calendar month in the previous year. 
4. Use of landscape irrigation systems for all other customers shall be limited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. no more than three nights per week. 
  The limitation for times does not apply to: 
  a. Drip, bubbler, or soaker irrigation hardware or emitters; 
  b. Use of an irrigation system for the express purposes of repairing or completing routine maintenance. 
  c. Watering by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with shut-off nozzle. 
  d. Watering by use of a hose-end sprinkler with a radius of not more than ten feet if such sprinkler causes no overspray or runoff to adjoining property or to the roadside ditch or gutter. 
5. All city water customers who do not comply with the reduced consumption amount shall be required to install retrofit kits. 
6. The city will implement excessive water use penalties or tier water rates to discourage excessive water use and shall penalize water customers who fail to meet the reduced consumption amount. 
 
(Ord. No. 14-236, § 2, 9-16-2014) 
In Stage 3, there is a twenty-one (21)—thirty (30) percent reduction in the city's available water supply. There is a probability that the city's supply (treatment) and/or distribution system will not be able to meet all water demands of city customers with the city's available water supply for the current water year. Mandatory restrictions apply in an effort to increase conservation by ten percent above Stage 2. 
Stage 3: Emergency Water Shortage 
All measures from Stages 1 and 2 become mandatory in Stage 3 unless noted as more restrictive. 
1. Parks and school grounds shall be watered at night only between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., no more than two nights per week, and shall achieve a thirty (30) percent reduction in water use. 
2. Use of landscape irrigation systems for all other customers shall be limited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. no more than two nights per week for a maximum total run time of fifteen (15) minutes per station per night. 
  The limitation for times does not apply to: 
  a. Drip, bubbler, or soaker irrigation hardware or emitters; 
  b. Use of an irrigation system for the express purposes of repairing or completing routine maintenance. 
  c. Watering by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with shut-off nozzle. 
  d. Watering by use of a hose-end sprinkler with a radius of not more than ten feet if such sprinkler causes no overspray or runoff to adjoining property or to the roadside ditch or gutter. 
3. Installation of irrigated landscaping for all new development shall be deferred pursuant to a written Agreement with the city. 
4. No new landscape irrigation systems shall be installed on developed parcels. This restriction shall not apply to the replacement of inefficient irrigation systems with systems that incorporate water-savings technologies, such as the installation of high efficiency sprinkler heads, weather-based irrigation controllers, and/or drip irrigation systems. 
 
(Ord. No. 14-236, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.14.070 - Stage 4: Severe water shortage. 
In Stage 4, there is a thirty-one (31)—forty (40) percent reduction in the city's available water supply. The city's supply (treatment) or distribution system will not be able to meet all demands of city customers with the city's available water supply for the current water year. Mandatory restrictions apply in an effort to increase conservation by ten percent above Stage 3. 
Stage 4: Severe Water Shortage 
All measures from Stages 1, 2 and 3 become mandatory in Stage 4 unless noted as more restrictive. 
1. Water use shall be restricted so as to meet the minimum requirements for personal health and safety. Priority shall be given to supplying adequate water to ensure public/community health and safety (i.e., fire suppression, medical, veterinarian, and educational institutions). 
2. Swimming pools that have been filled prior to Stage 4 shall not be emptied and refilled. 
3. Filling of new swimming pools is prohibited as of the effective date of the Stage 4 declaration. 
4. Flushing of sewers and fire hydrants shall be prohibited except in cases of emergency. 
5. No potable water from the city system shall be used for construction purposes, such as dust control, compaction, or trench jetting. 
 
(Ord. No. 14-236, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.14.080 - Stage 5: Critical water shortage emergency. 
In Stage 5, there is a forty-one (41)—fifty (50) percent reduction in the city's available water supply. The city's supply (treatment) or distribution system will not be able to meet all demands of city customers with the city's available water supply for the current water year. In Stage 5, the city is experiencing a major failure of supply, storage, or distribution facilities. The city is not able to meet all customer water requirements with Stage 4 measures. Mandatory restrictions apply in an effort to increase conservation by ten percent above Stage 4. 
Stage 5: Critical Water Shortage Emergency 
All measures from Stages 1, 2, 3 and 4 become mandatory in Stage 5 unless noted as more restrictive. 
1. No new residential development shall be permitted unless the developer has submitted a complete building permit application to the city prior to the Stage 5 declaration. 
2. Use of landscape irrigation systems for all customers shall be prohibited. Using a hand-held container for watering is allowed. Watering by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with shut-off nozzle is allowed. 
 
(Ord. No. 14-236, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.14.090 - Enforcement. 
The city manager, building official, development services director, water conservation coordinator and each of their respective designees are each authorized to administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter, including the issuance of citations. 
(Ord. No. 14-236, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.14.100 - Penalties and violations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, to violate or cause or permit the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or provide false information to the city in response to city requests for information. The penalties for violations of any provision of this chapter are as follows: 
1.  First Violation. No penalty shall be imposed. The city shall provide notice of the violation and a copy of this chapter to the current property owner and/or billing address. 
2.  Second Violation. No penalty shall be imposed. The city shall issue a written notice of the violation by certified mail to the current property owner and/or billing address and provide notice that additional violations may result in penalties or termination of service. 
3.  Third Violation. A third violation within twelve (12) calendar months of the second violation shall result in a penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). The city shall issue a written notice of the violation by certified mail to the current property owner and/or billing address. The amount of the penalty shall be added to the next water bill thirty (30) days after the date of the written notice of the violation, if not paid in full or protested pursuant to Section 13.12.100(F) of this chapter. If the penalty is added to the water bill, failure to pay the penalty shall be treated as nonpayment of the water bill and water service may be terminated as a result. 
4.  Fourth Violation. A fourth violation within twelve (12) calendar months of the third violation shall result in a penalty not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). The city shall issue a written notice of the violation by certified mail to the current property owner and/or billing address. The amount of the penalty shall be added to the next water bill thirty (30) days after the date of the written notice of the violation, if not paid in full or protested pursuant to Section 13.12.100(F) of this chapter. If the penalty is added to the water bill, failure to pay the penalty shall be treated as nonpayment of the water bill and water service may be terminated as a result. 
5.  Fifth and Subsequent Violations. A fifth violation and subsequent violations within twelve (12) calendar months of the fourth violation shall result in a penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). The city shall issue a written notice of the violation by certified mail to the current property owner and/or billing address. The amount of the penalty shall be added to the next water bill thirty (30) days after the date of the written notice of the violation, if not paid in full or protested pursuant to Section 13.12.100(F) of this chapter. If the penalty is added to the water bill, failure to pay the penalty shall be treated as nonpayment of the water bill and water service may be terminated as a result. 
B.  Each separate day or portion thereof in which any violation of the chapter occurs or continues without a good faith effort by the customer to correct the violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
C.  Termination of Service. In addition to any penalties, the city may disconnect and/or terminate a customer's water service. If water service is disconnected, it shall be restored only upon payment of the connection charge fixed by city council. 
D.  Civil Enforcement. Violations of this chapter may also be redressed by civil action. In addition to being subject to prosecution, any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be made the subject of a civil action. Appropriate civil action includes, but is not limited to, injunctive relief and cost recovery. 
E.  Remedies Cumulative. The remedies available to the city to enforce this chapter are in addition to any other remedies available under the Shasta Lake Municipal Code or any state statutes or regulations and do not replace or supplant any other remedy but are cumulative thereto. 
F.  Protesting Penalties/Fines. 
1.  A protest of penalties/fines shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the City and shall be filed with the city no later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of notice of a violation. The protest shall be accompanied by photographs, maps, drawings or other information showing why the protest should be granted. 
2.  The city manager or his/her designee shall consider all protests and make a determination on the request no later than ten calendar days after submittal and may approve, conditionally approve or deny the protest. The applicant shall be notified in writing of any action taken. 
3.  The decision of the city manager or his/her designee may be appealed to the city council by written notice within ten (10) calendar days of the date of action taken on the protest request. The appeal shall be scheduled for city council consideration at the next possible city council meeting. Upon granting any protest request, city council may impose any conditions it determines to be appropriate. The decision of city council shall be prepared in writing, and provided to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 14-236, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
13.14.110 - Hardship variances. 
A.  If, due to unique circumstances, a specific requirement of this chapter would result in undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar properties or classes of water users, then the person may apply for a variance from the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  An application for a variance shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the city. The application shall be accompanied by photographs, maps, drawings or other information showing why the request should be granted. 
C.  The city manager or his/her designee shall consider all variance applications and make a determination on the request no later than ten calendar days after submittal and may approve, conditionally approve or deny the variance request. The applicant shall be notified in writing of any action taken. 
D.  An application for a variance shall be denied unless the city manager or his/her designee finds, based on the information provided in the application, supporting documents, or such additional information as may be requested by the city, and on water use information for the property as shown by the records of the city, all of the following: 
1.  Due to unique circumstances a specific requirement would result in undue hardship; and 
2.  The variance does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other residents and businesses; and 
3.  Because of special circumstances applicable to the property or its use, the strict application of this chapter would have a disproportionate impact on the property or use that exceeds the impacts to residents and businesses generally; and 
4.  Granting the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties and will not be detrimental to the general welfare of the public; and 
5.  The conditions of the subject property or the intended use of the property for which the variance is sought is not common, recurrent or general in nature; and 
6.  Proposed alternative water use restrictions for the property would result in equal or greater water savings than the existing water use restrictions and the customer has achieved the maximum practical reduction in water consumption. 
E.  Appeals to City Council. Any interested person may appeal the decision of the city manager or his/her designee to the city council by written notice within ten calendar days of the date of the decision on the variance request. The appeal shall be scheduled for city council consideration at the next possible city council meeting. Upon granting any appeal, city council may impose any conditions it determines to be appropriate. City council's decision on the variance request shall be prepared in writing, and provided to the appellant. The decision of city council shall be final. 
F.  Previous Violations. Any approved or conditionally approved variance is valid from the date it was approved or conditionally approved. Any previous violations and subsequent penalties associated with those violations are final and will not be reimbursed. 
(Ord. No. 14-236, § 2, 9-16-2014)  
Chapter 13.16 - SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions and Definitions 
 
13.16.010 - Purpose and contents of provisions. 
Title 13 of this code fixes rates for sewer service furnished by the city's sewer department, and provides rules and regulations governing the furnishing of sewer service by the city's sewer department. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.04.010)  
13.16.020 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, repealed § 13.16.020, which pertained to general regulation no. 1 and sanitary code adopted and its derivation includes prior code § 13.04.020 and being amended during the 1998 codification.  
13.16.030 - Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). 
"Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
(Prior code § 13.04.030)  
13.16.040 - Building. 
"Building" means any structure used for human habitation, or a place of business, recreation or other purposes. 
(Prior code § 13.04.040)  
13.16.050 - Building drain. 
"Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer. 
(Prior code § 13.04.050)  
13.16.060 - Building sewer. 
"Building sewer" means a sewer conveying materials from the premises of a user to a community sewer. 
(Prior code § 13.04.060)  
13.16.070 - Chemical oxygen demand (COD). 
"Chemical oxygen demand (COD)" means the measure of the chemically decomposable material in domestic or industrial wastewater, as represented by the oxygen utilized as determined by the appropriate procedure described in "Standard Methods." 
(Prior code § 13.04.070)  
13.16.080 - Community sewer. 
"Community sewer" means a sewer owned and operated by the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.04.080)  
13.16.090 - Contractor. 
"Contractor" means any contractor licensed by the state of California to enter into contracts for and perform the work of installing, repairing, replacing or relocating sewers under city jurisdiction, or the owner of private property doing his or her own house sewer work on his or her private property only. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.04.090)  
13.16.100 - County. 
"County" means the county of Shasta. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.04.100)  
13.16.110 - City engineer. 
"City engineer" means the engineer appointed by the city council to act directly or through authorized agents. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.04.110)  
13.16.120 - City inspector. 
"City inspector" means the inspector acting for the city council and appointed by the city council. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.04.120)  
13.16.130 - Domestic sewage. 
"Domestic sewage" means sewage from residences, businesses, buildings and institutions, as distinct from industrial waste. 
(Prior code § 13.04.130)  
13.16.140 - Industrial wastes. 
"Industrial wastes" means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business, as distinct from domestic sewage. 
(Prior code § 13.04.140)  
13.16.150 - Natural outlet. 
"Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
(Prior code § 13.04.150)  
13.16.160 - pH. 
"pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
(Prior code § 13.04.160)  
13.16.170 - Public sewer. 
"Public sewer" means a sewer lying within a street or easement which is controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.04.170)  
13.16.180 - Radioactive material. 
"Radioactive material" means material containing chemical elements that spontaneously change their atomic structure by emitting any particles, rays or energy forms. 
(Prior code § 13.04.180)  
13.16.190 - Sanitary sewer. 
"Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
(Prior code § 13.04.190)  
13.16.200 - Sewage. 
"Sewage" means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments. 
(Prior code § 13.04.200)  
13.16.210 - Sewage treatment plant. 
"Sewage treatment plant" means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
(Prior code § 13.40.210)  
13.16.220 - Sewage works. 
"Sewage works" means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
(Prior code § 13.04.220)  
13.16.230 - Sewer. 
"Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
(Prior code § 13.04.230)  
13.16.240 - Single-family dwelling. 
A "single-family dwelling" unit shall be a structure which is designed, improved or used as a residence for one family only and which is not designed, improved or used for any other purpose. 
(Prior code § 13.04.240)  
13.16.250 - Street. 
"Street" means any public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, way, public place, public easement, or right-of-way. 
(Prior code § 13.04.250)  
13.16.260 - Storm drain. 
"Storm drain" (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
(Prior code § 13.04.260)  
13.16.270 - Suspended solids. 
"Suspended solids" means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
(Prior code § 13.04.270)  
13.16.280 - Watercourse. 
"Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Prior code § 13.04.280)  
Article II. - Sewer Service Regulations and Policies 
 
13.16.290 - Rules and regulations—Adoption and applicability. 
The following rules and regulations respecting sewer construction, disposal of sewage, drainage of buildings, and connection to the sewage works of the city are adopted, and all work in respect thereto shall be performed as herein required and not otherwise. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.08.010)  
13.16.300 - Connection to community sewer required. 
Following the effective date of the ordinance codified in Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code, it is unlawful for any person to connect to, construct, install or provide, maintain and use any other means of sewage disposal from any building in the city, except by connection to a community sewer in the manner as provided in this chapter. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.08.020)  
13.16.310 - Installation and connection of toilet facilities—Deadline and extensions. 
A.  The owner of any building, as defined in Section 13.16.040 of this chapter, which abuts on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a community sewer of the city, is required to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code, within one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line; except that any owner receiving such notice may apply in writing to the manager within ninety (90) days after such notice for a permit, to delay the installation of such a sewer service not to exceed one year, if he or she can furnish sufficient evidence to the manager that: 
1.  Connection to the sewer at this time would be impractical due to personal hardship; and 
2.  The premises are now served by a septic tank; and 
3.  By written report of the county health officer, the septic tank is operating efficiently now and that its continued operation would not create a hazard to public health. 
B.  Upon receipt of such evidence to his or her satisfaction, the manager may grant, in writing, such extension of time for completing the connection. Such a delay shall not be subject to further extensions. 
(Prior code § 13.08.030)  
13.16.320 - Permit—Requirements generally. 
A.  No community sewer, building sewer, or other sewerage facility shall be installed, altered or repaired within the city until a permit has been obtained from the city and all fees paid in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Every applicant for a permit to install, add to, alter, relocate or replace sewerage facilities, or any part thereof, shall state in writing on the application form provided for that purpose the work proposed to be done and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the building in connection therewith. 
C.  The city manager or engineer may require plans, specifications or drawings, and such other information as he or she may deem necessary. All work shall be done in accordance with such standard specifications which the city may adopt, and all applicable codes and ordinances. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.08.040)  
13.16.330 - Permit—Classes and application requirements. 
A.  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
1.  For residential and commercial service; and 
2.  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
B.  In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city manager or engineer. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.08.050)  
13.16.340 - Permit—Issuance—Authorized personnel. 
A.  Any permit required by Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code may be issued to any person to do any construction or work regulated by this chapter within the lot limits of a single-family dwelling, provided such person is the owner of the lot and building, such building is occupied or designed to be occupied by the owner, and that the owner shall personally purchase all material and shall personally perform all labor in connection therewith. This does not give anyone other than a licensed contractor, as contractor is defined in Section 13.16.090, permission to do any work within the public right-of-way. 
B.  All work done in streets and public rights-of-way shall conform to city public works department regulations. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.08.060) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.16.350 - Permit—Expiration—New permit required when. 
Every permit issued by the manager under the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one year from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one year. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained. 
(Prior code § 13.08.070)  
13.16.360 - Permit—Scope and limitations. 
A.  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful. 
B.  The issuance of a permit upon plans and specifications shall not prevent the city manager or engineer from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans and specifications, or from preventing construction operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this title, or of any other regulations of the city or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.08.080)  
13.16.370 - Work done without permit—Penalty. 
Any person who shall commence sewerage work for which a permit is required by this chapter without first having obtained a permit therefor shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee fixed by this chapter for such work; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the city manager or engineer that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit therefor before the commencement of the work. In all such cases, a permit must be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so, and if there is an unreasonable delay in obtaining such permit, a double fee, as provided herein, shall be charged. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.08.090)  
13.16.380 - Prohibited discharges—Liability for damages. 
Any wastewater discharger who discharges or causes the discharge of prohibited wastewaters which cause damage to city facilities, detrimental effects on treatment processes, or any other damages resulting in costs to the city, shall be liable to the city for all damage occasioned thereby. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.08.100)  
Article III. - Building Sewers and Connections 
 
13.16.390 - Design and construction specifications. 
A.  Minimum standards for the design and construction of sewers within the city shall be in accordance with the standard city specifications herein referred to, copies of which are on file in the city office. The city engineer, with the consent of the city manager, may permit modifications, or may require higher standards where unusual conditions are encountered. 
B.  Two complete sets of as-built drawings, showing the actual location of all mains, structures, wyes and laterals shall be filed with the city before final acceptance of the work. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.010)  
13.16.400 - Plans, profiles and specifications required. 
The application for a permit for public sewer construction in public rights-of-way shall be accompanied by three complete sets of plans, profiles and specifications, complying with all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, prepared by a registered civil engineer, showing all details of the proposed work based on an accurate survey of the ground. The application, together with the plans, profiles and specifications, shall be reviewed by the city in accordance with the procedure set forth in the city's standard specifications. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.020)  
13.16.410 - Separate building sewers required—Exceptions. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except commercial trailer courts, motels and other multi-use applications, where one lateral may serve more than one structure, when approved by the city council. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.030)  
13.16.420 - Old building sewers—Reuse authorized when. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found to meet all requirements of the city and be in good working order. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.040) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.16.430 - Low sewers—Lifting to permit discharge. 
In all buildings in which any building sewer is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building sewer shall be lifted by artificial means, approved by the engineer, and discharged to the public sewer at the expense of the owner. 
(Prior code § 13.12.050)  
13.16.440 - Construction and connection specifications. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the city. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. All taps in public sewers shall be performed by city personnel only. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and material must be approved by the public works director, in writing, before installation. Any damage to the public sewer shall be repaired, at the cost of the applicant, to the satisfaction of the public works director. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.060) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.16.450 - Testing requirements before connection. 
Before any acceptance of the sewer line by the city and prior to the admission of sewage into the system, the sewer line shall be tested and shall be complete, in full compliance with all requirements of the standard city specifications, and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.070)  
13.16.460 - Costs and expenses—Owner responsibility. 
All costs and expenses incident to the construction, installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The acceptance of any permit shall constitute an agreement by the owner to comply with the provisions, terms and requirements of Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code and other ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. The owner and contractor shall indemnify the city from any losses or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer, including the negligent or unlawful act of any person installing or maintaining the building sewer. 
(Prior code § 13.12.080)  
13.16.470 - Maintenance requirements. 
Building sewers shall be maintained by the owner of the property served thereby to the point of connection with the sewer main. 
(Prior code § 13.12.090)  
13.16.480 - Subdivision map approval and sewer requirements. 
The requirements of Section 13.16.400 of this chapter shall be fully complied with before any final subdivision map shall be approved by the city council. The final subdivision map shall provide for the dedication for public use of streets, easements or rights-of-way in which public sewer lines are to be constructed. Deposits shall be fixed by order of the city council in an amount which shall equal the costs of engineering, inspection, legal and other charges to be incurred by the city in examining the plans and specifications, inspecting the construction, drafting legal documents, and other expenses regularly to be incurred in connection with the project. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.100)  
13.16.490 - Easements and rights-of-way. 
In the event that an easement is required for the extension of the public sewer or the making of connections, the applicant shall procure for and have accepted by the city council a proper easement or grant of right-of-way, having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, sufficient in length to allow the laying and maintenance of such extension or connection. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.110) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.16.500 - Inspection—Required when. 
All pipes, fittings and other appurtenances relative to the sewer collection system shall be inspected by the city prior to backfill to insure compliance with city construction standards. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.120) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.16.510 - Inspection—Notice to city. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the person making the work authorized by the permit to notify the city orally, or in writing, that the work is ready for inspection. Such notification shall be given not less than eight working hours before the work is to be inspected, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by the permit to make sure that the work will stand the test prescribed, before giving the above notification. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.130)  
13.16.520 - Pressure tests. 
Upon completion of the work, the manager may require the building sewer to be subject to a pressure test. The pressure test shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the city's standards for testing sanitary sewer lines. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.140)  
13.16.530 - Test materials and labor. 
The equipment, material, power or labor necessary for the inspection and test shall be furnished by the person doing the work authorized by the permit. 
(Prior code § 13.12.150)  
13.16.540 - Trench protection, backfilling, lighting and repaving requirements. 
Any person constructing a sanitary sewer within the city right-of-way or easement shall comply with applicable state laws and city construction standards pertaining to the cutting of pavement, opening, barricading, lighting and protecting of trenches, backfilling and repaving thereof, and shall obtain all permits and pay all fees required prior to the issuance of a permit by the city. All trench excavations requiring shoring shall conform to the requirements of the California Occupational Safety and Health Act (CAL-OSHA). The contractor shall furnish and install all shoring and bracing required to support the trench walls for the protection of all personnel working in the excavation. Shoring and bracing shall be removed in a manner that protects workers and prevents sloughing of trench walls. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.160) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.16.550 - Barricades and lights for public safety. 
All trenches and excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately protected with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.12.170) 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Article IV. - Discharge Testing and Prohibitions 
 
13.16.560 - Measurements, tests and analyses—Specifications and procedures. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of characteristics of water and waste to which reference is made in Chapters 12.04, 12.08 and Title 13 of this code shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be performed upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.16.010)  
13.16.570 - Prohibited discharge standards. 
A.  General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
B.  Specific Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
1.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees F (sixty (60) degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
2.  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 11, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
3.  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the sewer system or in the POTW resulting in interference; 
4.  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
5.  Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees F (forty (40) degrees C); 
6.  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
7.  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
8.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city manager; 
9.  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewer for maintenance or repair; 
10.  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently impart color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES Permit; 
11.  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
12.  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the city manager; 
13.  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
14.  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city manager in a wastewater discharge permit; 
15.  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
16.  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
17.  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than three hundred (300) mg/l; 
18.  Any garbage, fruit, vegetable, animal or other solid waste material resulting from the preparation or handling of any food or drinks in any dwelling, or other establishment that does not fall within the definition of "food service establishment" pursuant to SLMC Section 13.16.680 or otherwise require compliance with SLMC Chapter 13.16, Article VII (Fats, Oils and Grease Control), unless the same shall have passed through a mechanical garbage or waste grinder of such construction and have such operating characteristics that not more than five percent by weight (determined on a dry basis) of all material discharged from it shall have dimension larger than one-quarter inch, and no particle shall have any dimension greater than one-half inch; 
19.  Untreatable Wastes. Any water or waste containing substances which are not amenable to treatment, or which cause the treatment plant effluent to fail to meet the discharge requirements established by the State Water Resources Control Board, the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, or any other state or regulatory agency. 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. 97-101 § 2: prior code § 13.16.020) 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(2), 8-7-2012)  
Article V. - Rates and Charges 
 
13.16.580 - Rates and charges established—Minimum monthly sewer service charge. 
A.  The following rates and compensation set out in this article are fixed and established as the rates to be charged and collected by the city's sewer department for sewer service provided by the department. 
B.  Each premises connected to or required by this chapter to be connected to the sewer system shall pay a monthly sewer service charge. The monthly service charge for a single-family dwelling unit shall be determined by the council. 
C.  "Minimum monthly sewer service charge" means the minimum amount chargeable for sewer service. For any of the classifications listed in this article, the monthly service charge may be more than that authorized and posted as a result of this article, when it is determined by the council that, because of certain facts involved, it is uneconomical for the city to supply sewer services to the user for the amount so posted. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.24.010)  
13.16.590 - Rates for service. 
The following rates and compensation are fixed and established as the rates to be charged and collected by the city's wastewater department: 
Type of Occupancy 	Minimum 
Monthly Charge 
October 2014 	Minimum 
Monthly Charge 
July 2015 	Minimum 
Monthly Charge 
July 2016 	Minimum 
Monthly Charge 
July 2017 	Minimum 
Monthly Charge 
July 2018 
A. Minimum rate of any premises (excluding Lifeline): 	$ 58.40 	$ 60.45 	$ 62.56 	$ 64.75 	$ 67.02 
B. Single family: 					
1. Each single-family dwelling unit, including mobile homes and apartment units 	$ 58.40 	$ 60.45 	$ 62.56 	$ 64.75 	$ 67.02 
2. Lifeline service for qualified low income single family residence 	$ 46.72 	$ 48.36 	$ 50.05 	$ 51.80 	$ 53.61 
C. Multiple lodging structures: 					
1. Hotel, motel, or rooming house 	$ 58.40 plus 19.39 each additional room 	$ 60.45 plus 20.07 each additional room 	$ 62.56 plus 20.77 each additional room 	$ 64.75 plus 21.50 each additional room 	$ 67.02 plus 22.25 each additional room 
2. Commercial trailer park 	$ 58.40 plus 19.39 each additional room 	$ 60.45 plus 20.07 each additional room 	$ 62.56 plus 20.77 each additional room 	$ 64.75 plus 21.50 each additional room 	$ 67.02 plus 22.25 each additional room 
D. Premises of commercial owners: 					
1. Beauty shops 	$ 87.60 	$ 90.68 	$ 93.84 	$ 97.13 	$100.53 
2. Food markets 					
 a. Less than 4,000 sq ft 	$ 58.40 	$ 60.45 	$ 62.56 	$ 64.75 	$ 67.02 
 b. More than 4,000 sq ft but not greater than 16,000 sq ft 	$116.80 	$120.90 	$125.12 	$129.50 	$134.04 
 c. Greater than 16,000 sq ft 	Determined by city engineer 	Determined by city engineer 	Determined by city engineer 	Determined by city engineer 	Determined by city engineer 
3. Bakery 	$116.80 	$120.90 	$125.12 	$129.50 	$134.04 
4. Medical or dental office 	$116.80 	$120.90 	$125.12 	$129.50 	$134.04 
5. Restaurants or other food service establishments 	$116.80 	$120.90 	$125.12 	$129.50 	$134.04 
6. Restaurants or other food-service establishments serving only one meal period per day (e.g. 6:30 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.; 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.; 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. 	$ 58.40 	$ 60.45 	$ 62.56 	$ 64.75 	$ 67.02 
7. Fast food franchise 	$584.00 	$604.50 	$625.60 	$647.50 	$670.20 
8. Beer or on-sale liquor establishment 	$116.80 	$120.90 	$125.12 	$129.50 	$134.04 
9. Gasoline service station within 300 yards of 1-5 and with 12-hour operation 	$116.80 	$120.90 	$125.12 	$129.50 	$134.04 
10. Gasoline service station with car wash (per stall) 	$ 58.40 	$ 60.45 	$ 62.56 	$ 64.75 	$ 67.02 
11. Gasoline service station with holding tank disposal service (per tank) 	$ 58.40 	$ 60.45 	$ 62.56 	$ 64.75 	$ 67.02 
12. Gasoline station—all others 	$ 58.40 	$ 60.45 	$ 62.56 	$ 64.75 	$ 67.02 
13. Car wash (per stall) 	$ 58.40 	$ 60.45 	$ 62.56 	$ 64.75 	$ 67.02 
14. Theater 	$116.80 	$120.90 	$125.12 	$129.50 	$134.04 
15. Retail store or small commercial establishment with water closet for use of employee only (including professional office, drug stores, retail stores without fountain or lunch counter, feed store, pet shops, barbershops, automobile repair, light fabrication) 	$58.40 	$60.45 	$62.56 	$64.75 	$67.02 
16. Any other premises of a commercial owner 	$ 58.40 	$ 60.45 	$ 62.56 	$ 64.75 	$ 67.02 
17. Veterinary hospitals 	$ 87.60 	$ 90.68 	$ 93.84 	$ 97.13 	$100.53 
E. Commercial cleaners 					
1. Laundromat 	Determined by city engineer 	Determined by city engineer 	Determined by city engineer 	Determined by city engineer 	Determined by city engineer 
2. Dry cleaners 	Determined by city engineer 	Determined by city engineer 	Determined by city engineer 	Determined by city engineer 	Determined by city engineer 
F. Premises of institutional owners: 					
1. Church 	$ 58.40 	$ 60.45 	$ 62.56 	$ 64.75 	$ 67.02 
2. Government or civic office 	$ 58.40 	$ 60.45 	$ 62.56 	$ 64.75 	$ 67.02 
3. Schools* (per 100 people) 					
 a. High school 	$217.31 per 100 	$224.93 per 100 	$232.79 per 100 	$240.93 per 100 	$249.38 per 100 
 b. Intermediate school 	$190.38 per 100 	$197.07 per 100 	$203.95 per 100 	$211.09 per 100 	$218.49 per 100 
 c. Elementary school 	$118.79 per 100 	$122.96 per 100 	$127.25 per 100 	$131.70 per 100 	$136.32 per 100 
4. Hospital or convalescent home 	$ 58.40 plus $ 22.54 per bed 	$ 60.45 plus $ 23.33 per bed 	$ 62.56 plus $ 24.15 per bed 	$ 64.75 plus $ 24.99 per bed 	$ 67.02 plus $ 25.87 per bed 
5. Other institutional owner 	$ 58.40 	$ 60.45 	$ 62.56 	$ 64.75 	$ 67.02 
G. Industrial and light industrial 	fee to be based upon flow, pretreatment ordinance, # of employees and other factors, determined by city engineer 	fee to be based upon flow, pretreatment ordinance, # of employees and other factors, determined by city engineer 	fee to be based upon flow, pretreatment ordinance, # of employees and other factors, determined by city engineer 	fee to be based upon flow, pretreatment ordinance, # of employees and other factors, determined by city engineer 	fee to be based upon flow, pretreatment ordinance, # of employees and other factors, determined by city engineer 
 
(Ord. 07-186 § 1; Ord. 06-171 § 1: Ord. 04-162 §§ 1, 3, 4: Ord. 02-147 §§ 1, 3—5, Exh. A: Ord. 97-86 §§ 1, 2, 4—7: Ord. 97-81 § 1: Ord. 95-59: Ord. 94-37: prior code § 13.24.020) 
(Ord. No. 09-202, § 1, 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 14-235, § 1, 9-2-2014)  
13.16.600 - Industrial wastewater surcharge—Payment. 
An industrial surcharge shall be paid to the city annually, in lieu of a service charge following the fiscal year in which charges accrue, by those industrial wastewater dischargers whose contribution of flow, chemical oxygen demand, suspended solids or peak flow create costs in excess of their annual sewer service charge. The treatment surcharge shall be based upon the sewerage system's total maintenance, operation and capital expenditure for providing industrial wastewater collection, treatment and disposal services. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.24.030)  
13.16.610 - Industrial wastewater surcharge—Computation. 
A.  The annual industrial wastewater treatment surcharge shall be computed by the following formula: 
Surcharge = a (V) + b (COD) + c (SS) + d (M)P - T 
Where: 
Surcharge = Net annual industrial wastewater treatment in dollars. No refund will be made if a negative number results. 
V = Total annual volume of flow, in millions of gallons. 
COD = Total annual discharge of chemical oxygen demand, in thousands of pounds. 
SS = Total annual discharge of suspended solids, in thousands of pounds. 
P = Peak discharge rate over a 30-minute period occurring between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and determined by averaging a maximum of 10 substantiated peak-flow rate measurements of the accrual year in gallons-per-minute. Values of "P" less than 10 gallons-per-minute shall be considered equal to zero. 
a, b, c = Unit charge rates adopted annually and d by the city based upon the projected annual total costs for wastewater collection, treatment and disposal, in dollars per unit, as described in Section 13.16.620. 
M = A multiplying factor accounting for increased city costs due to high ratios of industrial discharger peak to average flow rates (P/A). 
A = Average discharge rate, determined by dividing "V" by the total annual hours of operation or working time for the industrial discharger, converted to gallons-per-minute. (See "M.") 
T = Total annual service charge paid on a monthly basis to the city for collection, treatment and disposal of industrial wastewaters. These charges are set by the city by resolution and are based upon the discharger's flow, organic strength and the suspended solids in the stream. The basic service charge shall apply when the COD does not exceed 500 mg/l and the suspended solids do not exceed 250 mg/l. The flow shall be determined by the metered water consumption; or, if in the opinion of the city engineer the water use as measured by the water meter does not fairly represent the total flow, he or she may require the discharger to meter and record his or her flow at the point where it discharges to a city sewer. 
B.  The quantities for yearly flows, COD, suspended solids and peak-flow rates used in the surcharge formula may be established by engineering estimation, short-term sampling, analysis and flow sampling, analysis and flow measurement extrapolated to a yearly total, or by extensive sampling, analysis and flow measurement, all as approved by the city. The city shall set the minimum requirements for sampling, analysis and flow measurement by the discharger necessary to establish quantities to be used in the above formula. 
C.  If the industrial discharger elects or is required by the city to discharge the peak rates of industrial flow during the nighttime hours between ten p.m. and eight a.m., the flow discharge shall be made approximately uniform during these ten nighttime hours. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.24.040)  
13.16.620 - Industrial wastewater surcharge—Unit charge rates— Water treatment surcharge. 
A.  Unit charge rates "a," "b," "c" and "d" in the industrial wastewater treatment surcharge set out in Section 13.16.610 shall be established annually in accordance with Section 13.16.610. 
B.  Appropriate unit charge rate parameters for flow, chemical oxygen demand and suspended solids, respectively designated "a" (in dollars per million gallons), "b" (in dollars per one thousand (1,000) pounds of COD), and "c" (in dollars per one thousand (1,000) pounds of suspended solids), shall be determined by the following method: 
1.  The total capital outlay for construction of sewerage facilities, including debt principal and interest for the past fiscal year, shall be totaled and distributed among the three parameters in accordance with the city's determination of the percentage of the total existing capital facilities of the sewerage system predominately related to each parameter. 
2.  The total operation and maintenance costs of the system shall be totaled for the past fiscal year and distributed among the three parameters in accordance with the city's determination as to which charges are predominately related to each parameter. 
3.  The sum of the capital costs, and operation and maintenance costs determined for each parameter by subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall be divided by the projected yearly total volume of wastewater and weight of COD and suspended solids to be treated by the sewerage system for the past year in order to obtain the unit charge rates "a," "b" and "c" for the system. 
B.  The unit charge rate related to peak flow rate and designated "d" (in dollars per gallon per minute of peak flow) shall be determined by the following method: 
1.  The total nondepreciated value of the historic capital investment in the system shall be divided by the total peak hydraulic capacity of all treatment facilities in the system to determine a unit cost per million gallons per day of peak flow capacity. 
2.  The unit cost determined in subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be amortized over thirty (30) years at six percent interest and converted to a gallon-per-minute basis to obtain the unit charge rate "d." 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.24.050)  
Article VI. - Enforcement—Violations and Penalties* 
* Note: This article only applies to users not subject to the industrial wastewater pretreatment ordinance. 
 
13.16.630 - Violation—Penalties. 
A.  Every person violating any provision of this chapter, (except for the industrial wastewater pretreatment ordinance), including the failure to pay any fees, charges or surcharges imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of a permit or plan approval issued pursuant thereto, is guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
B.  Each day during which any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense punishable as provided above. 
C.  The city may sue to recover any amounts due the city under the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  In the event of such violation, the city shall petition the superior court to impose, assess and recover such sums. 
(Ord. 97-101 § 3: prior code § 13.28.010)  
13.16.640 - Abatement of violations—Required. 
A.  The owner(s) of property(ies) violating any provision(s) of this chapter shall immediately cause such violation(s) to cease. 
B.  Any construction, reconstruction or repair of facilities required to eliminate such violation(s) shall be completed within sixty (60) calendar days of written notice that such violation(s) exists. These sixty (60) calendar days may be extended with the number of days of inclement weather experienced since the beginning of such sixty (60) day period which shall be three days following the day that the city mails such written notice, first class mail, at the Central Valley, California, post office. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.28.020)  
13.16.650 - Abatement of violations—Procedure. 
Abatement procedure is as follows: 
A.  Identify violations of this chapter; 
B.  Provide written notification of such violations; 
C.  Meet with owners of property, or their representatives, on the site, one time, to discuss the exact locations of the observed violations. On the site, issue a permit for the necessary construction, reconstruction or repair. There will be no charge for a permit for repair of facilities previously accepted by the city that are the subject of the written notice of violations; 
D.  Inspect the completed construction, reconstruction or repair. Re-smoke-test the repairs as schedule permits. Make any requested or additional site visits or reinspections. May levy nominal fee for required reinspections beyond initial two reinspections. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.28.030)  
13.16.660 - Failure to cease violations—Sanctions. 
Failure to cease such violation(s) shall cause the city to proceed with any or all sanctions described in other sections of this chapter. 
(Amended during 1998 codification; prior code § 13.28.040)  
Article VII. - Fats, Oils and Grease Control 
 
13.16.670 - Scope and purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to assist in limiting the introduction and accumulation of fats, oils and grease (FOG) from food service establishments (FSE) into the city's sewer collection and treatment system in order to reduce the potential for sanitary sewer overflows. This article does not apply to individual dwelling units or for any private living quarters. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.680 - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meaning hereinafter designated: 
A.  Alternative pretreatment technology includes, but is not limited to, appropriately sized devices that are used to trap, separate and hold grease from wastewater and prevent it from being discharged into the sanitary sewer collection system. 
B.  Best management practices (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of FOG to the sewer facilities. 
C.  Development services director. The individual, or his/her designee, designated by the city manager to approve the type of grease control device used in a FSE and ensure the correct installation of the device. 
D.  Effluent. Any liquid outflow from the FSE that is discharged to the sewer. 
E.  Fats, oils, and grease (FOG). Any substance such as vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a by-product of the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
F.  FOG control program. The FOG control program required by and developed pursuant to RWQCB Order No. 2006-0003-DWQ, Section D.13.vii, as established in the most current version of the city's sewer system management plan. 
G.  FOG control program manager. The wastewater treatment plant superintendent, or his/her designee, designated by the city manager to administer the FOG control program. The FOG control program manager is responsible for all determinations of compliance with the program in regard to the correct use of best management practices (BMP) and operation of grease control devices. 
H.  Food service establishment (FSE). Facilities defined in California Retail Food Code (CRFC), and any establishment engaged primarily in activities of preparing, serving, manufacturing, packaging or otherwise making available food for consumption by the public (e.g., restaurants, commercial kitchens, caterers, hotels, schools, hospitals, prisons, correctional facilities, care institutions, etc.) which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed by a Type I or Type II hood, as defined in CRFC. 
I.  Food grinder. Any device installed in the plumbing or sewer system for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation by-products for the purpose of disposing it in the sewer system. 
J.  Grease control device. Any grease interceptor, grease trap or other mechanism, device, or process, which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap or collect or treat FOG prior to it being discharged into the sewer system. "Grease control device" may also include any other proven method to reduce FOG subject to the approval of the development services director. 
K.  Grease interceptor. A multi-compartment structure or device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located underground in outside areas between the FSE and the connection to the sewer system for the purpose of removing and preventing fats, oils and grease from entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices retain grease-containing flow long enough so that grease and some solids can rise to the water surface, most of the solids settle to the bottom, and clarified water can eventually be discharged to the sanitary sewer. 
L.  Grease trap. A device used to serve from one to four plumbing fixtures for separating and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer system. 
M.  Manifest. That receipt which is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing recyclable wastes or liquid FOG wastes as required by this article. 
N.  Monitoring/sampling facilities. Structure(s) provided at the FSE's expense for the city or FSE to collect a representative wastewater sample, measure and record wastewater constituent mass and concentrations, or provide access to plug or terminate the discharge. 
O.  Remodeling. A physical or operational change causing generation of the amount of FOG that exceeds the current amount of FOG discharged to the sewer system in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for sanitary sewer overflows (SSO) to occur; or to a FSE that requires a building permit and involves any one or combination of the following: (1) Under slab plumbing in the food processing area, (2) a thirty (30%) percent increase in the net public seating area, (3) a thirty (30%) percent increase in the size of the kitchen area, or (4) any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment. 
P.  Sanitary sewer overflow (SSO). Any overflow, spill, release, discharge or diversion of untreated or partially treated wastewater from a sanitary sewer system. SSO's often contain high levels of suspended solids, pathogenic organisms, toxic pollutants, nutrients, oil, and grease. SSO's pollute surface and ground waters, threaten public health, adversely affect aquatic life, and impair the recreational use of surface waters. 
Q.  Sewer facility or system. Any devices or systems belonging to the city used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, reclamation, reuse, transportation, or disposal of wastewater or sludge. 
R.  Sewer lateral. That portion of the sanitary sewer line conveying wastewater from the building to the city's sewer system. The sewer lateral is owned and maintained by the property owner. 
S.  Twenty-five (25%) percent rule. Requirement for grease control devices to be maintained such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed twenty-five (25%) percent of the total depth of the grease control device. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available hydraulic volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG discharged to the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.690 - FOG program notice. 
All new and existing FSE's shall be issued a FOG program notice by the FOG control program manager. The notice shall contain the current FOG control program rules and regulations. The FSE is required to comply with all of the applicable rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.700 - Food service establishment discharge prohibitions. 
All FSE's are prohibited from any of the following: 
A.  The discharge of wastes containing FOG of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than three hundred (300) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
B.  The discharge into the sewer system of FOG that may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages in the sewer system or at the sewer system lateral except as provided herein. 
C.  Operation of food grinders in the plumbing system. 
D.  The introduction of any additives into a FSE's wastewater system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG, unless a specific written authorization from the FOG control program manager is obtained. 
E.  The disposal of cooking oil into drainage pipes. All waste cooking oils shall be collected, stored and labeled properly in receptacles such as barrels or drums for recycling or other acceptable methods of disposal. 
F.  The use of biological additives for grease remediation or as a supplement to interceptor maintenance, without prior authorization from the FOG control program manager. 
G.  The discharge of waste from toilets, urinals, washbasins, and other fixtures containing fecal materials to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service. 
H.  The discharge to the sewer system of any waste, including FOG and solid materials, removed from the grease control device. Grease removed from grease interceptors shall be disposed of as necessary as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for grease interceptors pursuant to Section 13.16.780 of this article. Grease removed from grease traps shall be disposed of as necessary as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for grease traps pursuant to Section 13.16.800 of this article. 
I.  No FSE shall increase the use of water or in any other manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a way of achieving compliance with this article and the FOG control program. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.710 - Requirement to install grease interceptor. 
A.  All new FSE's or FSE's remodeled pursuant to Section 13.16.680(O) of this article shall have a grease interceptor that complies with the requirements of this article unless a waiver or variance is granted pursuant to Section 13.16.720 of this article. Flows from sinks and drains, such as floor drains, floor sinks and other fixtures, or equipment that discharges wastewater containing excessive amounts of FOG, must be connected to a grease interceptor. Pipes draining to a grease interceptor shall be labeled "GW" (grease waste). 
B.  Facilities other than FSE's which introduce FOG into the sewer system in quantities that can affect line stoppage or hinder sewage treatment may be required to install a grease interceptor as determined by the FOG control program manager 
C.  A grease control device shall not be required for individual dwelling units or for any private living quarters. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.720 - Exceptions to requirement for grease control device. 
A FSE may submit an application, on a form prescribed by the city, for a waiver or variance from the requirement for a grease control device to the development services director as provided in this section. Upon determination by the development services director, in consultation with the FOG control program manager, that reasons are sufficient to justify a waiver or variance, the permit will be issued, issued with conditions, or denied. The FSE may appeal the development services director's decision to the city council as provided in Section 13.16.720(F) of this article. 
A.  Conditional Waiver for Existing FSE's. FSE's that existed on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article that do not have a grease control device installed will be issued a conditional waiver. The conditional waiver will specify requirements with which the FSE must comply in order to operate without a grease control device. The conditional waiver may be revoked at any time pursuant to Section 13.16.720(E) of this article. 
B.  Conditional Waiver Due to Business Type. A new or remodeled FSE may submit an application for a conditional waiver from the requirement for a grease control device to the development services director for the following business types. A conditional waiver may be revoked at any time pursuant to Section 13.16.720(E) of this article. Although a waiver may be granted, a newly constructed FSE may be required to provide space and plumbing segregation for future installation of a grease interceptor or grease trap. 
1.  Establishments serving only beverages. 
2.  Establishments engaged in only reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready-to-eat food products without any baking or other food preparation. 
3.  Other establishments that can demonstrate that food preparation and service do not generate fats, oils and grease in a quantity sufficient to require a grease interceptor due to menu and number of meals served, or a combination of the two. 
C.  Variance from Grease Interceptor Requirements Due to Installation Restrictions. 
1.  If a new or remodeled FSE can demonstrate that installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible due to one or both of the following conditions, the development services director, taking into consideration Shasta County Department of Environmental Health standards, may authorize the installation of an indoor grease trap or other alternative pretreatment technology. A variance may be revoked at any time pursuant to Section 13.16.720(E) of this article. Although a variance may be granted, a newly constructed FSE may be required to provide space and plumbing segregation for future installation of a grease interceptor or grease trap. 
a.  Adequate physical space cannot be provided at the site for installation and/or maintenance of a grease interceptor. 
b.  Adequate slope cannot be provided for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and the proposed location of the grease interceptor or from the interceptor to the sewer. 
2.  If a FSE believes the installation of a grease interceptor is infeasible because of documented space constraints, the variance request shall contain the following information: 
a.  Location of sewer main and any easements in relation to available exterior space outside the building; 
b.  Existing building and site plumbing line plan that uses common plumbing for all services at the site. 
D.  Terms and Conditions of Variance or Waiver. A waiver or variance shall contain the terms and conditions that serve as the basis for its issuance. The waiver or variance shall be valid as long as the FSE remains in compliance with the terms and conditions, or until any expiration date specified in the waiver or variance. 
E.  Revocation of Waiver or Variance. 
1.  The development services director or FOG control program manager may periodically review FSE compliance with the waiver or variance requirements. A waiver or variance may be revoked by the development services director or FOG control program manager at any time for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Quantity of FOG discharge as measured or as indicated by the size of FSE's based on seating capacity, number of meals served, menu, water usage, amount of on-site consumption of prepared food and other conditions have changed since the granting of said waiver or variance such that the FSE is contributing to FOG discharges. 
b.  Identification of the FSE as a significant contributor of FOG into the sewer system, which is based on inspection or sampling of the FOG discharged from the FSE's sewer lateral to the sewer system. 
c.  Failure to adequately implement and comply with kitchen best management practice (BMP) requirements. 
d.  Change in sewer lateral size, grade, or condition based on visual information. 
e.  Changes in operations that significantly affect FOG discharge. 
f.  Failure to comply with any of the conditions set forth in the waiver or variance. 
g.  Any other condition deemed reasonably related to the generation of FOG discharges by the FOG control program manager. 
2.  If a waiver or variance is revoked, grease interceptors or grease traps shall be installed as directed. If a waiver or variance is revoked, the FSE shall submit the plans identified in SLMC Section 13.16.740 to the city within ninety (90) days of receipt of the written notice of revocation. Any required interceptor, grease trap or alternative pretreatment technology shall be installed within one hundred eighty (180) days of issuance of a building permit by the city. 
F.  Appeal. A FSE which disagrees with the development services director's or FOG control program manager's decision to issue, issue with conditions, deny or revoke a waiver or variance permit may appeal such decision to the city council if the appeal is submitted in writing to the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days following receipt of the development services director's or FOG control program manager's written decision. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.730 - Monitoring/sampling facilities requirements. 
A.  The city may require a FSE to construct and maintain in proper operating condition at a FSE's sole expense, flow monitoring, constituent monitoring and/or sampling facilities per the city's construction standards. 
B.  The location of the monitoring or metering facilities shall be subject to approval by the FOG control program manager. 
C.  FSE's shall provide, during regular business hours, immediate and safe access to the FSE's grease interceptor or grease trap monitoring and metering facilities to the FOG control program manager, development services director, Shasta County department of environmental health, or their designees. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.740 - New grease control device or monitoring/sampling facilities plan submittal requirements. 
A.  A new, remodeled, or existing FSE or other establishment required to install a grease interceptor, grease trap or monitoring/sampling facility shall submit facility site plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and other details to show the sewer locations and connections for its facility or premises to the city sewer system. The submittal shall be in a form and content acceptable to the development services director. 
The development services director shall have the authority to require any revisions to the plans as necessary to comply with all provisions of this article and the city's construction standards. The review and approval of the plans and procedures shall in no way relieve a FSE of the responsibility of modifying the facilities or procedures in the future, as necessary to meet the requirements of this article, the FOG control program or any requirements of other regulatory agencies. All submitted plans and drawings shall be prepared by a qualified professional engineer. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.750 - Existing grease interceptor/grease trap plan submittal requirements. 
An existing FSE that owned and operated a grease interceptor or grease trap prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article shall submit any available plans for the existing device within ninety (90) days of receiving a FOG program notice sent by the city. If no plans are available, the FSE shall notify the development services director so an inspection of the grease interceptor and/or grease trap can be scheduled. The purpose of the inspection shall be to provide the owner of the FSE with suggestions for operating, maintaining and possibly modifying the grease interceptor or grease trap. 
This section shall not apply to existing grease interceptors or grease traps installed pursuant to a building permit issued by the city of Shasta Lake. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.760 - Notification regarding change in operations. 
A.  The FSE shall notify the development services director in writing at least sixty (60) days prior to any facility expansion and/or remodel, or process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG discharges, or a change in the nature of the discharge. 
B.  The written notification shall state the following: 
1.  FSE name. 
2.  Name and title of the FSE's contact person or person most knowledgeable concerning the facility expansion, remodeling or process modifications. 
3.  Address and telephone number of the owner of the FSE. 
4.  Date of the proposed facility expansion, remodeling or process modifications and the reasons for the same. 
5.  Any additional information requested by the development services director or FOG control program manager for evaluation of the effect of such expansion and/or remodeling or process modifications on the FSE's FOG discharge to the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.770 - Grease interceptor design and construction standards. 
A.  Grease interceptors shall be designed and sized according to the most recently adopted California plumbing code and city of Shasta Lake construction standards. 
B.  Grease interceptors shall be constructed and installed according to the most recently adopted city of Shasta Lake construction standards. 
C.  Grease interceptors shall be installed at a location where it shall be easily accessible for inspection, cleaning and removal of intercepted grease. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.780 - Grease interceptor operation and maintenance requirements. 
All existing and new grease interceptors shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. The maintenance frequency for all FSE's with a grease interceptor shall be determined by one of the following methods: 
A.  Grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition and shall be fully pumped out and cleaned by a qualified grease hauler pursuant to Section 13.16.800 of this article at a minimum frequency of once every ninety (90) calendar days. The FOG control program manager may mandate a more frequent cleaning schedule to ensure compliance with item B. below or if it is found that FOG is accumulating in the downstream sewers. 
B.  In no event shall the combined FOG and solids accumulation exceed twenty-five (25%) percent of the total depth of the grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG. 
If the grease interceptor, at any time, contains FOG and solids accumulation that does not meet this requirement, the FSE shall be required to have the grease interceptor serviced as soon as possible, but not more than forty-eight (48) hours later, such that all FOG, sludge, and other materials are completely removed from the grease interceptor. 
C.  The FOG control program manager may approve a less frequent cleaning schedule than required in item A. above at the request of the FSE. The FSE has the burden of responsibility to demonstrate that the requested change in frequency reflects actual operation conditions based on the average FOG accumulation over time. In order to approve a less frequent cleaning schedule, the FOG control program manager must verify the FSE is in full compliance with all provisions of this article and the FOG control program. Upon determination by the FOG control program manager that the requested revision is justified, the FSE shall be notified in writing of the revised maintenance frequency. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.790 - Grease trap design and construction standards. 
A.  Grease trap sizing and installation shall conform to the most recently adopted California Plumbing Code (CPC). 
B.  The number of drainage fixture units to be connected to the grease trap shall not include floor drains, urinals, lavatories, or other fixtures not approved for connection to the grease trap per CPC requirements. 
C.  Only automatic hydromechanical grease traps shall be approved. Approved grease traps shall include the following functions: 
1.  Automatic grease skimmer or pump with programmable timer or grease level sensor. 
2.  Removable grease collection container for automatically removed grease. 
3.  Minimum ninety (90%) percent grease removal efficiency and maximum three hundred (300) milligrams per liter (mg/l) grease effluent water quality shown by independent testing. 
4.  Pre-set maximum inlet flow control. 
5.  Gas trap and ventilation piping. 
6.  Solids strainer with maximum 0.125" pass-through diameter, removable for manual cleaning. 
7.  Inlet baffle (to isolate grease layer from inlet turbulence) and outlet baffle (to prevent grease from exiting grease trap). 
8.  Thermostatically controlled emersion heater to maintain grease in liquid state. 
9.  Stainless steel construction. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.800 - Grease trap operation and maintenance requirements. 
All grease traps shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and the following requirements: 
A.  Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operational condition by removing accumulated grease on an as-needed basis, or the frequency specified by the manufacturer, but no less than on a weekly basis. 
B.  Grease traps shall be maintained free of all food residues and any FOG waste removed during the cleaning and scraping process. 
C.  Grease traps shall be inspected periodically by the FSE, but in no event less than once a month, to check for leaking seams and pipes, and for effective operation of the baffles and flow-regulating device. Grease traps and their baffles shall be maintained free of all caked-on FOG and waste. Removable baffles shall be removed and cleaned during the maintenance process. 
D.  Dishwashing machines and food disposal/grinding units shall not be connected to or discharged into any grease trap. FSEs operating with grease traps only must implement a warm wash pre-rinse procedure, in which all cookware, plates, and utensils are pre-rinsed without detergent in a pre-rinse sink that is connected to the grease trap, prior to placing in a dishwasher that is not connected to a grease interceptor or grease trap. 
E.  Wastewater in excess of one hundred forty degrees (140°) F/sixty degrees (60° C) shall not be discharged into a grease trap. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.810 - Grease disposal and grease hauling requirements. 
A.  Grease accumulated in grease interceptors shall not be removed by FSE employees. Accumulated grease shall be removed by grease haulers licensed by the California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA) in accordance with the California Food and Agricultural Code, or other qualified individual as determined by the FOG control program manager. 
B.  Grease accumulated in grease traps shall be periodically removed by FSE employees and stored in secure grease recycling bins. Grease stored in grease recycling bins cannot be removed from the FSE premises by FSE employees, and must be collected by grease haulers licensed by the California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA) in accordance with the California Food and Agricultural Code, or other qualified individual as determined by the FOG control program manager. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.820 - Kitchen best management practices (BMPs). 
All FSEs shall be required, at a minimum to implement and comply with the following Kitchen BMPs, whenever applicable: 
A.  Undiluted cooking oil, grease, or meat fat shall be dumped only into a separate recycling container which is used specifically to store these wastes for future removal by qualified grease haulers pursuant to Section 13.16.810 of this article. 
B.  For FSEs operating with grease traps only, a warm water pre-rinse procedure shall be followed. For FSEs operating under a waiver or variance pursuant to Section 13.16.720 of this article, all cookware that has been used where FOG is involved shall be thoroughly dry wiped before being rinsed or washed to remove as much FOG as possible. 
C.  Drain screens shall be installed on all drainage pipes in food preparation areas. 
D.  All waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored properly in recycling receptacles such as barrels or drums. Such recycling receptacles shall be maintained properly to ensure that they do not leak. Qualified grease haulers and a licensed grease recycling or rendering facility must be used to dispose of waste cooking oil, in accordance with Section 13.16.810 of this article. 
E.  All garbage and food waste shall be disposed of directly into trash bins or containers, and not in sinks, garbage disposals or food grinders. Double-bagging food wastes that have the potential to leak in trash bins is highly recommended. 
F.  Exhaust filters shall be maintained in good operating condition utilizing frequent cleaning practices. The sewage generated from cleaning the exhaust filter shall be disposed of properly. 
G.  Kitchen BMP signs, posters, or similar information in appropriate language(s) shall be prominently displayed in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times. 
H.  Absorbent materials shall be placed under the fryers or other areas where FOG typically or frequently drips or spills. 
I.  Covered conveyance devices shall be used in order to transport FOG without spilling. 
J.  FOG containers shall be emptied or removed by qualified grease haulers pursuant to Section 13.16.810 of this article in a manner to avoid accidental or incidental spills. 
K.  "Spill kits" (e.g., absorbent materials) shall be created and shall be well marked and readily accessible in the event a spill does occur. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.830 - Food service establishment employee training. 
Employees of all FSEs existing as of the effective date of this article shall be trained to implement kitchen FOG disposal BMPs within ninety (90) calendar days of the effective date of this article. New employees shall be trained within one week of employment. All employees shall receive refresher training on an annual basis. Training shall be documented and employee signatures retained indicating each employee's attendance and understanding of the practices reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time by the FOG control program manager, Shasta County Department of Environmental Health, or their designees. Training shall be completed and documented in the following areas: 
A.  Overview of the requirements and recommendations of this article. Employees must have a general knowledge of the function of a grease trap and/or interceptor. Training shall also include instruction on the physical location(s) of the FOG removal device(s), their capacities and the drains and fixtures that are connected to them. 
B.  How to "dry wipe/scrape" pots, pans, dishware and work areas before washing to remove FOG. 
C.  How to properly dispose of garbage, food waste and solids in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors. 
D.  The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations where FOG may be spilled or accumulated. 
E.  How to properly dispose of FOG from cooking equipment into a FOG receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.840 - Recordkeeping requirements. 
The following records shall be maintained for no less than five years and the FSE shall make them available to the FOG control program manager, Shasta County Department of Environmental Health, or their designees: 
A.  For FSEs with grease traps or grease interceptors, the following must be documented: 
1.  Dates cleaned. 
2.  Dates and nature of maintenance or repair activities. 
3.  Copies of records and manifests of grease hauling activities, which will include: 
a.  Name of hauling company. 
b.  Name and signature of operator performing the pump-out/hauling. 
c.  Documentation of full pump-out with volume of water and FOG removed from grease interceptors. 
d.  Documentation of volume of stored grease hauled from grease traps. 
e.  Documentation of the level of floating FOG and settled solids for grease interceptors (to determine if volume exceeds twenty-five (25%) percent of the total depth of the grease removal equipment). 
f.  Documentation if repairs to the grease interceptor or trap are required. 
g.  Identification of the facility where the qualified waste hauler is planning to dispose of the waste. 
4.  Records of sampling data and/or sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the grease interceptors. 
B.  Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the lateral or sewer system. Receipts shall be retained for sewer lateral cleaning or inspection services provided by contractors. 
C.  A record or logbook of kitchen BMPs being implemented including employee training as described in Section 13.16.830 of this article. 
D.  Any other information deemed appropriate by the FOG control program manager to ensure compliance with this article and the FOG control program. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.850 - Compliance inspections. 
The FOG control program manager, development services director, Shasta County Department of Environmental Health, or their designees may conduct periodic inspections of FSEs to determine compliance with this article. Inspections may be unannounced, and will occur during regular business hours. FSE operators shall make all FOG disposal records maintained per Section 13.16.840 of this article available to the individual or agency completing the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.860 - Monitoring and reporting of conditions requirements. 
A.  The FOG control program manager may require periodic reporting of the status of implementation of kitchen BMPs in accordance with the FOG control program. 
B.  If previous visual monitoring completed by the city has revealed an accumulation of FOG, the FOG control program manager may require additional visual monitoring at the sole expense of the FSE to observe the actual conditions of the FSE's sewer lateral and sewer lines downstream. 
C.  The FOG control program manager may require reports for self-monitoring of FOG characteristics of the FSE needed for determining compliance with any conditions or requirements of this article and the FOG control program. The FOG control program manager shall approve monitoring reports of the analyses of sewage constituents and FOG characteristics. Failure by the FSE to perform any required monitoring or to submit monitoring reports required by the FOG control program manager constitutes a violation of this article. The FSE shall be responsible for any and all expenses of the city in undertaking such monitoring analyses and preparation of reports required of the FSE. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.870 - Illicit discharge notification requirements. 
A.  In the event a FSE is unable to comply with this article and/or the FOG control program due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error, or if the FSE has reasonable belief that its discharge will violate this article and/or the FOG control program, the FSE or its representative shall immediately notify the FOG control program manager by telephone at the telephone number listed on the FOG program notice. 
B.  Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the FOG control program manager no later than five working days from the date of the incident at the address listed in the FOG program notice. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent a recurrence. 
C.  Such notification shall not relieve the FSE of any expense, loss, damage or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage or otherwise arising out of a violation of this article or any other section of the Shasta Lake Municipal Code (SLMC) or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
13.16.880 - Enforcement of the FOG control program. 
Any FSE found to be in violation of any of the requirements set forth in this article is guilty of an infraction and subject to penalty per SLMC Section 13.16.630. If necessary, any FSE shall correct any conditions resulting in the violation per SLMC Section 13.16.640. The FOG control program manager will provide written notification of violations and meet with owners of property or their representatives on the site to discuss the exact locations of the observed violations per SLMC Section 13.16.650. 
Violations occurring at FSEs which are operating under a waiver or variance may result in a requirement to install a grease interceptor or grease trap. Violations resulting from the operation of existing grease traps or grease interceptors may result in a compliance schedule for modifications to those devices, or required implementation of more stringent maintenance requirements. 
The city building division shall issue a building permit for any necessary improvements and conduct an inspection to ensure that the proper corrections have been made. 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(3), 8-7-2012)  
Chapter 13.20 - ELECTRICITY SERVICE SYSTEM[3] 
Sections: 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-248, § 2.2, adopted March 15, 2016, amended former Chapter 13.20, Arts. I—IV, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the prior code, §§ 11.04.010—030, 11.08.010—11.08.300, 11.12.010—11.12.040, 11.12.060—11.12.090, 11.13.010—11.13.060; Ord. No. 96-67; amendments of the 1998 codification; Ord. No. 00-123, § 2; Ord. No. 00-125, § 1; Ord. No. 05-168; Ord. No. 06-180, § 1; Ord. No. 08-196, § 2; Ord. No. 12-223, § 1, 2-21-2012. 
 
Article I. - Definitions and General Provisions 
 
13.20.010 - Purpose of provisions. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide the basis for the city of Shasta Lake ("city"), through its electric department, to own and operate an electric utility to provide electric power generation, transmission, and distribution services to its electric utility customers. 
(Ord. No. 16-248, § 2.2, 3-15-2016)  
Article II. - Service Regulations and Policies 
 
13.20.020 - Scope of provisions. 
(a)  Adoption of Rules and Regulations by Resolution. The city council may, by resolution, from time to time as it deems necessary for the administration or implementation of the intent of this chapter, review, revise, adopt and/or promulgate new or amended rules and regulations concerning the operation or administration of the electric utility. A copy of the current rules and regulations adopted by the city shall be kept open for inspection at the office of the city and shall also be posted online on the city's website. 
(b)  Adoption of Rate Schedules by Resolution. The city council may, by resolution, from time to time as it deems necessary for the administration or implementation of the intent of this chapter, review, revise, adopt and/or promulgate new or amended electric utility rate schedules. A copy of the current schedule of rates and charges adopted by the city shall be kept open for inspection at the office of the city and shall also be posted online on the city's website. 
(c)  Objective and Adherence to State and Federal Law. In adopting or amending rates, rules and regulations pursuant to this chapter, the city council shall adhere to and obtain all necessary permission from state and federal entities with regulatory authority over the city. It will be the primary objective of the city in all decisions under this chapter to make electrical services available to the ultimate consumer at the lowest possible rates consistent with sound business principles and in conformance with state and federal law. 
(d)  Responsible Parties. By receiving and accepting electric utility services, electric utility customers of the electric utility shall be considered to have given express consent to, and be bound by, the provisions of this chapter and any rules and regulations or rate schedules adopted or amended pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  Incorporation by Reference. The rules and regulations, rate schedules, or any amendments or revisions thereto which may subsequently be adopted by the city council by resolution, shall be incorporated by reference into this chapter and shall have the same force and effect as if set forth in full in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-248, § 2.2, 3-15-2016)  
13.20.030 - Resolution of conflicting provisions. 
In case of conflict between any provisions of a rate schedule, and any rules and regulations provisions, the rate schedule shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 16-248, § 2.2, 3-15-2016)  
13.20.040 - Establishing electrical rates. 
A.  In the establishment of rates pursuant to this chapter, the city may provide different rates for various categories of use, quantities of power used, and types of service furnished. 
B.  Any electrical utility rates set shall be sufficient to discharge and pay all the costs of operation and maintenance of the electric utility department and electric utility system, including reasonable provision for general administrative services, and to discharge and pay all costs in connection with additions and betterments to the electrical utility system, and to provide for the amortization of all depreciation and obsolescence within the system, and to discharge and pay any and all bonded indebtedness incurred in the construction or extension of the electrical utility system, including principal and interest thereof, and to establish and maintain a reasonable reserve fund to provide for unforeseen contingencies and the acquisition of facilities in newly annexed areas as well as extensions and betterments of the existing system. Electrical utility rates shall not be charged in excess of the amounts necessary to raise the costs, expenses and appropriate reserves set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 16-248, § 2.2, 3-15-2016)  
Article III. - Enforcement. 
 
13.20.050 - Enforcement. 
The primary responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the rates, rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be vested in the city manager. The city manager may authorize city field inspectors, code enforcement officers, or other employees of the city to act as agents of the city with the authority to inspect, issue notices of violation, and write citations for any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-248, § 2.2, 3-15-2016)  
13.20.060 - Violation of this chapter or rules and regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter or the rates, rules and regulations adopted therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 16-248, § 2.2, 3-15-2016)  
13.20.070 - Costs of enforcement. 
In any civil, criminal, or administrative hearing, appeal or action commenced by the city under this chapter, the city shall be entitled to recover from the defendant of such action reasonable attorney's fees, costs of suit and/or any other costs of enforcement, including, but not limited to, inspection and/or repair costs. 
(Ord. No. 16-248, § 2.2, 3-15-2016)  
Chapter 13.24 - PLAN SUBMITTAL AND REVIEW PROCEDURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, adopted Sept. 4, 2012, repealed former Ch. 13.24, §§ 13.24.010—13.24.970, and enacted a new Ch. 13.24 as set out herein. Former Ch. 13.24 pertained to standard specifications for utility design and construction and derived from prior code, §§ 17.04.010—17.04.040, 17.08.010—17.08.040, 17.12.010—17.12.030, 17.16.010—17.16.100, 17.20.010—17.20.400, 17.24.010—17.24.310, 17.28.010, 17.32.010—17.32.030; amended during the 1998 codification and Ord. No. 07-182, § 2. 
 
13.24.050 - Plan submittal and approval requirements. 
No utility improvements shall be constructed within the city until satisfactory plans which conform to the design standards of the city have been submitted and approved for construction, and all associated requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
13.24.070 - Standard procedure for plan review. 
A.  At the time of first submittal of utilities improvement plans for plan review, a deposit as set forth by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city by the developer or owner. 
B.  Under no circumstances shall refunds of the above fees be made. 
C.  Six sets of blue-line prints of the proposed utility improvements and six copies of the final tract or parcel map (if only one utility is involved, four sets/copies), and one copy of the subdivider's engineer's cost estimate shall be submitted, together with the improvement plan review fee for the first plan check. Plans illustrating an incomplete design do not meet minimum standards and will not be accepted for review. Also required will be a study of the tributary drainage distribution area above or beyond the subject property, and the criteria and calculations used in determining the size of the pipelines. 
D.  Staff shall then analyze the plans and materials as submitted, and prepare and send a copy of comments to the developer's engineer. 
E.  The city shall keep a cost accounting of all plan review services provided by the city. The developer shall submit the additional amount due, if any, to the city prior to final approval of the improvement plans. 
F.  When improvement plans and are ready for approval, the project engineer will prepare a final cost estimate, submit properly executed easement deeds for checking, and pay a deposit for inspection fees as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
G.  The city shall keep a cost accounting of all improvement inspection services provided by the city. The developer shall submit the additional amount due, if any, to the city prior to final inspection of the completed improvements. 
H.  Staff will then provide the developer with the following: 
1.  Agreement for construction of water facilities (in triplicate); 
2.  Agreement for construction of sewer facilities (in triplicate); 
3.  Agreement for a plan of reimbursement, if any; 
4.  A letter requesting that there be no changes in the final map; 
5.  Request for a faithful performance bond (in triplicate) equivalent to one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost, including contingencies of construction; 
6.  Request for a labor and material bond equivalent to one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost (in triplicate). 
I.  Upon receipt and checking of all documents, bonds, fees and encroachment permits, the manager will sign the original plans and the developer's engineer will be notified that the plans are signed and available. The developer's engineer will then provide the city with three sets of blue-line prints (if only one utility, two sets of prints). 
(Ord. No. 12-228, § 1, 9-4-2012)  
Chapter 13.28 - INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the city of Shasta Lake (city) and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code Section 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are: 
A.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
B.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
C.  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
D.  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
E.  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
F.  To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. Except as hereinafter provided, all persons discharging industrial wastewater to the city's sewer collection system shall be governed by the city enforcement response plan procedures. Said plan may be adopted by resolution of the city council, and amended from time to time as necessary 
(Ord. 97-100 § 1.1) 
 
13.28.020 - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city manager may be delegated by the city manager to others. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 1.2)  
13.28.030 - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD—biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR—Code of Federal Regulations 
COD—chemical oxygen demand 
EPA—U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
gpd—gallons per day 
mg/l—milligrams per liter 
NPDES—National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW—publicly owned treatment works 
RCRA—Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC—standard industrial classification 
TSS—total suspended solids 
U.S.C.—United States Code 
(Ord. 97-100 § 1.3)  
13.28.040 - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
"Act" or "the Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq. 
"Approval authority" means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Redding. 
"Authorized representative of the user" means: 
1.  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five (25) million dollars, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
2.  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
3.  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
4.  The individuals described in paragraphs 1 through 3, above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
"Biochemical oxygen demand" or "BOD" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
"Categorical pretreatment standard" or "categorical standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471. 
"City" means the city of Shasta Lake. 
"City manager" means the person designated by the city who assists in the supervision of the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or a duly authorized representative. 
"Enforcement response plan" means the city's plan and procedures for implementing and enforcing the industrial waste ordinance. 
"Environmental Protection Agency" or "EPA" means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
"Existing source" means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
"Grab sample" means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
"Indirect discharge" or "discharge" means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
"Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit" means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
"Interference" means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
"Medical waste" means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
"New source" means: 
1.  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
2.  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subection (1)(b) or (c) of this section but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
3.  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
i.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment, or 
ii.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
"Noncontact cooling water" means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
"Pass through" means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
"Person" means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
"pH" means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
"Pollutant" means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
"Pretreatment" means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
"Pretreatment requirements" means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
"Pretreatment standards" or "standards" means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
"Prohibited discharge standards" or "prohibited discharges" means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. These prohibitions appear in Section 13.28.050 of this chapter. 
"Publicly owned treatment works" or "POTW" means a "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292) which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
"Septic tank waste" means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
"Sewage" means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
"Significant industrial user" means: 
1.  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
2.  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
3.  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this section has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
"Slug load or slug" means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section 13.28.050 of this chapter. 
"Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code" means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
"Stormwater" means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
"Suspended solids" means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
"User" or "industrial user" means a source of indirect discharge. 
"Wastewater" means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
"Wastewater treatment plant" or "treatment plant" means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 1.4)  
Article II. - General Sewer Use Requirements 
 
13.28.050 - Prohibited discharge standards. 
A.  General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
B.  Specific Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
1.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees F (sixty (60) degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
2.  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 11, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
3.  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference; 
4.  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
5.  Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees F (forty (40) degrees C); 
6.  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
7.  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
8.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city manager in accordance with Section 13.28.130 of this chapter; 
9.  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
10.  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit; 
11.  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
12.  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the city manager; 
13.  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
14.  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city manager in a wastewater discharge permit; 
15.  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
16.  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
17.  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than three hundred (300) mg/l; 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 2.1)  
13.28.060 - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are incorporated. 
A.  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the city manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
B.  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the city manager shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
C.  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
D.  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 2.2)  
13.28.070 - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 2.3)  
13.28.080 - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The city manager may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 2.4)  
Article III. - Pretreatment of Wastewater 
 
13.28.090 - Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in Section 13.28.050 of this chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the city manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the city manager before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 3.1)  
13.28.100 - Additional pretreatment measures. 
A.  Whenever deemed necessary, the city manager may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The city manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
C.  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the city manager and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. Regulations pertaining to food service establishments are included in SLMC Chapter 13.16, Article VII (Fats, Oils and Grease Control). 
D.  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 3.2) 
(Ord. No. 12-226, § 1(1), 8-7-2012)  
Article IV. - Wastewater Discharge Permit Application 
 
13.28.110 - Wastewater analysis. 
When requested by the city manager, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within ten days of the request. The city manager is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 4.1)  
13.28.120 - Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
A.  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the city manager, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to Section 13.28.130 of this chapter may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
B.  The city manager may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
C.  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Articles IX through XI of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 4.2)  
13.28.130 - Wastewater discharge permitting—Existing connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within thirty (30) days after said date, apply to the city manager for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with Section 13.28.150 of this chapter, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after sixty (60) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the city manager. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 4.3)  
13.28.140 - Wastewater discharge permitting—New connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with Section 13.28.150 of this chapter, must be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 4.4)  
13.28.150 - Wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The city manager may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
A.  All information required by Section 13.28.240(B) of this chapter; 
B.  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
C.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
D.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
E.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
F.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
G.  Time and duration of discharges; and 
H.  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the city manager to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 4.5)  
13.28.160 - Application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 4.6)  
13.28.170 - Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
The city manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the city manager will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The city manager may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 4.7)  
Article V. - Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process 
 
13.28.180 - Wastewater discharge permit duration. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the city manager. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 5.1)  
13.28.190 - Wastewater discharge permit contents. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the city manager to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
A.  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
1.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
2.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with Section 13.28.220 of this chapter, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
3.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
4.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
5.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
B.  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
1.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
2.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
3.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
4.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
5.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
6.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
7.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
8.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city manager to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 5.2)  
13.28.200 - Wastewater discharge permit appeals. 
The city manager shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the city manager to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within fifteen (15) days of notice of its issuance. 
A.  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
B.  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
C.  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
D.  If the city manager fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
E.  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the appropriate court. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 5.3)  
13.28.210 - Wastewater discharge permit transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least ninety (90) days advance notice to the city manager and the city manager approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the city manager must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
A.  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
B.  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
C.  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 5.4)  
13.28.220 - Wastewater discharge permit revocation. 
The city manager may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
A.  Failure to notify the city manager of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
B.  Failure to provide prior notification to the city manager of changed conditions pursuant to Section 13.28.280 of this chapter; 
C.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
D.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
E.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
F.  Refusing to allow the city manager timely access to the facility premises and records; 
G.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
H.  Failure to pay fines; 
I.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
J.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
K.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
L.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
M.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 5.5)  
13.28.230 - Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. 
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with Section 13.28.150 of this chapter, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 5.6)  
Article VI. - Reporting Requirements 
 
13.28.240 - Baseline monitoring reports. 
A.  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the city manager a report which contains the information listed in subsection B of this section. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the city manager a report which contains the information listed in subsection B of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
B.  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
1.  Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
2.  Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
3.  Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
4.  Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
5.  Measurement of Pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 13.28.330 of this chapter. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 13.28.340 of this chapter. 
6.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a California registered civil engineer, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
7.  Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in Section 13.28.250 of this chapter. 
8.  Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13.28.160 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 6.1)  
13.28.250 - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by Section 13.28.240 (B)(7) of this chapter. 
A.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
B.  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
C.  The user shall submit a progress report to the city manager no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
D.  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the city manager. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 6.2)  
13.28.260 - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city manager a report containing the information described in Section 13.28.240(B)(4) through (6) of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13.28.160 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 6.3)  
13.28.270 - Periodic compliance reports. 
A.  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the city manager but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13.28.160 of this chapter. 
B.  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
C.  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city manager, using the procedures prescribed in Section 13.28.340 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
D.  The city may sample and analyze user discharge and can require the discharger to pay for any or all costs associated with city's sampling and analyzing of the waste. 
E.  The city may require the discharger to install an adequate sampling facility either within or outside the discharger's property. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 6.4)  
13.28.280 - Reports of changed conditions. 
Each user must notify the city manager of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. 
A.  The city manager may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section 13.28.150 of this chapter. 
B.  The city manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section 13.28.170 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section 13.28.210 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
C.  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty (20) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 6.5)  
13.28.290 - Reports of potential problems. 
A.  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the city manager of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
B.  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the city manager, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection A of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 6.6)  
13.28.300 - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the city manager within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city manager within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the city manager monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city manager samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 6.7)  
13.28.310 - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
A.  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under Section 13.28.280 of this chapter. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of Sections 13.28.240, 13.28.260 and 13.28.270 of this chapter. 
B.  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection A of this section, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
C.  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the city manager, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
D.  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
E.  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 6.8)  
13.28.320 - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 6.9)  
13.28.330 - Sample collection. 
A.  Except as indicated in subsection B of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
B.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 6.10)  
13.28.340 - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 6.11)  
13.28.350 - Record keeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city manager. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 6.12)  
Article VII. - Compliance Monitoring 
 
13.28.360 - Right of entry—Inspection and sampling. 
The city manager shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the city manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
A.  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city manager will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
B.  The city manager shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
C.  The city manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated every six months to ensure their accuracy. 
D.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
E.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 7.1)  
13.28.370 - Search warrants. 
If the city manager has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Shasta County sheriff's department, in Shasta County. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 7.2)  
Article VIII. - Confidential Information 
 
13.28.380 - Procedure to protect trade secrets. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the city manager's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city manager, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 8)  
Article IX. - Administrative Enforcement Remedies 
 
13.28.390 - Notification of violation. 
When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the city manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city manager to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 9.1)  
13.28.400 - Consent orders. 
The city manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 13.28.420 and 13.28.450 of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 9.2)  
13.28.410 - Show cause hearing. 
The city manager may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the city manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 9.3)  
13.28.420 - Compliance orders. 
When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 9.4)  
13.28.430 - Cease and desist orders. 
When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city manager may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
A.  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
B.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 9.5)  
13.28.440 - Administrative fines. 
A.  When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may fine such user in an amount not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per day per violation. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
B.  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
C.  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city manager to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within fifteen (15) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the city manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. 
The city manager may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
D.  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 9.6)  
13.28.450 - Emergency suspensions. 
The city manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city manager may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
A.  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city manager may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in Section 13.28.460 of this chapter are initiated against the user. 
B.  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under Sections 13.28.410 or 13.28.460 of this chapter. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 9.7)  
13.28.460 - Termination of discharge. 
In addition to the provisions in Section 13.28.230 of this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
A.  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
B.  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
C.  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
D.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
E.  Violation of the pretreatment standards in Article II of this chapter. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 13.28.400 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 9.8)  
Article X. - Judicial Enforcement Remedies 
 
13.28.470 - Injunctive relief. 
When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may petition the court through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The city manager may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 10.1)  
13.28.480 - Civil penalties. 
A.  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
B.  The city manager may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
C.  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
D.  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 10.2)  
13.28.490 - Criminal prosecution. 
A.  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation, per day. 
B.  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
C.  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation, per day. 
D.  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation, per day. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 10.3)  
13.28.500 - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The city manager may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city manager may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city manager is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 10.4)  
Article XI. - Supplemental Enforcement Action 
 
13.28.510 - Performance bonds. 
The city manager may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this ordinance, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the city manager to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 11.1)  
13.28.520 - Liability insurance. 
The city manager may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 11.2)  
13.28.530 - Water supply severance. 
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 11.3)  
13.28.540 - Public nuisances. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued here-under, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the city manager. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 11.4)  
Article XII. - Miscellaneous Provisions 
 
13.28.550 - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
A.  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
B.  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
C.  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
D.  Fees for filing appeals; and 
E.  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this ordinance and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. 97-100 § 12.1)  
Chapter 13.32 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
13.32.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
"City" means the city of Shasta Lake. 
"Council" means the city council of the city of Shasta Lake. 
"Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. 
"Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees. 
"Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, cross arms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
"Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions in Section 13.32.030. 
"Utility" means all persons or entities supplying electric, communications or similar associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.020 - Public hearings. 
A.  The city council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communications, or similar or associated services. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard and concerned utilities will be expected to present evidence on whether and approximately to what extent they will participate in the cost of the work. The findings of the council that certain utilities shall be placed underground shall include at least one of the following: 
1.  Such undergrounding will avoid or eliminate an unusually heavy concentration of overhead distribution facilities; 
2.  The street or road or right-of-way is extensively used by the general public and carries a heavy volume of pedestrian or vehicular tariff; 
3.  The street or road or right-of-way adjoins or passes through a civic area or public recreation area or an area of unusual scenic interest to the general public. 
B.  The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.030 - District designation by resolution. 
If, after any such public hearing the city council find that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal, and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.040 - Overhead utilities prohibited—Exceptions. 
Whenever the city council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provisioned in Section 13.32.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, expect as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance of such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.32.090 and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in Section 13.32.090 and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.050 - Overhead facilities—Emergency service. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, in order to provide emergency service. In addition, the city director of public services may grant special permission, on such terms as he or she may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures for limited periods of time. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.060 - Exceptions to chapter provisions. 
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030 shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Any city-owned facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the director of public services; 
B.  Poles, or electrifiers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.070 - District designation notice. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
B.  Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030 together with a copy of this chapter to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.080 - Responsibilities of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. Where it has been determined that utility companies shall be compensated by property owners for part or all of the cost of relocating facilities underground by special assessment district or otherwise, each utility shall be entitled to receive a comparable portion of its actual relocation cost as a condition to relocating its facilities underground. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.090 - Responsibilities of property owners. 
Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.32.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.100 - Responsibility of city. 
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.32.030. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.110 - Notice to property owners. 
In the event the person owning, operating, leasing or renting property does not comply with the provisions of Section 13.32.090 within the time provided for in the ordinance enacted pursuant to this chapter, the city public services director shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice. Notice pursuant to this section may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail, the notice shall be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises. The notice shall be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and shall be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county, when no address appears, to general delivery, city of Shasta Lake. 
If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city public services director shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The notice given pursuant to this section shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within ten days after receipt of such notice, the city public services director shall provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.120 - Notice of hearing on assessment of costs. 
The city public services director shall upon the time for hearing protests against the assessment of costs having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof, in the manner provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the city council will pass upon the report of the city public services director and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.130 - Hearing protests of assessments— Payments of assessments. 
Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, as to assessment of costs, the city council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the city council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city public services director, and the city public services director is directed to turn over to the county assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.140 - When utility deemed failing to comply with chapter. 
Until such time as an order is issued pursuant to this chapter, the supplying utility shall not be in violation of this chapter or the ordinance enacted pursuant to this chapter in continuing to maintain overhead facilities necessary to serve such person during the period of such noncompliance and such reasonable time thereafter as may be necessary to remove the same. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
13.32.150 - Performance—Extension of time. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.32.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 02-143 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 13.36 - STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 
 
13.36.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the city's citizens by controlling non-storm water discharges to the city's storm water conveyance system and by reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable. This chapter is also intended to assist in the protection and enhancement of water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, and to provide the city with the legal authority to fully implement and enforce provisions set under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System General Permit No. CAS000004 for Storm Water Discharges from Small Municipal Storm Sewer Systems, Water Quality Order No. 2013-0001-DWQ, or any subsequent permits that amend or replace General Permit CAS000004. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter have the following meanings: 
"Best management practices (BMPs)" shall mean specific stormwater management techniques that are applied to manage construction site runoff and minimize site erosion. 
"City manager" shall mean the municipal official responsible for the administration of the City of Shasta Lake as a whole. 
"Clean Water Act (CWA)" shall mean the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
"Construction activity" shall mean activities including, but not limited to, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, stockpiling or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, pavement removal, demolition, exterior construction, substantial removal of vegetation where soils are disturbed including but not limited to removal by clearing or grubbing, or any activity which bares soil or rock. 
"Construction general permit" shall mean the NPDES General Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction and Land Disturbance Activities administered by the State of California in accordance with applicable provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act and the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act. 
"Development" shall mean the construction, building or placement of any structure or portion thereof, or any activity such as excavation or grading to improve site conditions. Development does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or the original purpose of the facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities (i.e., land disturbances) required to protect public health and safety. 
"Development services director" shall mean the municipal official responsible for the administration of the building, planning and code enforcement divisions of the city of Shasta Lake. 
"Discharge "shall mean the release, threatened release, or placement of any material into the city's storm water conveyance system or receiving waters, including but not limited to storm water, wastewater, solid materials, liquids, hazardous waste, raw materials, debris, litter, or any other substance. 
"Enforcement agency" shall mean the city for the purposes of this chapter. The enforcement agency shall coordinate program activities and authorize personnel to serve as enforcement officials to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. 
"Enforcement official" shall mean any agent of the city authorized by the enforcement agency to enforce compliance with this chapter. If the city council and the governing body of another public agency enter into an agreement authorizing that agency to administer and/or enforce some or all of the provisions of this chapter, "enforcement official" also shall mean the authorized official(s) of the agency designated in the agreement as the agency responsible for administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter, as provided in the agreement. 
"Hazardous material "shall mean any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed (California Health and Safety Code § 25117). 
"Illicit connection" means either of the following: 
1.  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface which allows an illicit discharge to enter the city's storm water conveyance system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the City's storm water conveyance system and any collections to the city's storm water conveyance system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or 
2.  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the city's storm water conveyance system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city. 
"Illicit discharge" shall mean any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the city's storm water conveyance system or receiving waters, except as exempted in Section 13.36.100 of this chapter. The term illicit discharge does not include discharges that are regulated by a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4). 
"Industrial activity" shall mean any activity subject to the NPDES Industrial General Permit as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
"Industrial general permit" shall mean the General Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Industrial Activities, issued and administered by the State of California in accordance with applicable provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act and the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act. 
"Maximum extent practicable (MEP)" shall mean the technology-based standard established by Congress in Clean Water Act section 402(p)(3)(B)(iii) for small MS4 storm water discharges. MEP emphasizes pollution prevention and source control BMPs primarily in combination with treatment methods. 
"Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)" shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) owned by a state, county, city, town, or other public body, that is designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, which is not a combined sewer, and which is not a part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)" shall mean the primary permitting program under the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.) which regulates most discharges to receiving waters. 
"National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES permit)" shall mean a permit issued by either the Regional Board or the State Water Resources Control Board pursuant to Chapter 5.5 (commencing with Section 13370) of Division 7 of the California Water Code to control discharges to Waters of the United States. 
"Phase II Municipal General Permit" shall mean the General Permit for Storm Water Discharges from small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s), issued and administered by the State of California in accordance with applicable provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act and the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act. 
"Pollutant" shall mean anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, and solvents; soil, sand, or sediment; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid, solid wastes and yard wastes; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; biological and fecal waste; dissolved and particulate metals; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including but not limited to sediments, slurries, and concrete rinsates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
"Pollution "shall mean the human-made or human-induced alteration of the quality of waters which unreasonably affects, or has the potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses (California Water Code §13050). 
"Porter-Cologne Act" shall mean the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and as amended (California Water Code §13000 et seq.). Under the Porter-Cologne Act, the State Water Resources Control Board has the ultimate authority over State water rights and water quality policy. Porter-Cologne also establishes nine regional water quality control boards to oversee water quality on a day-to-day basis at the local/regional level. 
"Premises" shall mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
"Property owner" shall mean any person, entity, company, and/or authorized representative having title to real property within the geographic area affected by this chapter. 
"Public works director" shall mean the municipal official responsible for the administration of the public works divisions of the city of Shasta Lake, including water, sewer, streets and public improvements. 
"Receiving water limitations" shall mean water quality standards contained in a statewide water quality control plan, the California Toxics Rule, or in the applicable regional water quality control board basin plan. 
"Receiving waters" shall mean natural surface bodies of water, as defined by the Phase II Municipal General Permit, including, but not limited to, creeks and rivers, which serve as discharge points for the City storm water conveyance system. 
"Regional water quality control board (regional board)" shall mean the Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
"Responsible Official" shall mean the designee of the city manager responsible for implementing the storm water quality management program for the city. Typically, the development services director is the responsible official for non-public property, and the public works director is the responsible official for public property, easements, and right-of-ways, as well as public utilities. 
"Storm water" shall mean any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from storm events and/or snow melt. 
"Storm water conveyance system" shall mean those public or natural facilities within the city which are owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the city by which storm water may be conveyed to receiving waters, including, but not limited to, any city roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, detention basins, constructed wetlands, natural and artificial channels, canyons, stream beds, gullies, curbs, gutters, ditches, sumps, and storm drains. 
"Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)" shall mean a document that describes the BMPs to be implemented by the owner or operator to eliminate prohibited non-storm water discharges and/or reduce to the MEP pollutant discharges to the city storm water conveyance system as required by the construction general permit. 
"Waters of the United States" shall mean surface watercourses and water bodies as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry storm water at and during all times and seasons. 
Any term(s) defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and/or defined in the regulations for the storm water discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency, as amended, and which are not specifically defined in this section, shall, when used in this article, have the same meaning as set forth in such act or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.030 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all users and potential users located within the city and all users that discharge either directly or indirectly into the city storm water conveyance system. Within the city this chapter shall also apply to storm water and non-storm water discharges made to receiving waters. This chapter does not apply to facilities operated by the State of California or by agencies of the federal government. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.040 - Responsibility for administration. 
The city manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city manager may be delegated by the city manager to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest or in the employ of the city (i.e. responsible officials). 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.050 - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.060 - Regulatory consistency. 
This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Clean Water Act and Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, or any applicable implementing regulations. In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any federal or state law or regulation, that requirement which establishes the higher standard for public health shall govern. To the extent permitted by law, nothing in this chapter shall preclude enforcement of any other applicable law, regulation, order, permit, or city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.070 - Compliance disclaimer. 
Compliance by any person with the provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the need to comply with other local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements relating to the control of pollutant discharges or protection of storm water quality, or both. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.080 - Disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering and other relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into receiving waters. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.090 - General discharge prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged, any non-storm water, storm water or pollutant to the city storm water conveyance system or to receiving waters which results in, or contributes to a violation of a receiving water limitation or a violation of the municipal general permit. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.100 - Exceptions to discharge prohibitions. 
The following discharges are exempt from the otherwise applicable non-storm water discharge prohibition set forth in Section 13.36.090: 
A.  Any discharge regulated under a NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger, and administered by the state pursuant to Division 7 Chapter 5.5 of the California Water Code, provided that any such discharge is in compliance with all requirements of the NPDES permit, waiver, or order and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
B.  Any discharge from any of the following activities, provided that any such discharge does not cause or contribute to the violation of any receiving water limitation and appropriate control measures to minimize the impacts of such discharges are developed and implemented as determined by the responsible official. This provision does not obviate the need to obtain any other appropriate permits for such discharges. 
1.  Water line flushing. 
2.  Individual residential car washing. 
3.  Diverted stream flows. 
4.  Rising groundwaters. 
5.  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined in 40 CFR § 35.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers. 
6.  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater. 
7.  Discharges from potable water sources. 
8.  Foundation drains. 
9.  Air conditioning condensation. 
10.  Springs. 
11.  Water from crawl space pumps. 
12.  Footing drains. 
13.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands. 
14.  Dechlorinated and untreated swimming pool discharges. 
15.  Incidental runoff from landscaped areas. 
16.  Discharges or flows from fire-fighting activities. 
C.  Any discharges which the responsible official, in concert with the regional board, determines are necessary for the protection of public health or safety. 
D.  Additional categories of non-storm water discharges which do not cause or contribute to the violation of any receiving water limitation may be excepted from the otherwise applicable prohibition by the responsible official upon approval of the executive officer of the regional board, as provided in the municipal general permit, or any successor permits. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.110 - Revocation of exceptions to discharge prohibitions. 
Notwithstanding the exemptions provided for in Section 13.36.100 above, if the regional board or the responsible official determine that a discharge which is otherwise exempt from the prohibition on discharges causes or significantly contributes to the violation of any receiving water limitation or results in the conveyance of significant quantities of pollutants to receiving waters, or is otherwise a danger to public health or safety, the responsible official may give written notice to the owner or operator of the facility that the discharge exception shall not apply to the discharge at issue following expiration of the thirty-day period commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of such thirty (30) day period, any such discharge shall be unlawful. Upon finding that any continuance of the discharge poses a significant threat to the environment or to public health and safety, the responsible official may waive the thirty-day waiting period and require immediate cessation of the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.120 - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
A.  The construction, use or continued existence of illicit connections to the city storm water conveyance system is prohibited. 
B.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. Upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, any person who maintains an illicit connection shall have thirty (30) days or a time determined by the responsible official from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to disconnect and discontinue use of such connection. 
C.  The responsible official may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illicit connection to the storm water conveyance system comply with the requirements of this chapter to eliminate or secure approval for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
D.  If subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this chapter the responsible person can demonstrate that an illicit discharge will no longer occur, said person may request city approval to reconnect to the city's storm water conveyance system. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible person's expense. 
E.  A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.130 - Waste disposal prohibitions. 
No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, city storm water conveyance system facility, or receiving waters, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, cigarette butts, objects, construction materials, gravel, soil, and other accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution in storm water discharges. Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purpose of collection are exempted from this prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.140 - Discharge in violation of industrial or construction general permits. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction general permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the development services director prior to or as a condition of a parcel map, tentative map, entitlement, building permit, grading permit, business license, or encroachment permit; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.150 - Prevention and reduction of pollutants in storm water—General requirements. 
A.  The responsible official and/or state or federal agencies may designate as subject activities any activities, including construction and industrial activities, considered potential sources of discharges of pollutants to the city storm water conveyance system or receiving waters. The subject activity may occur at stationary facilities or as a mobile activity that takes place at various job sites. State or federal agencies may require the city to enforce regulatory measures against the subject activity in question. 
B.  Industrial activities for which the municipal general permit specifies that the city shall routinely inspect, or which are listed in municipal general permit Section E.9. are hereby designated as subject activities. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.160 - Authorization to adopt and impose best management practices. 
A.  BMPs shall be adopted by the public works director as a component of the city's construction standards. 
B.  Any person whom the responsible official determines is conducting any subject activity shall prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants from those activities, to the MEP, through the implementation of BMPs. 
C.  The responsible official may specify and describe BMPs for specified subject activities. Where BMP requirements are promulgated by the city or any federal, state, or regional agency for any activity, operation, or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the city storm water conveyance system or receiving waters, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such requirements. 
D.  Any alternative BMP implemented for specified subject activities pursuant to subsection (C) of this section shall be subject to review and approval by the public works director. If a person conducting subject activities implements alternative BMPs without the prior written approval of the public works director and subsequently receives written notice from the responsible official that the alternative BMPs do not provide the required equivalent level of protection from pollutant-laden storm or non-storm water discharges, the continued implementation of such alternative BMPs shall be deemed to be a violation of requirements of this chapter as of the date of delivery of such notice. 
E.  Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements promulgated pursuant to subsections (B) and (C), any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering the city storm water conveyance system or receiving waters shall implement BMPs to the MEP. 
F.  Persons implementing BMPs will be required to establish, document, and conduct a maintenance program, subject to approval by the responsible official, for all BMPs. This requirement applies to BMPs required by the city and BMPs that were voluntarily installed. Maintenance requirements established pursuant to this section must be appropriate for site conditions, design of the BMPs, and must protect public safety, health, infrastructure, the environment and meet the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.170 - Spill prevention and response. 
A.  The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of pollutants into the city storm water conveyance system or receiving waters. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of pollutants shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's expense. 
B.  The responsible official may designate types of industries where the owner or operator of the industry shall be required to notify the city within twenty-four (24) hours of the discovery of an actual discharge into the city storm water conveyance system. For any discharge subject to the reporting requirements of the State of California Water Code Sections 13271 and 13272, notification in compliance therewith shall constitute sufficient notification for the purposes of this section. 
C.  Any person owning or occupying premises or conducting any activity that has knowledge of any non-storm water discharge or threatened prohibited discharge, from the premises or activity to the city storm water conveyance system or receiving waters shall immediately take all reasonable action to contain and otherwise minimize any such discharge. 
D.  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants from said facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into the city storm water conveyance system or receiving waters, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of a release of a hazardous material, said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials that is not an emergency, said person shall notify the city's public works department in person or by phone no later than 3:00 p.m. of the next business day. If the discharge of pollutants emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.180 - Requirement to eliminate prohibited discharges. 
The responsible official may require by written notice that a person responsible for a prohibited discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take measures at the cost of the discharger to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illicit discharges. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.190 - Construction sites. 
Any person owning or operating a construction site shall implement BMPs to control the discharge of pollutants to the city storm water conveyance system or receiving waters to the MEP, in compliance with the municipal general permit, construction general permit, city construction standards, and Chapter 15.08, "Grading, Erosion Control and Hillside Development" of the city of Shasta Lake Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.200 - Industrial sites. 
Any person owning or operating an industrial site shall implement BMPs to control the discharge of pollutants to the city storm water conveyance system or receiving waters to the MEP, in compliance with the municipal general permit, industrial general permit, and city construction standards. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.210 - New development and redevelopment. 
A.  The responsible official shall ensure that development complies with measures and BMP performance standards, including but not limited to, those outlined in Section E.12 of the municipal general permit. The requirements for new development or redevelopment may include but are not limited to performance standards, operational BMPs site design measures, low impact development design standards, and hydromodification measures. The requirements may include associated maintenance programs and city access agreements. 
B.  Requirements established pursuant to Subsection (A) may be included in city construction standards, written policies in the city of Shasta Lake Municipal Code, conditions of development, conditions of approval or any other appropriate instrument administered by the city. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions as required in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.220 - Watercourse protection. 
A.  Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, construction materials, and other obstacles that would pollute or contaminate the watercourse. 
B.  In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
C.  The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond routine maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect it against erosion and degradation originating or contributed from their property. 
D.  Pertinent regulatory agencies' permits shall be obtained as required prior to work within those areas under the jurisdiction of those agencies. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.230 - Administrative rules and regulations. 
A.  The responsible official shall have the authority to promulgate regulations, policies, and standards for the implementation of this chapter. 
B.  All regulations, policies, and standards promulgated by the responsible official shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the MS4 general permit. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.240 - Authority to inspect. 
A.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the responsible official has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the responsible official may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect records related to storm water management compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
B.  Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter including, but not limited to, compliance with requirements of the municipal general permit, visual evidence, complaints received, knowledge or physical evidence of industrial activities or other pollutant sources, random sampling, sampling in areas with evidence of storm water contamination, illicit connections, and discharge of non-storm water to the city storm water conveyance system or similar factors. 
C.  The responsible official may conduct inspections pursuant to this chapter on private or public property. The responsible official may enter upon private property to investigate the source of any discharge to any public street, inlet, gutter, the city storm water conveyance system, or receiving waters. 
D.  For purposes of verifying compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the responsible official may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment, or any stationary equipment, which may reasonably be believed to be sources of pollutants or non-storm water discharges. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.250 - Authority to Sample, establish sampling devices, and test. 
A.  During any inspection as provided herein, the responsible official may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. 
B.  The responsible official may erect and maintain monitoring and sampling devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the city storm water conveyance system or receiving waters. 
C.  The responsible official may investigate the integrity and layout of all storm drain and sanitary sewer system or other pipelines on the premises using appropriate tests, including, but not limited to, smoke or dye tests or video surveys. 
D.  The responsible official may conduct any necessary surveys, take photos or video, make measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.260 - Requirement to monitor and analyze. 
The responsible official may require by written notice that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution, illicit discharges, and/or non-storm water discharges to the city storm water conveyance system or receiving waters, to undertake at said person's expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the city as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.270 - Confidentiality of information. 
A.  Information and data on a discharger or potential discharger obtained from inspections reports, questionnaires, applications, permits, monitoring programs, records, or any other form of submittal to the city shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without notification unless the discharger or potential discharger specifically requests confidentiality as to any portion thereof and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the responsible official that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the discharger or potential discharger. 
B.  Storm water and non-storm water constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information, and effluent data shall be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.280 - Fees. 
The city shall collect such fees as may be established by the city council to provide for the recovery of costs associated with implementing this chapter. Any such fees shall be established by resolution of the city council. Failure to pay required fees within the time period set in policy established by the city manager shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.290 - Cease and desist orders. 
A.  Any violation of this chapter in which the responsible official determines that the violation constitutes an immediate threat to public health or safety, including by way of illustration and not limitation, significant harm to human or aquatic life or to the city storm water conveyance system or receiving waters, may result in an order to immediately cease and desist all activities causing such immediate threat. A cease and desist order may direct the owner or occupant of any premises, or any other person responsible for any violation of this chapter, to take any of the following actions: 
1.  Immediately discontinue any prohibited discharge. 
2.  Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter. 
3.  Clean up the area affected by the violation. 
B.  If the discharger fails to comply with a cease and desist order within the time specified in the order, the responsible official may conduct abatement of the violation and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
C.  In the event a condition in violation of the provisions of this chapter constitutes an imminent danger to public safety or the environment, the responsible official may enter the premises from which the violation emanates, abate the violation and restore any property affected by the violation, at the expense of the violator, without prior notice to or consent from the owner or occupant thereof and without judicial warrant. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.300 - Enforcement of the storm water quality management ordinance. 
Any discharger found to be in violation of any of the requirements set forth in this chapter is guilty of an infraction and subject to penalty per SLMC Section 1.16.010. The responsible official will provide written notification of violations and meet with owners of property or their representatives on the site to discuss the exact location and nature of the observed violations. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
13.36.310 - Reimbursement of fines. 
In addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter or any other law, the city may also seek and recover reimbursement from any person whose conduct or activity results in any fine, penalty or other charges being imposed upon the city by any authorized federal, state, or local government agency, including, but not limited to, the Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board, for violations of the terms of the city's municipal general permit or otherwise, up to the actual amount of the fine, penalty, or charge imposed upon the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-241, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 15.01 - BUILDING STANDARDS CODES ADOPTED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 2015, amended Ch. 15.01 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15.01, §§ 15.01.010—15.01.120, pertained to building codes adopted, and derived from Ord. 07-190 (part). 
 
15.01.010 - California Building Standards Codes adopted. 
A.  The city does adopt by reference the latest edition of the California Building Standards Code in publication at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. It is anticipated and expected that editions shall be from time to time amended, altered and changed to more recent editions. New editions published by the respective code organizations are automatically deemed adopted by the city for those building codes listed in this chapter. It shall not be necessary by ordinance or resolution by the city council to adopt alterations, amendments or changes in the building codes as they are promulgated from time to time. 
B.  The city building official shall be required to maintain copies of the Building Standards Codes listed in this chapter for review by the public and for administrative purposes by the city officials who have responsibility for the various areas for regulatory purposes. 
C.  Schedule of permit fees. The fee for each permit shall be as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
D.  Plan review fees. If it is determined plan review is required, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submittal of a building permit application. The plan review fee shall be sixty-five (65) percent of the estimated building permit fee as determined by the building official or his/her designee. 
When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review, or when the project involves deferred submittal items, an additional plan review fee shall be charged as determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
15.01.020 - California Administrative Code adopted. 
The city does adopt the California Administrative Code as published by the International Code Council together with all relevant appendices and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
15.01.030 - California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2, adopted. 
The city does adopt the California Building Code as published by the International Code Council together with all relevant appendices and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
15.01.040 - California Residential Code adopted. 
The city does adopt the California Residential Code as published by the International Code Council together with all relevant appendices and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
15.01.050 - California Electrical Code adopted. 
The city does adopt the California Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association together with all relevant appendices and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
15.01.060 - California Mechanical Code adopted. 
The city does adopt the California Mechanical Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, together with all relevant appendices and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
15.01.070 - California Plumbing Code adopted. 
The city does adopt the California Plumbing Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, together with all relevant appendices and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
15.01.080 - California Energy Code adopted. 
The city does adopt the California Energy Code as published by the International Code Council together with all relevant appendices and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
15.01.090 - California Fire Code adopted. 
The city does adopt the California Fire Code as published by the International Code Council together with all relevant appendices and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
15.01.110 - California Green Building Standards Code adopted. 
The city does adopt the California Green Building Standards Code as published by the California Building Standards Commission together with all relevant appendices and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
15.01.120 - California Referenced Standards adopted. 
The city does adopt the California Referenced Standards Code as published by the International Code Council together with all relevant appendices and amendments as adopted by the state of California. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
15.01.130 - Uniform Housing Code adopted. 
The city does adopt as its housing code the 1997 edition of the Uniform Housing Code as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, regulating and controlling the use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all residential buildings and structures. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
15.01.140 - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  The city building official is authorized and responsible for enforcing all building regulations adopted in this chapter. The fire chief of the Shasta Lake fire protection district or his or her designee shall be the principal enforcement officer with respect to the California Fire Code. 
B.  Any person who commences any work for which a permit is required before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an investigation fee that shall be in addition to the required permit fee. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee established by city council. 
C.  Any person who violates a provision of this Chapter or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official or of a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall also be liable for civil penalties of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day the violation continues. The city attorney may seek civil penalties in any civil action brought to enforce any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
15.01.150 - Applicability and effective date of building codes. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction, alternation, movement, enlargements, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures within the city. 
B.  Only those standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission that are effective at the time an application for a building permit is submitted shall apply to the plans and specifications for, and to the construction performed under, that permit. 
(Ord. No. 15-244, § 1, 10-6-2015)  
Chapter 15.02 - PROCESS FOR STATE-MANDATED BUILDING PERMIT EXPEDITING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-266, § 1, adopted Oct. 3, 2017, repealed the former ch. 15.02, §§ 15.02.010—15.02.050, and enacted a new ch. 15.02 as set out herein. The former ch. 15.02 pertained to small residential rooftop solar energy systems and derived from Ord. No. 15-243, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 2015. 
 
15.02.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined permitting and inspection process for state-mandated building permit procedures including but not limited to green building ordinance, small residential rooftop solar energy systems, electric vehicle charging stations and any other new and forthcoming state mandates regarding expediting building permit procedures. 
(Ord. No. 17-266, § 1, 10-3-2017)  
15.02.020 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter applies to all state mandates for building permit procedures to expedite and streamline the permitting and inspection processes. 
B.  A use permit or administrative permit may be required to allow state-mandated building permit expeditions that are not in compliance with the zone district. 
(Ord. No. 17-266, § 1, 10-3-2017)  
15.02.030 - Procedures for permitting and inspections. 
A.  Procedure, Checklist and Plans. The building official or his/her designee is authorized to establish a procedure for an expedited, streamlined permitting process and develop a checklist and standard plans for expediting state-mandated building permits, which will include the following: 
1.  The procedure, checklists and standard plans will substantially conform to the most current version of the California Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research unless an ordinance is adopted to modify the checklists and standards due to unique climactic, geological, seismological or topographical conditions. 
2.  The checklist, standard plans and permitting documents shall be published on the city's website. 
3.  The city shall allow for electronic submittal of a permit application and other applicable plans and documents. 
4.  The city shall allow for an electronic signature on all forms, applications and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by an applicant unless, by ordinance, the city states the reasons for its inability to accept electronic signatures, in which case an electronic signature shall not be allowed; and 
B.  Application Review and Building Permit Issuance. 
1.  The building official or his/her designee will coordinate application review with all pertinent agencies for their review of the application. 
2.  For an application that meets the requirements of the adopted checklist and standard plans, the building official or his/her designee will issue a building permit within three business days from the date the application is deemed complete. 
3.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required shall be sent to the applicant. 
C.  Inspection Process. The building official is authorized to establish a procedure for an expedited, streamlined inspection process, which will include the following: 
1.  The building official or his/her designee shall coordinate a consolidated inspection with other city departments as necessary. A separate fire safety inspection by SLFPD may be performed. 
2.  The inspection will be completed the next business day following the inspection request whenever possible. In no event will the inspection occur later than five business days from the date of the request. 
3.  A concise inspection list will be developed that provides permit applicants a clear understanding of what elements of the permit will be inspected before final approval. 
(Ord. No. 17-266, § 1, 10-3-2017)  
15.02.040 - Permit denial and appeal process. 
A.  A permit may be denied by the building official if the building official makes a finding, based on substantial evidence, that a project have a specific, adverse impact on public health and safety. 
B.  The building official's decision may be appealed to the planning commission. The planning commission may not deny the application on appeal unless it makes written findings, based on substantial evidence in the record, that the proposal would have a specific, adverse impact on public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives of preventing the adverse impact. 
C.  Any conditions imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact on public health and safety at the lowest cost possible. 
(Ord. No. 17-266, § 1, 10-3-2017)  
Chapter 15.04 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
Sections:  
Article I. - Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods 
 
15.04.010 - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Shasta Lake does adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 1.1)  
15.04.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the city of Shasta Lake are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effects of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 1.2)  
15.04.030 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 1.3)  
15.04.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 1.4)  
Article II. - Definitions 
 
15.04.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
"Area of Special Flood Hazard." See "special flood hazard area." 
"Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
"Building." See "Structure." 
"Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)" means a letter from FEMA commenting on whether a proposed project, if constructed per the design submitted to and approved by FEMA, would justify a revision to the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood, flooding, or flood water" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
2.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
"Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
"Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "flooding." 
"Floodplain administrator" means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to nonresidential structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
"Floodway fringe" means that area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted. 
"Fraud and victimization" as related to Article VI of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Governing body" is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
"Hardship" as related to Article VI of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs. 
"Letter of map amendment (LOMA)" means a letter from FEMA revising an effective National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. A LOMA establishes that an existing structure or parcel of land is not included in a designated special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
"Letter of map revision (LOMR)" means an official revision to the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) issued by FEMA. Changes may include modifications to flood zones, base flood elevations, and floodplain and floodway delineations. 
"Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "basement" definition): 
1.  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter. 
2.  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
"New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community. 
"Obstruction" means and includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
One-Hundred-Year Flood or 100-Year Flood. See "base flood." 
"Principal structure" means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use. 
"Public safety and nuisance" as related to Article VI of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
"Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Sheet Flow Area. See "area of shallow flooding." 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area having special flood, and shown on a FIRM as zone A, AO, A-1-A30, AE, or AH. 
"Start of construction" means and includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or reverence areas. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 2.0) 
(Ord. No. 10-214, § II, 11-16-2010)  
Article III. - General Provisions 
 
15.04.060 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of Shasta Lake. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 3.1)  
15.04.070 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study (FIS) dated September 30, 1992, and accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated September 5, 1990 and September 27, 1985, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. In addition, the city adopts the original FIS & FIRMs and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the county's FIS & FIRMs from before incorporation including the inherited special flood hazard areas (SFHA). This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at City Hall. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Shasta County, Unincorporated Areas" dated September 27, 1985, with accompanying "FIRMs for Shasta County, Unincorporated Areas", dated September 27, 1985, and Flood Insurance Study for City of Shasta Lake, California, Shasta County" dated June 16,1999, with accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Maps for City of Shasta Lake, California, Shasta County" dated June 16, 1999 and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. These flood insurance studies and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FISs are on file at 1650 Stanton Drive, Shasta Lake, CA 96019. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 3.2) 
(Ord. No. 18-267, 3-6-2018)  
15.04.080 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 3.3)  
15.04.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 3.4)  
15.04.100 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 3.5)  
15.04.110 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city council, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 3.6)  
Article IV. - Administration 
 
15.04.120 - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.04.070 of this chapter. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required. 
A.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures, in zone AO, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; or 
B.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, if required in Section 15.04.160(C)(2); and 
C.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.04.140 of this chapter; and 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 4.1)  
15.04.130 - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The city manager, or the person designated by the city manager, is appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 4.2)  
15.04.140 - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that: 
1.  Permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
B.  Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.04.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Article V of this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption. 
C.  Notification of Other Agencies. 
1.  In alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
b.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
c.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
2.  Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations: 
a.  Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
b.  All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
D.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.  Certification required by Section 15.04.160 (C)(1) (lowest floor elevations); 
2.  Certification required by Section 15.04.160 (C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
3.  Certification required by Section 15.04.160(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard); 
4.  Certification of elevation required by Section 15.04.180B (subdivision standards); 
5.  Certification required by Section 15.04.210A (floodway encroachments). 
E.  Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article VI of this chapter. 
F.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.04.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 4.3) 
(Ord. No. 10-214, § II, 11-16-2010)  
15.04.150 - Appeals. 
The city council of the city of Shasta Lake shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
A.  Violation or infractions punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day of violation. 
B.  Civil remedies available as well. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 4.4)  
Article V. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
 
15.04.160 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
2.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.04.190 of this chapter. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed: 
1.  With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
2.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if 
4.  Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Section 15.04.050, Definitions, for "basement," "lowest floor," "new construction," "substantial damage" and "substantial improvement.") 
1.  Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
a.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM by at least one foot, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified; 
b.  In an A zone, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation, as determined by the community; 
c.  In all other zones, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with subsection (C)(1) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
a.  Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under subsection (C)(1) of this section so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or 
b.  Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
4.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.04.190 of this chapter. 
D.  Subgrade crawlspaces in the special flood hazard area shall comply with FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01—Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 5.1) 
(Ord. No. 18-267, 3-6-2018)  
15.04.170 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
1.  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems, and 
2.  Discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 5.2)  
15.04.180 - Standards for subdivisions. 
A.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
B.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator. 
C.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
E.  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
F.  All new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than fifty (50) lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include within such proposals base flood elevation data. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 5.3) 
(Ord. No. 18-267, 3-6-2018)  
15.04.190 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, on sites located: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood; 
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation, and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement. 
B.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section will be elevated so that either the: 
1.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 5.4)  
15.04.200 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map will either: 
A.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
B.  Meet the permit requirements of Article IV of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.04.190A of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 5.5)  
15.04.210 - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.04.070 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply. 
A.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 5.6)  
Article VI. - Variance Procedure 
 
15.04.220 - Nature of variances. 
The variance criteria set forth in this article of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 6.1)  
15.04.230 - Appeal board. 
A.  In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
1.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
4.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and 
11.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
B.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and 
2.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Shasta County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
C.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 6.2)  
15.04.240 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Articles IV and V of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 15.04.050 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall be issued only upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
E.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
1.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" (as defined in Section 15.04.050 of this chapter) to the applicant; and 
3.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Section 15.04.050 of this chapter, see "public safety or nuisance"), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 15.04.060 of this chapter) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
F.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections A through E of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
G.  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection A of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-87 § 6.3)  
Chapter 15.08 - GRADING, EROSION CONTROL AND HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT 
Sections: 
 
15.08.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, health, property, the environment, and the public welfare by regulating clearing and grading on private and public property and providing standards and design criteria implementing stormwater best management practices to control water pollution and erosion during all construction activities for all development. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 15-240, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
15.08.020 - Scope. 
A.  This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading, earthwork construction including fills and embankments, and development on hillsides and along ridgelines; establishes the administrative procedure for issuance of permits; and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading construction. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as waiving any requirements imposed by state, federal, or other local statutes or regulations or other provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions listed hereunder shall be construed as specified in this section: 
"Applicant" means the property or designated agent of such property owner who fills out and signs a written application for a city permit. 
"As-graded" means the extent of surface conditions on completion of grading. 
"Bedrock" means in-place solid rock. 
"Bench" means a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed. 
"Best management practices (BMPs)" means specific stormwater management techniques that are applied to manage construction site runoff and minimize site erosion. 
"Building envelope" means an area on a lot where existing trees and natural vegetation may be removed and soil disturbed for the purpose of a building footprint, parking, driveway access and other accessory uses. 
"Building official" means the municipal official responsible for enforcement and interpretation of the building code. 
"California Stormwater Quality Association (CASQA)" shall mean the professional member association dedicated to the advancement of stormwater quality management. 
"City engineer" means the engineer or person designated by the city council to be the city engineer. 
"Civil engineer" means a professional engineer registered in the state of California to practice in the field of civil works. 
"Clearing" means the removal above the natural ground surface of vegetative growth such as trees, logs, upturned stumps, roots of trees, brush, grass and weeds. 
"Compaction" means the densification of a fill by mechanical means. 
"Contour grading" means a grading concept designed to result in earth forms which resemble natural terrain characteristics. Horizontal and vertical curve variations are often used for slope banks. 
"Cut" means the mechanical removal of earth material. 
"Developer" means any property owner or designated agent of such property owner for whom land development plans are being or have been made. 
"Development services director" means the municipal official responsible for the administration of the building, planning and code enforcement divisions of the city of Shasta Lake. 
"DBH (diameter at breast height)" means the diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches at a height of four and one-half feet above ground. 
"Drainage report" means an analysis of drainage impacts from a proposed project, including drainage calculations prepared by a licensed professional engineer verifying that runoff from the project will not increase the ten, twenty-five (25) or one hundred (100) year flows downstream. The report shall include sizing and analysis of any proposed detention/retention facilities. 
"Earth material" means any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof. 
"Engineering geologist" means a geologist experienced and knowledgeable in engineering geology and registered as a professional engineering geologist in the state of California. 
"Erosion" means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice. 
"Erosion control system" shall mean permanent and/or temporary erosion control devices/features (BMPs) installed to prevent erosion and site runoff. 
"Excavation" means the mechanical removal of earth material. 
"Fill" means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
"Flaglot" means a parcel of land with a narrow extension of property on the lot from the buildable area of the lot to the public right-of-way, and which serves as access to the lot. 
"General plan" means a legal document in the form of a map and accompanying text adopted by the city council and consisting of objectives, policies and implementation measures regarding the long-term development of the city. 
"Geotechnical engineer" means a professional licensed in the state of California and experienced and knowledgeable in the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation, and design of civil engineering works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof. 
"Geotechnical engineering" means the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation, and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof. 
"Geotechnical report" means a technical report of the soils and geologic conditions on and below the surface at a project site, based on geotechnical investigation by borings, and shall include soils classifications, geotechnical conclusions, and recommendations for design, construction, and inspection of the project. 
"Grade" means the vertical elevation of the ground surface. 
1.  Existing grade is the grade prior to grading; 
2.  Finish grade is the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan. 
"Grading" means any excavating, filling, or combination thereof. 
"Hillside area" means a parcel or portion of a parcel that: 
1.  Contains an average slope over twenty (20) percent and a height differential of twenty (20) feet or more within the area having an average slope of twenty (20) percent or more; and 
2.  Where development of the project would be prominently visible from a substantial land area, including public streets and highways, public parks and open space areas, and neighboring properties; or 
3.  Where, due to the soil classification, the potential for erosion is high. 
"Hillside areas" include skyline ridges and ridgelines. 
"Hillside development" means all residential development within a hillside area, including a major or minor subdivision, or new construction of a single- or multifamily development. 
"Key" means an engineered compacted fill placed on a bench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope. 
"Knoll" means a small rounded hill. 
"Landscaping" means either: 
1.  Existing vegetation including sensitive biological habitat and protected trees. 
2.  Landscaping specifically mandated as a condition of approval by either the administrative or discretionary approval process relating to land use compatibility, ordinance development standards, environmental mitigation, and/or required slope planting ratios. 
"Manufactured slope" means any slope created through cut, fill or excavation. 
"Permanent erosion control devices" means features installed on-site for the permanent control of erosion and site runoff, including but not limited to required landscaping, permanent desilting basins, etc. 
"Property owner" means the owner of the fee title or leasehold interest in real property who has the present rights to possession and control of the property. 
"Protected tree" means any living tree, except gray pine (pinus sabiniana), having at least one trunk of ten inches or more DBH; or a tree that is required to be preserved under discretionary project approval or under a site development tree plan that is approved administratively by the development services director or his or her designee. 
"Public works director" means the municipal official responsible for the administration of the public works divisions of the city of Shasta Lake, including water, sewer, streets and public improvements. 
"Qualified SWPPP developer (QSD)" shall mean an individual who is certified to develop revise and certify storm water pollution prevention plans and best management practices. 
"Qualified SWPPP practitioner (QSP)" shall mean an individual who is certified to implement all elements of the storm water pollution prevention plans and best management practices. 
"Rain event action plan (REAP)" shall mean a plan, specific to a project site, designed to protect the site from erosion and to prevent discharge of pollutants. A REAP is to be prepared/revised for each forecasted rain event. 
"Retaining wall" means an engineered structure designed to resist lateral pressure by providing a barrier to downslope movement of soil, rock, or water. 
"Ridgeline" means tops of hills within a hillside area typically lower in height and normally viewed against a backdrop of other hills and, when compared to the surrounding terrain, may be visible only to a limited area. The precise location shall be determined during the project review process. 
"Rough grading" means grading to approximate final elevations as shown on the approved grading plan, including location and staking of property lines, cut and fill slopes correctly graded and located in accordance with the approved design, swales and terraces graded and ready for paving, berms installed, required drainage slopes provided on the building pads, and recommendations of the engineering geologist or geotechnical engineer incorporated in the design. 
"Sensitive biological habitat" means any biological habitat that supports or has the potential to support any rare, endangered, threatened or candidate species of plants, trees, or animals or species of special concern as defined by the California Endangered Species Act (Fish and Game Code Sections 2050 et seq.) or Federal Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.). 
"Sensitive biological species" means any rare, endangered, threatened or candidate species of plants, trees or animals, or species of special concern as defined by the California Endangered Species Act (Fish and Game Code Sections 2050 et seq.) or Federal Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.). 
"Site" means any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted. 
"Skyline ridge" means the top of a ridgeline which is prominently visible from a substantial land area, characterized by the lack of a topographical backdrop where the sky is visible beyond the ridge. The precise location shall be determined during the project review process. 
"Slope" means an inclined ground surface the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance (e.g., two is to one, or as a percent (%) of vertical distance divided by horizontal distance, e.g., fifty (50) percent). Note: fifty (50) percent slope equals a two is to one slope. 
"Soil" means naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying bedrock. 
"Stormwater discharge permit" means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit and amendments thereto, issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, identifying waste discharge requirements for discharges of urban runoff within the city of Shasta Lake. 
"Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)" shall mean a document prepared by a QSD, in compliance with the requirements of the regional water quality control board, which identifies sources and activities at a particular site that may contribute pollutants to stormwater and commits the applicant to specific control measures and time frames to prevent or treat such pollutants. 
"Story pole" means a visual aid that outlines the mass of a structure to assist in understanding a project's size, bulk and scale in relation to the neighborhood and/or its effect on public scenic views. Story poles shall be made of lumber, PVC piping or other sturdy material and shall be properly braced for safety purposes, with connections used to show ridgelines and structure heights made of bright construction tape or netting. 
"Temporary erosion control device" means interim features installed on-site during construction to control erosion and site runoff, including but not limited to geotextiles and mats, sandbagging, temporary drains and swales. (Also see city of Shasta Lake stormwater management requirements document). 
"Usable" means that portion of a lot which is usable for or adaptable to the normal uses of residential property, excluding steep areas over ten percent slope, any areas covered by water, or areas included as an easement. 
"Vegetation" means any plant life and plant cover including mature trees, protected trees, and sensitive biological habitat. 
"Wet weather season" means October 1st through April 30th. 
"Zoning ordinance" means that part of the Shasta Lake Municipal Code that establishes land use regulations and districts or zones that establish permitted and special uses within those zones. 
Figure A. Skyline and Ridgeline 
  
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 15-240, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
15.08.035 - Exemptions and exceptions to development or design standards. 
Exemptions or exceptions to any development or design standard required pursuant to this chapter that are not in conflict with federal or state law may be granted by the Planning Commission if substantial evidence, as defined by Title 14, Chapter 3 of the California Code of Regulations (CEQA Guidelines), is provided to support the following findings: 
1.  The exemption or exception will not result in adverse impacts to the environment; and 
2.  The exemption or exception will not be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-225, § 2, 6-5-2012)  
15.08.040 - Permits required. 
No person shall commence or perform any clearing or grading and no person shall export or import any earth materials to or from any site unless pursuant to a written permit from the development services director or his or her designee. The permit shall be in the name of the property owner. A separate permit shall be required for each site but may include the entire operation at such site. When grading is to be done within fifty (50) feet of the high water mark of a seasonal watercourse or in the one hundred (100) year floodplain of a stream, creek or river, a permit shall be required in all cases. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.050 - Permits required—Exemptions and exceptions. 
A.  Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  Work accomplished upon land owned and controlled by the United States of America or by the state and which is performed pursuant to a public program of some agency thereof; 
2.  Any excavation, removal, fill, or deposit of any earth or other materials within a property which is dedicated or used or to be used for cemetery purposes; provided that such work is performed for burying the dead and does not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property not owned by the cemetery authority; 
3.  Any grading operation which is conducted during a period of civil or hazardous material emergency or natural disaster and which is directly connected with or related to relief of conditions caused by such emergency or disaster or to make emergency firebreaks; 
4.  The depositing of rubbish or other material at any reclamation or rubbish disposal site operated by a public agency and grading work performed as part of such operation; 
5.  Any work done in city streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways, easements, or city-owned or leased property by the city, or by contractors under contract with the city at the direction of the city manager. 
6.  Excavations for utilities installed pursuant to permits issued by the building division; 
7.  Reconstruction of paved parking lots that do not alter the existing drainage pattern; 
8.  Grading, clearing, and the placement of topsoil for landscape purposes on a developed single-family residential parcel which is less than one acre, except as otherwise regulated by Chapter 12.36, Tree Conservation, or by stormwater management regulations. 
B.  Exceptions. Permits shall not be required in the following instances, provided that the activity does not affect sensitive biological species or habitats, protected trees, or cultural/ archaeological resources. The following exempt activities are subject to implementing erosion control measures and may be subject to applicable stormwater discharge permits: 
1.  An excavation below finish grade for basements and footings of a building, or for a swimming pool, retaining wall, or other structure, authorized by a valid building permit, and complies with Subsections 5 and 6 of this section. This shall not exempt any fill on land over ten percent slope, nor exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than four feet after the completion of such structure; 
2.  Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate, or clay, where established and provided for by law, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support, or increase the stresses in or pressure upon, any adjacent or contiguous property; 
3.  Minor exploratory excavations and soil remediation under the direction of soil engineers, or engineering geologists at the discretion of the development services director or his or her designee based on a case-by-case review when considering site conditions, topography, surrounding properties, and the extent of work involved; 
4.  Temporary excavation for installation or abandonment of underground storage tanks and associated piping when no permanent change is made in the existing terrain and the excavation is refilled. 
5.  An excavation which: 
a.  Does not exceed two hundred (200) cubic yards of earth material; and 
b.  Does not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of surface area; and 
c.  Does not exceed two feet in vertical depth at its deepest point measured from the original ground surface; and 
d.  Does not create a cut slope greater than two feet in height and steeper than two horizontal to one vertical; and 
e.  Does not change the existing drainage pattern. 
6.  A fill which: 
a.  Does not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards of earth material; and 
b.  Does not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of surface area; and 
c.  Is less than one foot in vertical depth and is placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical, or less than three feet in depth, not intended to support structures; and 
d.  Does not change the existing drainage pattern. 
7.  Clearing which: 
a.  Is in accordance with the provisions of Public Resources Code Sections 4291 et seq., or at the direction of the Shasta Lake Fire Protection District for fire prevention and safety purposes that does not destroy or remove or affect sensitive biological species or sensitive biological habitats, or cultural/archaeological resources, or as allowed pursuant to agreements with the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
b.  Does not exceed one acre or more of surface area. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-237, § 1, 12-2-2014; Ord. No. 19-273, § 3, 3-5-2019)  
15.08.060 - Environmental review. 
If the development services director or his or her designee determines that the clearing or grading is not statutorily or categorically exempt from the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), then an initial study shall be prepared. After preparation of an initial study, the environmental review process shall be conducted pursuant to CEQA. The planning commission shall conduct any necessary public meetings or hearings. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.070 - Tree protection and replacement standards. 
Tree protection and replacement shall be as specified in Chapter 12.36, Tree Conservation, of this code. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.080 - Clearing permit requirements. 
A.  Permits Required. Except as exempted in Section 15.08.050 of this chapter, no person shall do any clearing without first obtaining a clearing permit and applicable state-issued stormwater discharge permits. A separate permit shall be required for each site. 
B.  Clearing Plan and Specifications. Each application for a clearing permit shall be accompanied by three sets of plans and specifications, and supporting data pursuant to this section as determined by the development services director or his or her designee. All plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer or other licensed professional as authorized by the California Business and Professions Code except that the development services director or his or her designee may waive this requirement if the clearing is minor in nature and would not endanger the public health, safety or welfare. 
C.  Information on Clearing Plans and Specifications. Plans shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed, and show in detail that they will conform to the provisions of this chapter and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the general vicinity of the subject property, and the name, address and telephone number of the property owner, and the person by whom the plans were prepared. 
The plans shall include the following information: 
1.  Area of parcel to be cleared shown on site plan; 
2.  Amount of land to be cleared (in acres); 
3.  Methods and equipment to be used in clearing operations; 
4.  Purpose of clearing; 
5.  Proposed erosion control measures; 
6.  Exterior wall lines of all existing structures situated on or off the property within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property line (or one-half the width of the adjacent lot, whichever is less); 
7.  Existing and proposed topographic contours of the subject site. Existing contours shall be shown by broken lines at five feet or smaller intervals. Contours shall be labeled with elevation; 
8.  Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, including brow ditches, retaining walls, cribbing, dams, protective fencing, and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a part of, the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains; 
9.  Location of all trees greater that ten-inch diameter at breast height (DBH) with the exception of grey pine (pinus sabiniana) along with a tree survey pursuant to Chapter 12.36, Tree Conservation; 
10.  Location of any existing sensitive biological species, sensitive biological habitat, including wetlands; 
11.  Letter of permission from property owner for any off-site clearing; 
12.  Any additional plans, drawings, calculations, or title reports the development services director or his or her designee may require because of special characteristics found to exist upon the grading site. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.090 - Grading permit requirements. 
A.  Permits Required. Except as exempted in Section 15.08.050 of this chapter, no person shall do any grading without first obtaining a grading permit and applicable state-issued stormwater discharge permits. A separate permit shall be required for each site. 
B.  Preliminary Grading Plan. For projects requiring discretionary review by the planning commission, a preliminary grading plan shall be submitted. The plan shall include: 
1.  Slope analysis pursuant to subsection G of this section. 
2.  Existing and proposed grades and the extent of cut and fill. 
3.  Proposed drainage system, including location of proposed detention/retention facilities. 
4.  Existing and proposed topographic contours of the subject site. Existing contours shall be shown by broken lines at five feet or smaller intervals, with future contours shown by a solid line. Contours shall be labeled with elevation. 
5.  Proposed building envelopes, including elevations. 
6.  Geotechnical report pursuant to subsection F of this section. 
7.  Sectional drawings pursuant to subsection H of this section. 
8.  Proposed retaining walls. 
9.  Proposed erosion control measures. 
10.  Location of all waters of the United States and wetland areas as defined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
C.  Grading Plans and Specifications. Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by three hardcopy sets of plans and specifications, one .PDF format digital file, and supporting data pursuant to this section as determined by the development services director or his or her designee. When available, the submittal shall include one digital (electronic) set of plans in .DWG format. Additional sets of plans and specifications, or additional studies, may be required. All plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer or other licensed professional as authorized by the California Business and Professions Code, except that the development services director or his or her designee may waive this requirement if the grading is minor in nature; and would not endanger the public health, safety or welfare. All plans and specifications shall be reviewed and signed by the licensed professional who prepared the geotechnical report prior to submittal to the city. 
D.  Information on Grading Plans and Specifications. Plans shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed, and show in detail that they will conform to the provisions of this chapter and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the general vicinity of the subject property, and the name, address and telephone number of the property owner, and the person by whom the plans were prepared. 
The plans shall be a minimum of twenty (22) inches by thirty-four (34) inches in size and shall include the following information: 
1.  Parcel dimensions with bearings, distances and easements. Indicate physical reference points for location of property line (e.g., surveyor's monument), bench mark and basis of bearings. 
2.  Exterior wall lines of all existing structures situated on or off the property within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property line (or one-half the width of the adjacent lot, whichever is less). 
3.  Onsite driveways, parking, patios, decks, landscaping, retaining walls and fences. 
4.  Street right-of-way lines, curb lines or pavement edge, curb cuts and sidewalks. 
5.  Existing and proposed topographic contours of the subject site, plus an additional one hundred (100) feet beyond the project limits or property line, whichever is greater. Existing contours shall be shown by broken lines at five feet or smaller intervals. Contours shall be labeled with elevation. 
6.  Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, including brow ditches, retaining walls, cribbing, dams, protective fencing, and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a part of, the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains. A detailed drainage report prepared and signed by a civil engineer or other licensed professional as authorized by the California Business and Professions Code shall be submitted that provides information on the hydrology and hydraulics used to size all drainage devices. 
7.  Location, dimension, cross sections, building materials and top/bottom elevations of any proposed retaining, crib and stem walls and fences. Structural calculations for any device retaining thirty-six (36) inches or more shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer or other licensed professional as authorized by the California Business and Professions Code and shall be submitted along with the grading plans. 
8.  Location of all trees greater that ten-inch diameter at breast height (DBH) with the exception of grey pine (pinus sabiniana) along with a tree survey pursuant to Chapter 12.36, Tree Conservation. 
9.  Location of any existing sensitive biological species, sensitive biological habitat, including wetlands. 
10.  Letter of permission from property owner for any off-site grading. 
11.  Any additional plans, drawings, calculations, or title reports the development services director or his or her designee may require because of special characteristics found to exist upon the grading site. 
12.  A plan depicting proposed erosion control measures. 
13.  A detailed cost estimate of the project using local unit prices as approved by the city engineer. 
14.  Designation of all haul routes and site of deposition of any materials removed from the project site. 
E.  Regulatory Agency Approvals. For projects resulting in a land disturbance of one acre or more, or less than one acre but part of a larger common plan of development, the Regional Water Quality Control Board's notice of intent and authorization shall be provided, including a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). A SWPPP shall be required for land disturbances less than one acre when the development services director or his or her designee, or the Regional Water Quality Control Board, determines that the project poses a significant threat to water quality. Copies of permits from Army Corps of Engineers and California Department of Fish and Game shall be provided when applicable. 
F.  Geotechnical Report. A geotechnical report shall be provided for all projects requiring discretionary approval by the planning commission, or as required pursuant to the California Building Code, or as otherwise recommended by the development services director or his or her designee. The development services director or his or her designee may waive the requirement for a geotechnical report when the proposed project is so minor that it does not pose a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
The report shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer, geotechnical engineer, certified engineering geologist, or other licensed professional as authorized by the California Business and Professions Code. 
1.  Adequate description of the geology of the site including data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils. 
2.  Detailed subsurface investigation based on test borings. 
3.  Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, including structures, retaining walls and detention/retention facilities. 
4.  Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures. 
5.  Design criteria for corrective measures when necessary. 
6.  Opinions and recommendations covering adequacy of the site to be developed. 
7.  Recommendations included in the report and approved by the development services director or his or her designee shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. 
G.  Slope Analysis. The slope analysis shall include the natural topographic features showing the following slope categories and the acreage/square footage for each slope category: 
Zero—twenty (20) percent 
Twenty (20)—thirty (30) percent 
Thirty (30) percent and over 
The slope analysis shall generally be prepared at a scale no smaller than one inch equals two hundred (200) feet utilizing contour intervals of no more than ten feet. Exceptions may be granted by the development services director or his or her designee based on the size and slope of the property. 
An overlay of the slope analysis and the proposed development indicating the location of proposed pads, structures, streets, driveways, retaining walls, drainage features and facilities, and any other site improvements, and all proposed grading including cut and fill lines and maximum slope heights and gradients shall be required. 
H.  Sectional Drawings. Sectional drawings through the site showing major natural features and neighboring structures in relation to the proposed development shall be required. Indicate the fill from the original grade, extent of any excavation, hillside cuts, screening, existing and proposed grades, and effects on views of development from neighboring properties, public parks, and public rights-of-way. 
I.  Visual Impact Analysis. When determined necessary by the development services director or his or her designee, a visual impact analysis shall be completed that analyzes the visual impact of the proposed development from critical vantage points. 
Prior to application submittal, the development services director or his or her designee will evaluate the potential for adverse visual and aesthetic impacts from the following viewpoints within a five mile radius of the project site: 
1.  A property on or eligible for inclusion in the National or State Register of Historic Places. 
2.  State and city parks and designated open space areas, including public trail systems. 
3.  A highway or roadway designated or eligible for designation as scenic pursuant to the California Department of Transportation. 
4.  Public streets, highways and rights-of-way. 
The exact points of view to be utilized for the visual impact analysis will be specified by the development services director or his or her designee prior to the project submittal. The distance of the viewpoints from the proposed project shall generally be no more than five miles and no less than one-half mile. 
The visual impact analysis shall include story pole installation, color renderings, computer simulation, photomontage, scale model, or another graphic representation that accurately shows the scale, bulk and relationship of the proposed development to the topography and surrounding area, as determined by the development services director or his or her designee. 
J.  Issuance. The provisions of the Uniform Building Code (UBC) are applicable to grading and clearing permits. The development services director or his or her designee may require that grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur which incur weather-generated problems not considered at the time the permit was issued. 
K.  Provisions for Denial. A grading or clearing permit may be denied if the development services director or his or her designee determines that: 
1.  It is reasonably likely that the ultimate development of the land to be graded cannot occur without further grading requiring planning commission approval pursuant to the provisions of Section 15.08.060 of this chapter; or 
2.  a.  There is no approved development plan or environmental clearance under California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) for the property to be graded, and 
b.  The proposed grading may substantially limit development alternatives for the property, and 
c.  Development of the property will require discretionary approvals (such as, but not limited to, a tentative subdivision or parcel map, a conditional use permit, or a planned development approval) by the city; or 
3.  The proposed grading will result in removing the lateral and subjacent support of the adjacent land, or otherwise endanger or constitute a hazard to other real property at a higher or lower elevation not necessarily adjacent or contiguous thereto, or to public sewers, drains, watercourses, streets, street improvements or other public property or result in seepage or slides, except upon condition that such damage or hazard shall be eliminated by the construction of necessary walls, cribs or other devices approved by the city engineer; or 
4.  The proposed grading is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare; or 
5.  A hearing is required, unless the hearing body has approved the application after conducting the hearing and no appeal is filed. 
L.  Appeals. The development services director's or his or her designee's, denial of a grading permit pursuant to subsection K of this section may be appealed to the planning commission. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. Such appeals shall follow the same procedures for use permit appeals in accordance with the provisions of Sections 17.92.030 et seq. of Chapter 17.92. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 19-273, § 3, 3-5-2019)  
15.08.100 - Grading fees. 
The amount of the plan-checking and inspection fees for grading plans shall be as set forth by resolution or ordinance of the city council of the city of Shasta Lake. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.110 - Bonds. 
The development services director or his or her designee may require a surety bond or instrument of credit in such form and amounts as may be deemed necessary to ensure that the work, if not completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.120 - Work during the wet weather season. 
A.  That period between October 1 and the following April 30 is found and determined to be the period in which heavy rainfall normally occurs in the city. During this period, no clearing or grading in excess of two hundred fifty (250) cubic yards may be commenced on any single site if the city engineer or public works director determines by visual inspection that such work will endanger the public health and safety or is otherwise prohibited by state or federal regulations. 
B.  If work is allowed during the wet weather season, the permit shall include a sample rain event action plan (REAP) which shall be approved by the development services director or his/her designee, the public works director and the city engineer prior to commencement or continuation of work. The sample REAP shall be updated as needed to reflect the forecast severity of each rain event, as well as the current state of site-wide erosion control measures. 
C.  Erosion control measures, in accordance with the approved SWPPP or BMP schedule, shall be in place at all times during construction, especially during the wet weather season. If a fifty-percent or greater chance of precipitation is forecast for the work area by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (noaa.gov), all elements of the event-specific REAP shall be implemented on the work site under the direction of the qualified SWPPP practitioner (QSP). All additional materials necessary to implement the event-specific REAP shall be on site prior to commencement of work. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 15-240, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
15.08.130 - Grading inspection. 
A.  General. All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the city pursuant to Section 15.08.130(E) of this chapter. Failure by the property owner or his/her designated representative to provide required inspections and supervision shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. Prior to closing the clearing or grading permit, a final inspection shall be made of all construction or work for which the permit has been issued, pursuant to Section 15.08.160 of this chapter. 
B.  Exposure of Work. Whenever any work on which called for inspections are required as specified in this section is covered or concealed by additional work without having first been inspected, such work shall be exposed at the property owner's sole expense for examination. 
C.  Notice. The property owner or his/her designated representative shall notify the public works department twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the time when the grading operation is ready for each of the following inspections: 
1.  Preconstruction Inspection. When the permittee is ready to begin work but before any grading or brushing is started. 
2.  Clearing and Grubbing Inspection. After the natural ground is exposed and prepared to receive fill but prior to the placement of any fill. 
D.  Inspections and Reports. 
1.  The city shall inspect the project at the various stages of the work requiring approval and at any more frequent intervals necessary to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants. 
Certain types of work determined by the development services director or his/her designee or by the city engineer to be likely to endanger or create a hazard to other property shall have either continuous or constant inspection and supervision during all critical periods by a civil engineer, qualified SWPPP practitioner, geotechnical engineer, engineering geologist, or other licensed professional, at the property owner's expense, as required by the city engineer. 
2.  The property owner or his/her designated representative shall provide sufficient professional supervisory control by the geotechnical engineer during the grading operation to ensure compliance with the approved plans and specifications and the provisions of this chapter. This shall include, but need not be limited to, supervision of the grading operation and inspection of cleared areas and benches prepared to receive fill and removal of all unsuitable soil and material, recommendations with respect to spring locations, groundwater and earth material conditions, the bearing capacity of the fill to support structures, the placement and compaction of fill materials, and the inspection of buttress fills, subdrains and similar devices. 
E.  Notification of Noncompliance. If, in the course of fulfilling his/her responsibility under this chapter, the civil engineer, geotechnical engineer, engineering geologist or other licensed professional as authorized by the California Business and Professions Code finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the grading work and to the development services director or his/her designee. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted. 
F.  Transfer of Responsibility for Approval. If the civil engineer, the geotechnical engineer, the engineering geologist, or other licensed professional as authorized by the California Business and Professions Code is changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has provided written notice to the city to accept the responsibility within the area of his/her technical competence for approval upon completion of the work. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 15-240, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
15.08.140 - Safety. 
If at any stage of work on an excavation or fill the city engineer or public works director determines that the work is or is likely to become dangerous or is likely to endanger any property, public or private, it shall be his or her duty to require safety precautions to be immediately taken as a condition to continuing such permit work or to require immediate cessation unless and until it is made safe and to amend the plans for such work. After receiving such notice, oral or written, it is unlawful for the permittee or any person to proceed with such work contrary to said order. As soon as possible the public works director shall make a report outlining the conditions observed and the pertinent soil, geological and engineering information and shall mail or deliver a copy thereof to the permittee, but such order shall not be contingent upon the preparation or delivery of a report in those cases where hazard requires prompt action. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.150 - Modifications. 
A.  The permittee and his or her agents shall not deviate from the grading plans and specifications without the written approval of the official or body which granted final approval to the original permit. 
B.  The public works director or city engineer may require permittee to modify the grading plan, erosion control plans, and maintenance methods and schedules. The public works director shall notify the permittee in writing of the requirement and specify a reasonable period of time within which permittee must comply. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.160 - Completion of work. 
A.  Final Reports. Upon completion of the rough grading work prior to any fine/precise grading, and at the final completion of the work, the development services director or his or her designee may require the following reports, drawings, and supplements thereto: 
1.  A record grading plan prepared by the project's civil engineer or other licensed professional as authorized by the California Business and Professions Code, including original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities. The project civil engineer or other authorized licensed professional shall certify in writing that the work was done in accordance with the final approved grading plan. 
2.  A soil grading report prepared by the geotechnical engineer or other licensed professional as authorized by the California Business and Professions Code, including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests and other substantiating data and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the geotechnical engineering investigation report. The geotechnical engineer or other authorized licensed professional shall certify in writing as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use. 
3.  A geologic grading report prepared by the engineering geologist including a final description of the geology of the site including any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. The engineering geologist shall certify in writing as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use as affected by geologic factors. 
B.  Notification of Completion. The permittee or his or her agent shall notify the city public works department when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices and all erosion-control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan, the required reports, and the record grading plan have been submitted. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.170 - Hauling. 
A.  Routes. In cases where the public works director designates the haul routes, such designation of routes shall take into consideration the most practical means of transporting the earth materials to and from the grading site consistent with the safety and welfare of residents along the routes. 
B.  Maintenance of Roadways. All public roadways used by the permittee shall be maintained free from all dust, dirt, and debris caused by the grading operations. The public works director may require a cash deposit or other financial surety from the permittee to cover any costs of roadway maintenance incurred by the city which are directly attributable to the permittee's grading operation. The amount of the cash deposit or financial security shall be determined by the public works director. The cash deposit or other financial surety or any unused portion thereof shall be refunded to the permittee after the grading permit has been closed. 
C.  Spillage. All vehicle loads shall be trimmed and watered or otherwise secured so as to prevent spillage from the equipment. 
D.  Equipment. In no event shall any export or import of earth materials to and from a grading site over dedicated and improved streets in the area be undertaken or conducted except by use of equipment which complies in all respects with the State Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.180 - Grading violations. 
The following are expressly declared to be unlawful: 
A.  Any failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter by any person; 
B.  Any clearing, grading, excavation, or fill which is done without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
C.  Any failure by the permittee, or his or her agents, or anyone acting for the permittee, to comply with the terms, conditions, specifications, or limitations contained in a duly issued grading permit; 
D.  After work has been started by the permittee under a duly issued grading permit, any failure by the permittee to complete the work authorized by the permit; 
E.  Any quantity of clearing, grading, fill, or excavation upon the property of another without the property owner's permission; 
F.  Continuation of a violation described in subsection A, B, C, D, or E of this section, beyond the end of one day, shall be considered a separate violation for each day or portion of the last day on which it is continued. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.190 - Nuisance. 
A.  Declaration. The condition of the land which results from any unlawful clearing, grading, excavation, or fill is expressly declared to be a public nuisance. (Government Code Section 38771). 
B.  Notice. Whenever the development services director or his or her designee is advised that a nuisance exists pursuant to this section, he or she shall immediately notify the property owner and issue a stop-work order and/or an order providing for abatement of the nuisance and/or may refer the nuisance to the planning commission. 
C.  Responsibility. The property owner shall be responsible for the control of conduct on the property so as to prevent any unlawful clearing, grading, excavation, or fill. If any unlawful clearing, grading, excavation, or fill takes place on the property, the property owner shall alleviate the nuisance thereby created and: (1) restore the land to its preexisting condition to the greatest extent practicable, or (2) take such remedial action as may be required by the development services director or his or her designee, the planning commission (after abatement hearing), or city council (after appeal) to remove and abate the nuisance. 
D.  Relief from Nuisance Abatement Enforcement. The property owner may apply for relief by making a written request to the development services director in conjunction with an application for a clearing or grading permit. If a permit is issued, enforcement remedies to abate the nuisance shall be stayed pending performance under the permit, provided that: (1) the nuisance has not yet been abated by the city, and (2) any permit issued after an appeal before the planning commission, or city council shall conform to the order of such body without requirement of a further public hearing on the permit, and (3) only one permit may be issued pursuant to this section. Relief from nuisance abatement enforcement remedies shall not stay enforcement or relieve liability for fines under Section 15.08.200(A) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.200 - Penalties and remedies. 
The following penalties and remedies are accumulative and not exclusive of any other penalties or remedies allowed by law: 
A.  Fines. 
1.  Any persons who are found to have violated the provisions of this chapter with respect to grading, excavation, or fill may be held jointly and severally liable for payment of a fine made payable to the city in accordance with the amount of acreage of land which was unlawfully graded, excavated, or filled. The amount of the fine shall be: 
Less than one acre of disturbance 	$ 500.00 
One through five acres of disturbance 	2,000.00 
Over five acres of disturbance 	5,000.00 
 
2.  Any persons who are found to have violated the provisions of this chapter with respect to clearing may be held jointly and severally liable for payment of a fine in accordance with the amount of acreage of land which was unlawfully cleared. The amount of the penalty shall be: 
Less than one acre of disturbance 	$ 500.00 
One through five acres of disturbance 	2,000.00 
Over five acres of disturbance 	5,000.00 
 
3.  Any persons who are found to have violated the conditions of a duly issued permit for grading, excavation, fill, or clearing, such that the magnitude of the violation cannot be measured by the amount of acreage disturbed may be held jointly and severally liable for payment of a fine of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
4.  The development services director or his or her designee may order that further development, other than erosion control and corrective action or site restoration measures, be suspended for up to five years from the date of satisfactory completion of all corrective action or site restoration work. 
B.  Denial of Other Permits. No building permit, water, sewer, or electrical permit, or any other permit shall be issued by the city to any person for any premises or portion thereof which is in violation of this chapter and which violation is not corrected or approved for correction by the development services director or his or her designee. 
C.  Nuisance Abatement/Enforcement. 
1.  Appeal to the Planning Commission. Within ten days following a finding of a nuisance and issuance of an order by the development services director or his or her designee, an aggrieved property owner may appeal the decision by filing a written request to the clerk of the planning commission, together with a nonrefundable fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for processing the appeal. Said appeal does not release the property owner of complying with any stop-work order or order of abatement. 
2.  Appeal to City Council. Within ten days following a finding of a nuisance and issuance of an order by the planning commission, an aggrieved property owner may appeal the decision by filing a written request with the city clerk detailing the objections to the finding and order, together with a nonrefundable fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for processing the appeal. On appeal, the city council shall receive a report from the planning commission setting forth the basis for the finding and order, together with such relevant evidence as may be allowed on the issues raised by the appeal. Following hearing on the appeal, the city council may uphold or reverse the decision of the planning commission, or modify the remedial action necessary to abate the nuisance; and the city council shall authorize the mayor to immediately issue an order in accordance therewith. The order of the city council shall be final. 
3.  Resolution Ordering Abatement—Service. If the planning commission or city council orders abatement of the nuisance, a copy of the order directing the public works department to abate the nuisance after thirty (30) days shall be served upon the property owner in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Any property owner shall have the right to comply with the order by: (1) restoring the property to its preexisting condition to the greatest extent practicable, or (2) taking such remedial action specified in the order to remove or abate the nuisance, at his or her own expense, provided it is done in conformance with Section 15.08.190(C) of this chapter prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) days. 
4.  Abatement Costs—Accounting. The public works department shall keep an account of the costs, including incidental expenses, of abating the nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work has been done, and shall render an itemized report in writing to the city council showing the cost of the work on each separate lot or parcel of land; provided that before the report is submitted to the city council, a copy of the report and notice shall be served upon the owner of the property in accordance with the provisions of this section at least five days prior to submitting the report to the city council. Proof of service shall be made by affidavit or declaration and filed with the city clerk. The term "incidental expenses" shall include, but not be limited to, the expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, service of notices, specifications and contracts, inspecting the work, and the costs of printing and mailing required by this chapter. 
5.  Abatement Costs—Final Determination. At the date and time fixed for receiving and considering the report referred to in this section, the city council shall hear and pass upon the report of the public works department, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any persons potentially liable or property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abating the nuisance and any other interested persons. Thereupon, the city council may make such revision, correction, or modification in the report as it may deem just, after which by resolution the report, as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed, provided that a hearing or consideration may be continued from time to time. The decision of the city council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. 
6.  Abatement Costs—Assessment. The amount of the cost for abating the nuisance upon the various lots or parcels of land, as confirmed by the city council, shall constitute special assessments against the respective lots or parcels of land, and as thus made and confirmed shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessments, respectively. After the confirmation of the report, a copy shall be turned over to the county assessor and tax collector, acting for city, whereupon it shall be the duty of the assessor and tax collector to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular bills of taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes, and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
7.  Emergency Abatement. When it comes to the attention of the public works department that a nuisance exists which is determined to be of imminent danger of causing rocks, soil, sediment, or debris in any form to fall, slide, or flow onto adjoining properties, watercourses, public property, or floodplain, the department may immediately perform corrective work, either with city crews or by contract, notwithstanding the other provisions of this subsection. 
8.  Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to enforce the provisions of the chapter, city staff may enter the premises at all reasonable times in the manner provided by law to perform any duty imposed by this chapter. If such entry is refused, the development services director or his or her designee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.210 - Design criteria for all projects. 
A.  The criteria listed below are to be adhered to in the preparation of grading plans. In addition, these criteria are intended to reflect and implement the goals and policies of the Shasta Lake general plan relating to the protection of the natural resources of the city. Proposed grading designs will be compared to these criteria and, therefore, project proponents shall meet with city staff to discuss development and grading concepts prior to submittal of formal permit applications. 
1.  No extensive development or grading shall occur on slopes of thirty (30) percent or greater. Small isolated areas of slope over thirty (30) percent will be reviewed by the development services director or his or her designee and shall be approved by the planning commission only for the construction and installation of roads and utilities where it can be shown to be sensitive to the existing terrain. Development of garage pads and other limited pad grading for dwelling units on slopes over thirty (30) percent will be considered only outside of hillside areas where it can be shown to be sensitive to the existing terrain and when designed according to the design criteria stipulated in subsection (A)(2) of this section. 
2.  Grading on natural slopes of twenty (20) percent to thirty (30) percent shall be permitted only for the construction and installation of roads, driveways, utilities, garage pads and other limited pad grading for dwelling units where it can be shown to be sensitive to the existing terrain and shall be designed according to the following: 
a.  Proposed structures shall utilize split pads, stepped footings and grade separations in order to conform to the natural terrain. Detaching parts of a dwelling such as a garage, utilizing below grade rooms, and using roofs on lower levels for the deck space of upper levels shall be considered. Other structural designs such as stilt or cantilevered foundations and earth-sheltered or earth-bermed buildings which fit the structure to the natural contours and minimize grading may be considered on a case-by-case basis. Deck construction with excessively high distances between the structure and grade shall be avoided; 
b.  Rear yards shall not exceed twenty (20) feet measured parallel to the slope if such yard requires a grading exception; 
c.  Accessory structures, swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar uses shall not be constructed if such construction requires a grading exception. 
3.  Cuts. 
a.  General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved geotechnical report, cuts shall conform to the provisions of this section. In the absence of an approved geotechnical report, these provisions may be waived by the development services director or his or her designee for minor cuts not intended to support structures. 
b.  Slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two is to one. If steeper slopes are supported by a geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist, the city engineer shall consider and may approve, or recommend approval by the planning commission, a steeper slope but shall not be bound by such report if he or she determines the public safety would be endangered. Reasonable justification (such as to avoid blasting rock or to preserve protected trees) shall be given for any cut slope proposed to be steeper than two is to one. 
4.  Fills. 
a.  General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved geotechnical report, fills shall conform to the provisions of this section. In the absence of an approved geotechnical report, these provisions may be waived by the development services director or his or her designee for minor fills not intended to support structures. 
b.  Fill Location. Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than two is to one. 
c.  Preparation of Ground. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials, and scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill, and where natural slopes are steeper than five is to one and the height is greater than five feet, by benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the geotechnical engineer or other qualified professional. 
The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than five is to one shall be at least ten feet wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain shall be provided. Where fill is to be placed over a cut, the bench under the toe of fill shall be at least ten feet wide but the cut must be made before placing fill and approved by the geotechnical engineer as a suitable foundation for fill. 
d.  Fill Material. No organic material shall be permitted in fills. No rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than six inches shall be buried or placed in fills unless otherwise recommended by the geotechnical engineer or other qualified professional. Unsuitable soil is soil which, in the opinion of the city engineer or geotechnical engineer is not competent to support other soil or fill, to support structures, or to satisfactorily perform the other functions for which the soil is intended. 
Exception. The city engineer may permit placement of larger rock when the geotechnical engineer properly devises a method of placement, continuously inspects its placement and approves the fill stability. The following conditions shall also apply unless modified by the development services director or his or her designee: 
i.  Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock disposal areas shall be delineated on the grading plan; 
ii.  Rocks shall be placed so as to ensure filling of all voids with fines. 
e.  Old Fills. All old/existing fills shall be tested by either a geotechnical engineer or other qualified professional and a written declaration made as to the adequacy of the fill to support the proposed structures; or the old/existing fill shall be either removed and recompacted or removed from the site. 
f.  Compaction. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety (90) percent of maximum density as determined by AASHTO T-180, correction for oversize material in accordance with AASHTO T-224 or other approved testing method giving equivalent test results. 
g.  Field Density Testing. A field density test shall be taken for each two feet of fill or portion thereof, measured vertically from the lowest point of the area to be filled and for each one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill placed. In addition, in the case of subdivisions, at least one field density test shall be taken on each platted lot which receives fill. Slope face test shall be required at one test per one thousand (1,000) square feet but at no greater vertical interval than ten feet. 
h.  Field Density Certification. All fills shall be tested for relative compaction (density). A certificate of compliance shall be submitted to attest to compliance with these standards. In addition, any fill proposed to support any structure, either immediately or in the future, shall be certified as to compliance with these standards, the geotechnical report, and Appendix Chapter 33 of the Uniform Building Code. All certificates of compliance shall be signed by a geotechnical engineer or other qualified professional and shall be approved by the city engineer. 
5.  Slope heights shall be limited to minimize impact on adjoining properties. The height of retaining walls incorporated in grading designs shall be included in calculating the overall slope height. Grading designs shall conform to the following criteria: 
a.  Fill slopes within fifty (50) feet of the property line shall be limited to five feet in height. Fill slopes in this location greater than five feet in height may be allowed, subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
b.  Fill slopes beyond fifty (50) feet from the property line shall be limited to twenty (20) feet in height unless an alternative design is approved by the planning commission. 
c.  Fill slopes adjacent to existing public and private streets shall be limited to ten feet in height unless an alternative design is approved by the planning commission. 
d.  Cut slopes within fifty (50) feet of the property line shall be limited to twenty (20) feet in height unless an alternative design is approved by the planning commission. 
6.  Setbacks. 
a.  General. The setbacks and other restrictions specified by this section are minimum and may be increased by the development services director or his or her designee or by the recommendation of the city engineer, civil engineer, geotechnical engineer, engineering geologist, or other qualified licensed professional if necessary for safety and stability or to prevent damage of adjacent properties from deposition or erosion or to provide access for slope maintenance and drainage. Retaining walls may be used to reduce the required setbacks when approved by the city engineer, civil engineer, structural engineer or other qualified licensed professional as deemed appropriate by the development services director or his or her designee. 
b.  Unless otherwise recommended and shown on the approved grading plan, setbacks shall be no less than shown on Figure 1. 
c.  Top of Cut Slope. The top of cut slopes shall not be made nearer to a site boundary line than one-fifth of the vertical height of cut with a minimum of two feet and a maximum of ten feet. The setback may need to be increased for any required interceptor drains as determined by the city engineer. 
d.  Toe of Fill Slope. The toes of fill slope shall be made not nearer to the site boundary line than one-half the height of the slope with a minimum of two feet and a maximum of twenty (20) feet. Where a fill slope is to be located near the site boundary and the adjacent off-site property is developed, special precautions shall be incorporated in the work as the city engineer deems necessary to protect the adjoining property from damage as a result of such grading. These precautions may include but are not limited to: 
i.  Additional setbacks. 
ii.  Provision for retaining walls. 
iii.  Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope surface to minimize erosion. 
iv.  Provisions for the control of surface waters. 
Figure 1. Grading Setbacks 
  
7.  Drainage. 
a.  General. Unless otherwise indicated on the approved grading plan, drainage facilities shall conform to the provisions of this section. 
b.  Natural drainage courses shall be preserved, enhanced, and incorporated as an integral part of the project design to the extent possible. Where required, drainage channels and brow ditches shall follow the existing drainage patterns to the extent possible. They shall be placed in inconspicuous locations and receive a naturalizing treatment including native rock, natural materials, colored surfaces, and landscaping, so that the structure appears as an integral part of the environment. 
c.  Drainage. Swales or ditches shall be installed to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
d.  Subsurface Drainage. Cut-and-fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability and as recommended and approved by a geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist. 
e.  Disposal. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practicable drainageway approved by the city engineer and/or other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive downdrains or other devices. 
Building pads shall have a drainage gradient of two percent toward approved drainage facilities, unless waived by the development services director or his or her designee. 
Exception. The gradient from the building pad may be one percent if all of the following conditions exist throughout the permit area: 
i.  No proposed fills are greater than ten feet in maximum depth; 
ii.  No proposed finish cut or fill slope faces have a vertical height in excess of ten feet; 
iii.  No existing slope faces, which have a slope face steeper than ten is to one, have a vertical height in excess of ten feet. 
f.  Interceptor Drains. Paved interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of all cut slopes where the tributary drainage area above slopes toward the cut and has a drainage path greater than forty (40) feet measured horizontally. Interceptor drains shall be paved with a minimum of three inches of concrete or gunite and reinforced. They shall have a minimum depth of twelve (12) inches and a minimum paved width of thirty (30) inches measured horizontally across the drain. The slope of drain shall be approved by the city engineer, civil engineer, or other licensed professional as authorized by the California Business and Professions Code, as determined by the development services director or his or her designee. 
8.  Erosion Control. 
a.  All construction projects involving site grading shall include erosion control plans prepared by a registered civil engineer, Qualified SWPPP developer, or other licensed or certified stormwater professional as applicable. Projects that disturb less than one acre of area may utilize an erosion control handout issued by the city. 
b.  Temporary and permanent erosion control devices, designed and constructed in accordance with the California Stormwater Quality Association (CASQA) BMPs and the city of Shasta Lake Construction Standards, shall be provided to control erosion at all times. The erosion control plan shall contain the following information: 
i.  A delineation and description of the measures to be undertaken to retain sediment on the site, including, but not limited to, the designs and specifications for sediment detention basins and traps, and a schedule for their maintenance and upkeep; 
ii.  A delineation and brief description of the surface runoff and erosion-control measures to be implemented, including, but not limited to, types and method of applying mulches, and designs and specifications for diverters, dikes and drains, and a schedule for their installation, maintenance, and upkeep; 
iii.  A delineation and brief description of the vegetative measures to be used, including, but not limited to, types of seeds and fertilizer and their application rates, the type, location, and extent of pre-existing and undisturbed vegetation types, and a schedule for installation, maintenance, and upkeep. 
iv.  The location and detail of all the measures listed by the applicant under this section shall be depicted on the grading plan or on a separate plan at the discretion of the city engineer. 
v.  An estimate of the cost of implementing and maintaining all erosion- and sediment-control measures shall be submitted to the development services director or his/her designee. 
vi.  The applicant may propose the use of any erosion- and sediment-control techniques in the plan for approval by the city engineer and public works department, provided such techniques are proven to be as or more effective than the equivalent CASQA BMPs. 
c.  The project owner shall provide sufficient equipment and qualified personnel to conduct emergency erosion control methods at all times as identified in the SWPPP and/or erosion control plan. A twenty-four (24) hour emergency contact person and telephone number shall be provided to the development services director or his/her designee. 
d.  The project owner shall be responsible for continual maintenance and inspection of all erosion control systems. In the event of failure or refusal by the project owner to properly maintain the system, the development services director or his/her designee may cause emergency maintenance work to be done to protect public and private property. The cost shall be charged to the property owner. 
e.  In the event that the development services director or his/her designee must authorize emergency maintenance work to be done, he/she may revoke the grading permit by written notice to the property owner. The permit shall not be reissued until the erosion control system is reviewed and any necessary revisions completed as approved by the development services director or his/her designee. 
f.  All erosion-control facilities shall be fifty (50) percent complete by September 1, eighty (80) percent complete by September 15, and one hundred (100) percent complete and fully operational by October 1 of any year. In addition, all facilities shall be maintained fully operational until May 15th of the following year. The erosion-control devices shall be inspected during and between rainfall events and repaired as necessary. Identified sites experiencing erosion shall be scheduled for corrective action no later than the next day. 
9.  Grading shall be limited to the extent possible and designed to retain the shape of the natural landform (see Figure 6). Padded building sites are allowed, but site design and architecture techniques shall be used to mitigate the need for large padded building areas. 
10.  Contour Grading. Contour grading techniques shall be used to provide a variety of both slope percentage and slope direction, except when such approach requires a substantial increase in grading and slope heights, or is not deemed appropriate by the public works director or city engineer. When utilized, contour grading shall conform to the following: 
a.  Hard edges left by cut and fill operations shall be given a rounded appearance that closely resembles the natural contours of the land. The angle of any graded slope shall be gradually transitioned to the angle of the natural terrain. Creation of new graded slopes, significantly steeper than local natural slopes shall be minimized (see Figure 2). 
b.  When space and proper drainage requirements can be met, the toe and crest of any slope in excess of ten feet vertical height shall be rounded with vertical curves of radii no less than five feet designed in proportion to the total height of the slope, as approved by the city engineer (see Figure 3). 
The setbacks from such slope shall be determined as shown on Figure 1. When slopes cannot be rounded, drought-tolerant vegetation shall be used to alleviate a sharp, angular appearance. 
c.  Manufactured slopes shall blend with naturally occurring slopes at a radius compatible with the existing natural terrain (see Figure 3). 
d.  Manufactured slopes shall be screened from view under or behind buildings or by intervening landscaping or natural topographic features. Where possible, grading areas shall be designed with manufactured slopes located on the uphill side of structures, thereby hiding the slope behind the structure (see Figure 4). 
11.  Retaining walls shall be designed with smooth, continuous lines that conform to the natural hillside profile to the extent possible (see Figure 5). 
12.  Preservation of Natural and Cultural Features. Grading designs shall be sensitive to natural topographic, cultural, or environmental features, as well as protected trees, and sensitive biological species and habitat. The following features shall be preserved in permanent open space easements, or such other means which will ensure their preservation: 
a.  Riparian areas, mitigation areas, and areas with sensitive topography, vegetation or habitat; 
b.  Other unique or unusual geographic features; 
c.  Significant cultural or historical features. 
13.  All development shall be sited to avoid potentially hazardous areas and environmentally sensitive areas as identified in the open space element of the general plan or as part of the environmental review, as well as to avoid dislocation of any unique or unusual geographic features (see Figure 6). 
Figure 2. Contour Grading 
  
Figure 3. Contour Grading 
  
Figure 4. Slope Screening 
  
Figure 5. Retaining Walls 
  
14.  Landscaping of Manufactured Slopes. 
a.  All manufactured slopes steeper than two is to one shall be protected and landscaped as required by the planning commission. 
b.  High slopes (over twenty (20) feet) shall be screened with appropriate landscaping and efforts shall be made in the plotting of structures to screen slopes to the maximum extent possible. 
c.  Drought-tolerant and native species shall be utilized wherever possible to minimize water usage. 
15.  Dissimilar Land Uses. Where dissimilar land uses are located adjacent to one another, grading shall be designed so as to buffer or screen one use from the other. In this regard, the location, height, and extent of proposed grading shall be compatible with adjacent uses and screening measures including fences, walls, mounding, and extensive landscaping shall be utilized wherever needed. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 15-240, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
15.08.220 - Hillside development. 
A.  Definition. For purposes of this section, "hillside development" means all residential development within a hillside area, including a major or minor subdivision, or new construction of a single- or multifamily development. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.230 - Hillside development exemptions. 
A.  The hillside development regulations shall not apply to the following types of projects: 
1.  Repair or reconstruction of existing homes damaged or destroyed by fire or other cause; 
2.  Projects for which a grading or building permit was issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which permit was still valid as of said effective date and which has not since expired; 
3.  Grading necessary to correct a slope failure or other ground failure if such correction is deemed by the development services director or his or her designee to be an emergency (i.e., a situation where life and/or property is threatened). Such corrections might include buttressing or replacement of a slope failure, repair of earthquake damage, removing a slide from a roadway, or similar actions; 
4.  All public roads identified in the circulation element of the Shasta Lake general plan, provided that findings of fact are made that no less environmentally damaging alternative alignment or nonstructural alternative measures or combination of measures exist; 
5.  Local public streets or private roads which are necessary for access to the portion of the site to be developed on slopes of less than thirty (30) percent provided no less environmentally damaging alternative exists; 
6.  Trails for passive recreational use according to the approved parks master plan; 
7.  Development of public utility systems, not including private antennas, provided that findings of fact are made that the least environmentally damaging site or alignment has been selected; 
8.  Final maps recorded, and tentative maps and parcel maps approved and/or deemed complete prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. However, development, grading, and landscaping that has not been specifically approved with the approved map shall be reviewed for compliance with these regulations to the extent possible within the framework of the approved plans. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.240 - Plans and specifications. 
A.  The following information shall be submitted for approval of a hillside development: 
1.  All items included in Section 15.08.090 of this chapter. 
2.  Location of building envelopes and driveways pursuant to Section 15.08.270(A)(6) of this chapter. 
3.  Indication of which lots will utilize slab on grade foundations and which will utilize pole, step or other such foundation system to minimize grading. 
4.  For all newly constructed single-family homes on existing lots, building and grading plans shall be submitted at the same time. 
5.  Any additional or other specific information determined by the development services director or his or her designee to be relevant to the applicant's proposal. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 15-240, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
15.08.250 - Findings for approval of projects in a hillside area. 
A.  Prior to the approval of a project within a hillside development area, all of the following findings shall be made in addition to any other applicable findings: 
1.  The bulk, scale, density, and overall character of the proposed development is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and with the natural, cultural, scenic and open space resources of the area; and 
2.  The location and design of the proposed development respects and preserves the natural landform, vegetation, and wildlife of the project site; and 
3.  The location and design of the proposed development does not substantially alter the natural appearance and land form of the hillsides and ridgelines; and 
4.  The location and design of the proposed development will protect the safety of current and future residents, and will not create a significant threat to life and property due to slope instability, fire, flood, mud flow, erosion, or other hazards; and 
5.  All grading associated with the proposed development has been minimized to the extent possible, preserving the character of the property while utilizing appropriate erosion control practices as determined by the development services director or his or her designee to avoid erosion, slides, or flooding, in order to have as minimal an effect on said environment as practicable. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.260 - Density transfer for hillside development. 
A.  For projects within skyline ridges and ridgelines, a density transfer may be granted in order to protect sensitive natural resources, avoid hazardous areas, or preserve the natural appearance of skylines and ridgelines. In considering such density transfer, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  Density transfer shall be permitted only when it preserves skylines, ridgelines, or sensitive habitat or when it provides a community benefit, as determined by the planning commission. Cluster development shall avoid sensitive cultural or biological resources. 
2.  Allowed density transfer shall be four units per acre of skyline or ridgeline, or sensitive habitat open space areas. 
3.  When density is to be transferred outside the hillside area to the remaining portion of the property, the total allowable density shall be calculated by multiplying the size of the area of open space by the allowed density transfer (four units per acre) to determine the total number of residential units that can be transferred from the hillside area. The density transfer shall be in addition to the maximum density identified in the general plan, but the overall average density of the site shall not exceed the maximum allowable density identified in the general plan. Any resulting fractional remainders shall be rounded down. 
4.  As a condition of approval for density transfer, a deed restriction that assures permanent retention of the density transfer land area as open space shall be recorded with the Shasta County recorder concurrently with recordation of a final map or parcel map. A note shall also be placed on the face of the map to notify future property owners of any restrictions. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.270 - Design standards for hillside development. 
A.  The standards provided within this section are in addition to the provisions of Section 15.08.210 of this chapter. The following provisions shall apply to all hillside development. Additional design standards for skyline ridges and ridgeline areas are specified under Section 15.08.340 of this chapter. The planning commission may approve modifications to these requirements upon demonstration that any such proposed modifications represent a desirable integration of both site and unit design. 
1.  Unless a density transfer is granted pursuant to Section 15.08.310 of this chapter, maximum allowable density within hillside areas, not including skyline areas and ridgelines, shall be as specified by the general plan. Minimum lot size shall be as specified by the zoning code. 
2.  Within single-family districts, a usable rear yard of at least fifteen (15) feet from building to slope shall be provided. Within multiple-family districts, a usable rear yard of at least ten feet from building to slope shall be provided. This requirement may be modified to the extent that equal usable area is provided elsewhere on the lot, other than within the required front yard, such as usable open space provided on a deck, and it is demonstrated that the unit is designed to relate to the lot design. 
3.  Within single-family districts where a twelve (12) foot side yard is required, at least six feet of said side yard shall be usable as defined by this code. 
4.  Retaining walls may not be used within required usable side or rear yards unless approved by the development services director or his or her designee. Retaining walls so used will be counted as part of the total permitted slope height. 
5.  No cuts or fills higher than six feet shall be allowed within hillside areas unless an alternative design is approved by the planning commission. 
6.  Each new lot created shall designate a building envelope that indicates where existing trees and natural vegetation may be removed and soil disturbed for the purpose of a building footprint, parking, driveway access and other accessory uses. No building envelope shall exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet or no more than fifty (50) percent of the lot, whichever is less. However, a building envelope may exceed the maximum allowable size to the extent necessary for construction of a driveway longer than fifty (50) feet to reach a building envelope or when determined appropriate by the planning commission. There shall be no disturbance of the natural terrain or vegetation outside the building envelope. 
7.  Minimum lot width at the proposed building site shall be one hundred (100) feet. Minimum lot width at the property's street frontage shall be as specified by the underlying zoning. 
8.  Grading must be designed to preserve natural features such as knolls or ridgelines. The top of a prominent hilltop, knoll, or ridge may be graded to create a building pad only when approved by the planning commission. 
9.  The use of retaining walls, plantable walls, and terraced retaining structures is encouraged when such use can eliminate the need for extensive cut or fill slopes. Retaining walls shall typically have a height of five feet or less. Plantable walls shall be used instead of retaining walls above six feet in height. Terraced retaining structures shall be considered on an individual lot basis when their use can avoid the need for extensive manufactured slopes and retaining walls (see Figure 7). 
10.  Circulation shall be aligned to conform to the natural grades as much as possible within the limits of the city's street design standards (see Figure 9). 
11.  Grading for the construction of access roads or drainageways shall be minimized so that the visual impacts associated with said construction are mitigated to the greatest extent possible. 
12.  Common flaglot driveways shall be considered if grading is reduced by their use. 
13.  The construction of access roadways or driveways shall be accompanied by sufficient berming and landscaping/erosion control so that visual impacts associated with said construction are mitigated (see Figure 10). 
14.  If the development services director or his or her designee or the planning commission determines that no hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic will be created (e.g., a swing or curved driveway to the garage or carport, with entrance to the garage or carport facing the side yard), a garage or carport may be built to within five feet of the street right-of-way line, if: 
a.  The front half of the lot or building site slopes up or down from the established street grade at a slope of twenty (20) percent or greater; 
b.  The elevation of the front half of the lot or building site is more than four feet above established street grade. Such garage or carport may not extend across more than thirty (30) percent of the street frontage of the lot or building site, or more than fifty (50) feet, whichever is less. 
15.  Single-level residential structures shall be oriented such that the greatest horizontal dimension of the structure is parallel with, and not perpendicular to, the natural contour of the land unless an alternative design is approved by the planning commission (see Figure 11). 
16.  Building height shall be as permitted by the underlying zoning as measured from the natural grade at any point of the structure (see Figure 12). 
17.  Slope Ratios. Grading designs shall use a mix of different slope ratios—particularly where slope surfaces are easily visible from public streets. A mixture of two is to one, two and one-half is to one, three is to one, and flatter slope ratios shall be used to provide variety throughout the development. 
(Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
15.08.280 - Design standards for skyline and ridgeline development. 
A.  The standards of Sections 15.08.210 and 15.08.260 of this chapter shall apply in addition to the standards specified in this section. 
B.  The maximum allowable density within skyline ridge and ridgeline areas shall be two units per acre. Minimum lot size shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
C.  The minimum width of the lot measured parallel to the protected ridge at the proposed building site shall be no less than two hundred (200) feet (see Figure 13). 
D.  Only single-story structures or portions of multiple single-story-stepped structures designed to conform to the topography of the site shall be permitted to project above ridgelines a maximum of twenty (20) feet. 
E.  A structure may project above a skyline ridge only if it can be demonstrated with the visual impact analysis specified in Section 15.08.090(I) of this chapter that the proposed development will not substantially degrade the existing visual character or quality of the site and its surroundings or substantially damage scenic resources (e.g., scenic highways, trees, greenbelt areas, open space areas). 
F.  The slope of the roof shall be oriented in the same direction as the natural slope, and in developments that include a number of individual buildings, variation shall be provided to avoid monotony unless an alternative design is approved by the planning commission. 
G.  The natural contour and vegetation of the skyline ridge shall remain intact with development maintaining an undisturbed minimum setback of two hundred (200) feet measured horizontally from the center of the ridgeline on a topographic map, or fifty (50) feet measured vertically on a cross section, whichever is more restrictive (see Figure 14). 
Lesser setbacks may be authorized if it can be demonstrated with the visual impact analysis specified in Section 15.08.090(I) of this chapter that the proposed development will not substantially degrade the existing visual character or quality of the site and its surroundings or substantially damage scenic resources (e.g., scenic highways, trees, greenbelt areas, and open space areas). 
H.  A deed restriction that assures permanent retention of the nondisturbance area along a skyline ridge or ridgeline identified pursuant to subsection G of this section shall be recorded with the Shasta County recorder concurrently with recordation of a final map or parcel map. The owner shall be responsible to retain, maintain, preserve, and protect the public views of these areas in their natural state without obstruction by structures. A nondisturbance deed restriction shall not prohibit construction of a public trails system, planting of vegetation, or clearing of brush which is necessary to reduce fire hazards. A note shall also be placed on the face of the map to notify future property owners of any restrictions. 
I.  Building materials and color schemes shall blend with the natural landscape and shall include earth tones for main and accessory structures, fences and walls. Reflective materials or finishes shall not be used. Specific lots for which specific building materials and color schemes shall apply shall be identified during the application process in conjunction with the visual impact analysis. Landscaping shall be utilized to recreate the 
Figure 6. Sensitive Areas 
  
linear silhouette and to act as a backdrop for structures. Trees that grow to at least one and one-half times the height of the structure shall be planted between buildings to eliminate the open gap and blend the rooflines into one continuous silhouette. 
Figure 7. Use of Retaining Walls 
  
Figure 8. Cut Slopes 
  
Figure 9. Road Design 
  
Figure 10. Screening Impacts 
  
Figure 11. Structure Orientation 
  
Figure 12. Building Height/Roof Slope 
  
Figure 13. Site Distance/Lot Widths 
  
(Ord. No. 10-213, § II, 10-19-2010; Ord. 07-183 § 4 (part))  
Chapter 15.10 - Water Efficient Landscaping 
Sections: 
 
15.10.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to comply with the requirements of the California Water Conservation Landscaping Act of 2006 (AB 1881), codified as Government Code Section 65591 et seq. Furthermore, the specific purposes of this chapter are to: 
A.  Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as possible. 
B.  Ensure the attainment of water-efficient landscape goals by requiring that landscapes not exceed a maximum water demand. 
C.  Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects. 
D.  Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes. 
E.  Establish the city's responsibilities for administering programs to ensure compliance with the provisions for this chapter and of the California Water Conservation in Landscaping Act of 2006. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.020 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects submitted to the city on January 1, 2010, or later: 
1.  New construction and rehabilitated landscapes for public agency projects and private development projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building or grading permit, plan check or design review. 
2.  New construction and rehabilitated landscapes which are developer-installed in single-family and multifamily projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building or grading permit, plan check, or design review. 
3.  New construction landscapes which are homeowner-provided and/or homeowner-hired in single-family and multifamily residential projects with a total project landscape area equal to or greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet requiring a building or grading permit, plan check or design review. 
4.  Existing landscapes over one acre in size installed before January 1, 2010, limited to the provisions of Section 15.10.150 of this chapter. 
5.  Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to the provisions of Sections 15.10.050(B), 15.10.080 and 15.10.090; and existing cemeteries are limited to the provisions of Sections 15.10.150 and 15.10.060 of this chapter. 
B.  This chapter does not apply to: 
1.  Registered local, state or federal historical sites; 
2.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
3.  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
4.  Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public; or 
5.  Projects which use solely reclaimed water for irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.030 - Definitions. 
"Applied water" means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
"Automatic irrigation controller" means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data. 
"Backflow prevention device" means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
"Certificate of completion" means the document required under Section 15.10.060. 
"Certified irrigation designer" means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the US Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation Association's Certified Irrigation Designer program. 
"Certified landscape irrigation auditor" means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the US Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense irrigation auditor certification program and Irrigation Association's Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor program. 
"Check valve" or "anti-drain valve" means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off. 
"Common interest developments" means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351. 
"Conversion factor (0.62)" means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year 
"Drip irrigation" means any nonspray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
"Ecological restoration project" means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
"Effective precipitation" or "usable rainfall" (Eppt) means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth. 
"Emitter" means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil. 
"Established landscape" means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. 
"Establishment period of the plants" means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. 
"Estimated total water use" (ETWU) means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 15.10.050(B). 
"ET adjustment factor" (ETAF) means a factor of 0.7, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. A combined plant mix with a site-wide average of 0.5 is the basis of the plant factor portion of this calculation. For purposes of the ETAF, the average irrigation efficiency is 0.71. Therefore, the ET Adjustment Factor is (0.7)=(0.5/0.71). ETAF for a Special Landscape Area shall not exceed 1.0. ETAF for existing nonrehabilitated landscapes is 0.8. 
"Evapotranspiration rate" means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time. 
"Flow rate" means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second. 
"Hardscapes" means any durable material (pervious and nonpervious). 
"Homeowner-provided landscaping" means any landscaping either installed by a private individual for a single family residence or installed by a licensed contractor hired by a homeowner. A homeowner, for purposes of this ordinance, is a person who occupies the dwelling he or she owns. This excludes speculative homes, which are not owner-occupied dwellings. 
"Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated. 
"Infiltration rate" means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour). 
"Invasive plant species" means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. "Noxious weeds" means any weed designated by the Weed Control Regulations in the Weed Control Act and identified on a Regional District noxious weed control list. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database. 
"Irrigation audit" means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. 
"Irrigation efficiency" (IE) means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum average irrigation efficiency for purposes of this ordinance is 0.71. Greater irrigation efficiency can be expected from well designed and maintained systems. 
"Irrigation survey" means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system. 
"Irrigation water use analysis" means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data. 
"Landscape architect" means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California pursuant to Business and Professions Code, Section 5615. 
"Landscape area" means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or nonpervious hardscapes, and other nonirrigated areas designated for nondevelopment (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). 
"Landscape contractor" means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems. 
"Landscape documentation package" means the documents required under Section 15.10.050. 
"Landscape project" means total area of landscape in a project as defined in "landscape area" for the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under Section 15.10.020. 
"Lateral line" means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve. 
"Local water purveyor" means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service. 
"Low volume irrigation" means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
"Main line" means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet. 
"Maximum applied water allowance" (MAWA) means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 15.10.050(B)(3). It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas of a project irrigated with recycled or reclaimed water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. 
"Microclimate" means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces. 
"Mined-land reclamation projects" means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. 
"Mulch" means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, and decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion. 
"New construction" means, for the purposes of this chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape. 
"Operating pressure" means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate. 
"Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems" means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors). 
"Overspray" means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area. 
"Permit" means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes. 
"Pervious" means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
"Plant factor" or "plant water use factor" is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this chapter, the plant factor range for low water use plants is zero to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this ordinance are derived from the Department of Water Resources 2000 publication "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species". 
"Precipitation rate" means the rate of application of water measured in inches per hour. 
"Project applicant" means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under Section 15.10.050 to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the local agency. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee. 
"Rain sensor" or "rain sensing shutoff device" means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains. 
"Reclaimed water" means wastewater treated at the city of Shasta Lake Wastewater Treatment Plant to a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
"Record drawing" or "as-builts" means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor. 
"Recreational area" means areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, and golf courses where turf provides a playing surface. 
"Recycled water" means treated or recycled wastewater of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
"Reference evapotranspiration" or "ETo" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Section 15.10.050(B)(2)(a) and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. 
"Rehabilitated landscape" means any re-landscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of Section 15.10.020 and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, is fifty (50) percent of the total landscape area, and the modifications are completed within one year. 
"Runoff" means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope. 
"Soil moisture sensing device" or "soil moisture sensor" means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event. 
"Soil texture" means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay. 
"Special landscape area" (SLA) means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface. 
"Sprinkler head" means a device which delivers water through a nozzle. 
"Static water pressure" means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing. 
"Station" means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
"Swing joint" means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage. 
"Turf" means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses. 
"Valve" means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
"Water conserving plant species" means a plant species identified as having a low plant factor. 
"Water feature" means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. 
"Watering window" means the time of day irrigation is allowed. 
"WUCOLS" means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources and the Bureau of Reclamation, 2000. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.040 - Landscape documentation package review and approval required. 
A complete landscape documentation package (LDP) must be submitted and found to satisfy the requirements of this chapter prior to authorization for water service, the installation of a new water meter, or a change in water service. 
A.  The LDP submitted pursuant to this chapter shall be routed for review to the development services director or his/her designee to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
B.  The project applicant shall be notified in writing if the LDP is found to be incomplete or inconsistent with the standards and indicate where such additions or revisions are necessary. 
C.  Application Fee. An application fee set by resolution of the city council shall accompany each application. 
D.  Upon approval of the LDP, the project applicant shall: 
1.  Receive a building permit or other applicable permit and record the date of the permit on the certificate of completion. 
2.  Provide a copy of the approved LDP to the property owner and/or individual having control of the property. 
E.  In the event a water-supply emergency is declared, landscape requirements shall be deferred for those projects served within the impacted area until such time as the water-supply emergency has been lifted. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.050 - Elements of landscape documentation package. 
The landscape documentation package shall contain the following: 
A.  Water efficient landscape application form. 
B.  Water efficient landscape worksheet consisting of: 
1.  A hydrozone information table and a hydrozone map for the landscape project. 
2.  A water-budget calculation for the landscape project adhering to the following: 
a.  For the calculation of the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, the following ETo values shall apply: 
REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION 

(ETo) TABLE 
Jan. 	Feb. 	Mar. 	Apr. 	May 	Jun. 	Jul. 	Aug. 	Sept. 	Oct. 	Nov. 	Dec. 	Annual ETo 
1.2 	1.4 	2.6 	4.1 	5.6 	7.1 	8.5 	7.3 	5.3 	3.2 	1.4 	0.9 	48.8 
 
b.  The plant factors used shall be from water use classification of landscape species (WUCOLS), which are as follows: 
i.  Low-water-use plants = 0 to 0.3 
ii.  Moderate-water-use plants = 0.4 to 0.6 
iii.  High-water-use plants = 0.7 to 1.0 
c.  All water features shall be included in the high-water-use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low-water-use hydrozone. 
d.  All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated; the ETAF for all special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. 
3.  Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). 
a.  A project's maximum applied water allowance shall be calculated using the following formula: 
MAWA  = (ETo) (0.62) [(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)] where: 
MAWA  = Maximum applied water allowance (gallons per year). 
ETo  = Reference evapotranspiration (inches per year). 
0.62  = Conversion factor (to gallons). 
0.7  = ET adjustment factor (ETAF). 
LA  = Landscape area including SLA (square feet). 
0.3  = Additional water allowance for SLA. 
SLA  = Special landscape area (square feet). 
4.  Estimated total water use (ETWU). 
a.  The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. 
b.  The sum of the estimated total water use calculations for all hydrozones shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. 
c.  A project's estimated total water use shall be calculated using the following formula: 
ETWU  = (ETo) (0.62) [(PF x HA) ÷ IE + SLA] where: 
ETWU  = Estimated total water use (gallons per year). 
ETo  = Reference evapotranspiration (inches per year). 
PF  = Plant factor from WUCOLS. 
HA  = Hydrozone area (square feet). 
SLA  = Special landscape area (square feet). 
0.62  = Conversion factor (to gallons). 
IE  = Irrigation efficiency (minimum 0.71). 
C.  Soil Management Report. In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report satisfying the following criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package: 
1.  Results of a soils analysis prepared by a qualified professional or laboratory. Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants. 
The soils analysis may include the following, as recommended by a qualified professional: 
a.  Determination of soil texture, indicating the percentage of organic matter. 
b.  An appropriate soil infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture/infiltration rate tables. 
c.  Measure of pH. 
d.  Total soluble salts and sodium. 
e.  Recommendations. 
2.  The project applicant shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations in the landscape plan. 
D.  Landscape Design Plan. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package: 
1.  Plant Material. 
a.  Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. To encourage the efficient use of water, the following is highly recommended: 
i.  Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation. 
ii.  Selection of water-conserving plant and turf species. 
iii.  Selection of plants based on disease and pest resistance. 
iv.  Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists. 
b.  Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in Section 15.10.050(E)(1)(t). 
c.  Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. To encourage the efficient use of water, the following is highly recommended: 
i.  Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate. 
ii.  Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines); and 
iii.  Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain. 
d.  Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty-five (25) percent means one-foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run x 100 = slope percent). 
e.  A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per Public Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches. 
f.  The use of invasive and/or noxious plant species is strongly discouraged. 
g.  The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which includes community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group. 
2.  Water Features. 
a.  Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features. 
b.  Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features. 
c.  Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation. 
d.  Pool and spa covers are highly recommended. 
3.  Mulch and Amendments. 
a.  A minimum two-inch (2?) layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. 
b.  Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes. 
c.  The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement. 
d.  Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil management report and what is appropriate for the plants selected. 
4.  Landscape Plan. The project landscape plan shall, at a minimum: 
a.  Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method. 
b.  Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation. 
c.  Identify recreational areas. 
d.  Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants. 
e.  Identify areas irrigated with recycled water. 
f.  Identify type of mulch and application depth. 
g.  Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity. 
h.  Identify type and surface area of water features. 
i.  Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious. 
j.  Identify location and installation details of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and examples include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Infiltration beds, swales, and basins that allow water to collect and soak into the ground. 
ii.  Constructed wetlands and retention ponds that retain water, handle excess flow, and filter pollutants; and 
iii.  Pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete, etc.) that minimize runoff. 
k.  Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies (e.g., rain gardens, cisterns, etc.). 
l.  Contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the Water Efficient Landscaping Chapter and applied it for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan." 
m.  Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code. 
E.  Irrigation Design Plan. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers' recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
1.  Irrigation System. 
a.  Dedicated landscape water meters are required on landscape areas greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet to facilitate water management and are highly recommended for projects less than five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
b.  Weather-based irrigation controllers or soil moisture-based controllers or other self-adjusting irrigation controllers shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems. 
c.  The irrigation system shall be designed to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for optimal performance. 
i.  If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system. 
ii.  Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation. 
d.  Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain. 
e.  Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair. 
f.  Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements. 
g.  High flow sensors that detect and report high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are recommended. 
h.  The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto nontargeted areas, such as adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures. 
i.  Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems. 
j.  The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan. 
k.  The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Section 15.10.050(B) regarding the maximum applied water allowance. 
l.  In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone. 
m.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's recommendations. 
n.  Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer's recommendations. 
o.  Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to high traffic areas. 
p.  Check valves or anti-drain valves are required for all irrigation systems. 
q.  Narrow or irregularly shaped areas, including turf, less than eight feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or a low volume irrigation system. 
r.  Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty-four (24) inches of any nonpermeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from nonpermeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow nonspray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if: 
i.  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or 
ii.  The adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or 
iii.  The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in Section 15.10.050(E)(1)(h). Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
s.  Slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with a precipitation rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
t.  Hydrozone. 
i.  Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use. 
ii.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone. 
iii.  Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf. 
iv.  Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if: 
(a)  Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or 
(b)  The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations. 
v.  Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted. 
vi.  On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, the areas irrigated by each valve shall be designated and assigned a number to each valve. This valve number shall be provided in the Hydrozone Information Table and used to assist with pre-inspection and final inspection of the irrigation system and programming the controller. 
2.  Irrigation Design Plan Specifications. The irrigation design plan shall, at a minimum, contain the following: 
a.  Location and size of separate water meters for landscape. 
b.  Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices. 
c.  Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply. 
d.  Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station. 
e.  Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 15.10.110. 
f.  The following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the Water Efficient Landscape Chapter and applied it accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan." 
g.  The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641 through 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agricultural Code.) 
F.  Grading Design Plan. For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other local agency permits satisfies this requirement. 
1.  The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area, including the height of graded slopes, drainage patterns, pad elevations, finish grade, percent or ratios of slope and stormwater retention improvements, if applicable. 
2.  To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, the grading plan shall be designed to the extent practical to: 
a.  Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain on to nonpermeable hardscapes. 
b.  Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil. 
c.  Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas. 
3.  The grading design plan shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law and shall contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the Water Efficient Landscape Chapter and applied it accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan." 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.060 - Certificate of completion. 
Upon completion of the installation of landscaping and irrigation systems in compliance with the approved landscape design plan, a certificate of completion shall be submitted to the city for review and to the owner of record. The city shall review the certificate of completion and shall approve or deny the certificate. If the certificate of completion is denied, the city shall provide information to the project applicant regarding re-application, appeal or other assistance. The certificate of completion shall include the following elements: 
A.  Project Information. This shall include, but is not limited to, the date, project name, address and location; project applicant's name, telephone number, and mailing address; and property owner's name, telephone number and mailing address. 
B.  Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed in accordance with the approved landscape documentation package. Where there have been significant approved changes made in the field during construction, "as-built" or record drawings shall be included with the certification. 
C.  Irrigation-scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see Section 15.10.070, Irrigation Scheduling). 
D.  Landscape- and irrigation-maintenance schedule (see Section 15.10.080, Irrigation Maintenance Schedule). 
E.  Irrigation audit report (see Section 15.10.090, Irrigation Audit, Survey and Water Analysis). 
F.  Soil analysis report, if not submitted with landscape documentation package and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations (see Section 15.10.050(C), Elements of Landscape Documentation Package, Soil Management Report). 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.070 - Irrigation scheduling. 
For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria: 
A.  Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers. 
B.  Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
C.  For implementation of the irrigation schedule, irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, shall be considered so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data or soil moisture sensor data. 
D.  Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following: 
1.  The plant establishment period. 
2.  The established landscape. 
3.  Temporarily irrigated areas. 
E.  Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply: 
1.  Irrigation interval (days between irrigation). 
2.  Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff). 
3.  Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff. 
4.  Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis. 
5.  Application rate setting. 
6.  Root depth setting. 
7.  Plant type setting. 
8.  Soil type. 
9.  Slope factor setting. 
10.  Shade factor setting. 
11.  Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.080 - Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule. 
Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. 
A.  A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion. A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but is not limited to, routine inspection; adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing and obstruction to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
B.  Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents. 
C.  A project applicant is encouraged to implement sustainable or environmentally-friendly practices for overall landscape maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.090 - Irrigation audit, survey and water use analysis. 
An irrigation audit is required for new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after January 1, 2010. All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the local agency that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow and preparation of an irrigation schedule. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.100 - Irrigation efficiency. 
For the purpose of determining maximum applied water allowance, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.71. Irrigation systems shall be designed, maintained and managed to meet or exceed an average landscape irrigation efficiency of 0.71. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.110 - Recycled water. 
The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water, unless a written exemption has been granted as described in Section 15.10.110(A). 
A.  Irrigation systems and decorative water features shall use recycled water unless a written exemption has been granted by the city stating that recycled water meeting all public health codes and standards is not available and will not be available for the foreseeable future. 
B.  All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and state laws. 
C.  Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. Landscape areas which use solely reclaimed water for irrigation are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.120 - Stormwater management. 
Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site retention and infiltration are encouraged. 
A.  Project applicants shall refer to the city or regional water quality control board for information on any applicable stormwater ordinances and stormwater management plans. 
B.  Rain gardens, cisterns, and other landscapes features and practices that increase rainwater capture and create opportunities for infiltration and/or onsite storage are recommended. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.130 - Model homes/public education. 
The city shall provide information to property owners and developers at the customer service and permit center counters regarding the design, installation, management and maintenance of water efficient landscapes. All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this chapter. 
A.  Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme. 
B.  Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.140 - Environmental review. 
Projects subject to this chapter shall comply with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.150 - Provisions for existing landscapes. 
This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before January 1, 2010 and are over one acre in size. 
A.  The city shall analyze utility records to determine water use for existing landscape areas and identify feasible recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes. The maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes shall be calculated as: MAWA =(0.8)(ETo)(LA)(0.62). 
B.  No retrofits to irrigations systems existing prior to January 1, 2010, shall be required. 
C.  Ongoing monitoring of existing landscape areas shall be pursuant to Section 15.10.180 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.160 - Water waste prevention. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any property owner and/or individual having control of the property, to willfully permit runoff to leave the target landscape area due to low-head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots or structures. 
B.  Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified with approval from the city manager or his/her designee if: 
1.  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or 
2.  The adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.170 - Effective precipitation. 
The city will utilize effective precipitation (twenty-five (25) percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the following equation to calculate maximum applied water allowance: 
MAWA= (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)]. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.180 - Ongoing monitoring. 
The city shall utilize its automatic meter reading (AMR) system for ongoing monitoring of landscape areas subject to this chapter. The water leak detection capability available through the AMR allows the city to closely monitor usage and quickly detect potential water waste. If the city identifies excessive water use, the customer will be immediately notified of the situation. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.190 - Exceptions. 
Exceptions to these Landscape Water Conservation Standards may be granted by the development services director or his/her designee upon a finding, based on substantial evidence, that the exceptions will promote equivalent or greater water conservation than is provided for in these standards. Requests for exceptions shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the development services director or his/her designee at the time the application is submitted to the city for review. Requests for exceptions must be accompanied by documentary evidence supporting the finding of equivalent or greater water conservation. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
15.10.200 - Enforcement. 
A violation of any portion of this chapter and of guidelines adopted pursuant to this chapter is subject to the provisions of Chapter 1.16 of this Code (General Penalty), in addition to other civil or administrative remedies as approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 10-206, § 2, 1-5-2010)  
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.04.010 - Purpose. 
It is the intention of the city council to implement and supplement the Map Act in this title. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.04.010)  
16.04.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in the Map Act are incorporated herein by reference and are supplemented as set forth herein. The following words and terms are used and defined as follows for purposes of this title, unless the context in which a word or term is used requires another usage or meaning: 
"Clearing" means the clearing above the natural ground surface of vegetable growth such as trees, logs, upturned stumps, roots of down trees, brush, grass, weeds and other objectionable materials such as rubbish, in such a manner that any natural erosion, including sedimentation, will not be increased and damage to offsite property will not result. 
"Contiguous" means touching; in actual close contact; near, though not in contact. Parcels of property shall be considered contiguous units if they share a common boundary line or point or are physically so situated with respect to each other that they can reasonably be developed as one subdivision project. Property shall be considered contiguous units even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. 
"Immediate family" means a natural person's brothers, sisters, children, parents, uncles, aunts, nieces, nephews or spouse, or the spouse' brothers, sisters, children or parents. 
"Owner's statement" means a statement submitted with every tentative map for a proposed division of land, containing such information as this part and the city council may direct, and executed under penalty of perjury by the record title owners of the land affected, as provided in Code of Civil Procedure Section 2015.5. 
Property Line Adjustment. 
1.  "Property line adjustment" means the resubdivision of two adjoining parcels by a minor relocation of the boundary line between them so that the land taken from one parcel is merged with the land of the parcel to which it is added. 
2.  "Property line adjustment" does not include any resubdivision that results in either a greater number of parcels or building sites than originally existed or significant reconfiguration of the original parcels. 
"Resubdivision" means the simultaneous division of two or more adjoining parcels of real property that results in a reconfiguration of the parcels or an increase in the total number of parcels or building sites. 
Subdivision. 
1.  "Subdivision" means and includes divisions of real property subject to the Map Act and divisions of any unit or units of improved or unimproved real property, or any portion thereof shown on the latest equalized assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of gift, partition, termination of any joint ownership interest in the real property, or pursuant to or in satisfaction of any judicial decree of judgment, whether immediate or future. 
2.  For the purpose of this title, real property owned or beneficially controlled by substantially the same persons, entities or interests shall be deemed to be in one ownership and part of the same subdivided real property or subdivision. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.04.020)  
Chapter 16.08 - TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.08.010 - Generally. 
A.  Except as provided in Chapter 16.20 of this title, a tentative map is required for all subdivisions and shall show or be accompanied by such information, documents and data as the Map Act and this chapter may require. Application for approval of a tentative map shall be made to the planning division. 
B.  Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public agency or public utility shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing number of parcels. 
C.  No application for approval of a tentative map shall be accepted as complete unless and until the required fee and all required maps, documents and information are submitted to and accepted by the planning division. Every application shall include sufficient information to permit the determination of whether an environmental impact report or negative declaration is required under California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
D.  The development services director or his or her designee may require an applicant to waive in writing the time limits of Chapter 3 (commencing with Government Code Section 66451) of the Map Act for the purpose of permitting concurrent processing of related approvals or an environmental review on the same development project. 
E.  Within thirty (30) days after receiving the application and related information, the planning division shall determine in writing whether the application is complete and the development services director or his or her designee shall cause that determination to be transmitted to the applicant or his or her agent. Failure of any applicant to respond, within thirty (30) days of mailing, to any request to clarify, amplify, correct or otherwise supplement the application so as to make it complete shall be deemed an abandonment by the applicant of the proposed land division and no further action shall be taken on it unless a new application is first made. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.010)  
16.08.020 - Application requirements. 
A.  Tentative maps shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-six (26) inches in size and shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, or one centimeter equals ten meters, unless the development services director or his or her designee determines that an alternate scale will permit presentation of map data of acceptable completeness and clarity. Tentative maps shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer, licensed land surveyor, licensed architect, or licensed landscape architect or professional land use planner, except in the following cases: 
1.  When the proposed land division would create four or fewer parcels and: 
a.  If the parcel proposed to be divided is wholly or partially within the boundary of the south central urban region of the general plan or any water, community service or public utility district which furnishes water service, no parcel of less than eighteen (18) acres is proposed to be created, or 
b.  If the parcel proposed to be divided is elsewhere in the city, no parcel of less than nine acres is proposed to be created; 
2.  When the proposed land division would create four or fewer parcels and the parcels will be conveyed as a gift to a member of the subdivider's immediate family. 
B.  A tentative map and the application for approval of it shall contain such information and be submitted in such quantities as the city council may by resolution direct. 
C.  An environmental analysis, prepared pursuant to provisions the city council may establish for administration of the California Environmental Quality Act, shall be submitted with each tentative map. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.020)  
16.08.030 - Application—Copies to other administrators. 
When an application is received, the development services director or his or her designee shall forthwith transmit copies of the map and related documents to the director of public services and if applicable, the county health officer. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.030)  
16.08.040 - Application—CEQA review. 
All applications shall be reviewed pursuant to and for compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) under procedures established by resolution of the city council. Conditions of approval recommended pursuant to the CEQA review shall be transmitted to the members of the staff technical advisory committee (T.A.C.) and to the secretary of the appropriate planning commission and shall be included in any staff report prepared for the planning commission or city council. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.040)  
16.08.050 - Interdepartmental review— Preparation of staff report. 
A.  Each member of the staff technical advisory committee (T.A.C.) shall review and study each application and shall prepare his or her department's recommendations thereon, including proposed conditions for approval, recommendations for modifications or a recommendation for denial. A recommendation for denial shall include the reasons for that recommendation. If any T.A.C. member finds that an application contains insufficient information to allow preparation of his recommendation, he or she shall promptly advise the development services director or his or her designee to invoke the provisions of Section 16.08.010E. The recommendations of each T.A.C. member shall be included in any staff report prepared for the planning commission or city council. 
B.  Any T.A.C. member may call the committee into session if he or she deems a meeting of the committee to be necessary or convenient for the proper review of any application. Any T.A.C. member may request the applicant to attend the meeting in person or by an agent familiar with the technical aspects of the application. 
C.  The recommendations of the T.A.C. members shall be forwarded to the secretary of the planning commission. Whenever the planning commission may consider both an environmental determination and action on the related tentative map at the same meeting of the planning commission pursuant to Section 16.08.060D, the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and T.A.C. recommendations shall be consolidated into a single staff report. 
D.  A copy of any staff report shall be furnished to the applicant or his agent at least three days prior to the meeting of the planning commission at which the CEQA determination or the tentative map will be considered. 
E.  The planning division shall forward the tentative map for a land project to the office of intergovernmental management prior to referral of the map to the planning commission. 
F.  The planning division may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove property line adjustments, subject to provisions of Chapter 16.20 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.050)  
16.08.060 - Planning commission review. 
A.  Upon receipt of the staff report, the secretary of the planning commission shall schedule the application for review by the planning commission at its next available regular meeting. 
B.  The planning commission shall review the application and related documents. If a negative declaration has been prepared, the planning commission shall review it and may adopt it or require preparation of an environmental impact report (EIR). If an EIR has been prepared, the planning commission shall review it and may certify it as complete or refer it back to city staff and the applicant, or his or her agent for such amendment, revision or additional information as the planning commission may specify. The planning commission may schedule a public hearing on any negative declaration or EIR. 
C.  After acceptance of an application as complete pursuant to Section 16.08.010 and either adoption of a negative declaration or certification of an EIR, the tentative map shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission. The secretary shall set the map and application for hearing at the next regular meeting of the planning commission for which timely notice can be given. The date of filing of the tentative map shall be the date of the consideration of or hearing on the map by the planning commission. 
D.  Notwithstanding subsection C of this section, a planning commission may hold a hearing and act upon a tentative map at the same meeting at which it considers a negative declaration or an EIR pursuant to subsection B of this section; provided, that any notice required by law for the hearing has been given. The date of filing of the tentative map with the planning commission shall be the date of the consideration of or the hearing on the map by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.060)  
16.08.070 - Planning commission—Hearing. 
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each tentative map. Notice of the hearing shall be given as provided in the Map Act and as directed by the city council by resolution. Any interested person may appear at the hearing and be heard. Failure of any person to receive the notice shall not invalidate any action taken on a tentative map. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.070)  
16.08.080 - Planning commission—Authority to approve or disapprove. 
The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve to the full extent permitted by law, or disapprove tentative maps and may waive the filing of a parcel map pursuant to Chapter 16.20; provided, that prior to the approval, conditional approval or waiver, the planning commission determines that the tentative map complies with applicable provisions of state law, this chapter, the zoning plan, the development standards and city health standards and policies and with good planning and engineering practices. The planning commission shall also consider any measures, consistent with state law and city policy, that will promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.080)  
16.08.090 - Planning commission—State and regional requirements. 
The planning commission shall not approve a tentative map if it makes any finding or determination which prohibits approval under Government Code Sections 66473, 66473.5 and 66474, unless appropriate conditions sufficient to overcome all such findings are imposed at the time of approval. If the planning commission finds that the waste discharge from a proposed subdivision into a community sewer system would result in or add to a violation of existing waste discharge requirements of the regional water quality control council, it may disapprove the tentative map. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.090)  
16.08.100 - Dedication of land. 
A.  The planning commission may, to the full extent permitted by law, require as a condition of approval of a tentative map that interests in real property be dedicated, irrevocably offered for dedication or reserved for public purposes, including but not limited to those set forth in Government Code Sections 66475 through 66482. 
B.  The amount of land required to be dedicated or irrevocably offered for dedication for park or recreational purposes shall not exceed one acre per one hundred (100) lots or fraction thereof. In combination with or in lieu of such dedication or offer of dedication, the planning commission shall require payment of a fee for park and recreational purposes in an amount of seven hundred forty-seven dollars ($747.00) for single-family residential projects and six hundred eighty dollars ($680.00) for multi-family residential projects. 
These fees will be adjusted annually on January 1, based on the Construction Cost Index as published by the most recent November "Engineering News Record." 
C.  The planning commission may require that any dedication or offer of dedication of a street include a waiver of direct access rights to any such street from abutting property. 
(Ord. 08-195 § 1; Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.100)  
16.08.110 - Grading and erosion requirements. 
Every approved tentative map shall be conditioned on compliance with requirements for grading and erosion control, including prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property, as set forth in this code and the development standards. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.110)  
16.08.120 - Action on application—Time limits. 
A.  The planning commission shall act on a tentative map within fifty (50) days of the date of its filing with the planning division under Section 16.08.060 of this chapter, unless the time period is extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the planning division, or the planning division determines that an environmental impact report (EIR) is required and none has been prepared or that an EIR which has been prepared is incomplete, or a waiver of time limits has been required under Section 16.08.010 of this chapter. 
B.  If an EIR is required by the planning division and none has been prepared, or the planning division determines that an EIR which has been prepared is incomplete, the planning division may permit the applicant to withdraw the tentative map until an amended application has been submitted to the planning division for appropriate review under Sections 16.08.040 and 16.08.050 of this chapter and refiled with the planning division pursuant to Section 16.08.060 of this chapter, or the planning division may refer the application to the planning commission to deny approval of the map as provided in California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the Map Act and this chapter. 
C.  The provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall apply to any amended application refiled with the planning commission. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.120)  
16.08.130 - Grounds for disapproval. 
In addition to the provisions for disapproval of a tentative map contained in the Map Act, a map shall be disapproved or deemed to be disapproved if any of the following findings are made, or in the case of inaction on the map within the time required for action, any of the following circumstances exist: 
A.  The only practical use of the property included in the proposed subdivision is a use prohibited by law, or the map does not comply with this chapter, the Map Act, other applicable provisions of law or with accepted planning or engineering standards; 
B.  Required rezoning has not been adopted by the city council. If required rezoning has been adopted by the council but is not yet effective when the map is approved, the approval is contingent upon the effectiveness of the rezoning; 
C.  There is insufficient information upon which to approve the map. The development services director or his or her designee shall advise the applicant or his or her agent of the deficiencies upon which the disapproval is based. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.130)  
16.08.140 - Appeal procedures. 
A.  Any interested person may appeal any decision of a planning commission on the merits of a tentative map, or any finding in support of a decision, to the city council within ten days of the decision. 
B.  1.  An appeal is initiated by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the city. A notice of appeal shall identify by number the map which is the subject of the appeal; shall state the action, finding or determination of the planning commission, and the date thereof, from which the appeal is taken; and shall specifically set forth the grounds upon which the appeal is based. No appeal shall be deemed to be filed unless any required filing fee is paid to the clerk. 
2.  The clerk shall furnish copies of the notice of appeal to each city council member, the city manager, development services director, development services director or his or her designee, director of public services, city engineer, city counsel and the subdivider. 
C.  The filing of an appeal does not stay the decision appealed. When approval or conditional approval of a map is appealed, the city council may stay the decision pending determination of the appeal if, in the council's opinion, a stay is in the public interest. 
D.  If an appeal is filed, the following procedures apply: 
1.  If the city council sets the appeal for hearing, notice shall be given by the clerk to the same persons and in the same manner as notice was given for the hearing before the planning commission. Any interested person may appear at the hearing and be heard; 
2.  The council may dismiss any appeal at any time for failure of the appellant to comply with subsections A or B of this section; 
3.  The council may at any time refer an application back to the planning commission for further proceedings if it appears that matters will be raised or evidence presented before the council which was not considered by or presented to the agency. 
E.  The record on appeal shall consist of a copy of the tentative map and all related documents; the environmental assessment, including any environmental impact report (EIR) if one has been prepared; the technical advisory committee (T.A.C.) report and recommendations; the minutes of the proceeding before the planning commission, including a fair summary of all testimony received by the agency; and all documentary, pictorial or other physical evidence received into evidence by the agency. The original of the record on appeal and six copies of those portions of the record which are reproducible shall be filed by the development services director or his or her designee with the clerk within ten working days of the date the notice of appeal is filed. 
F.  If an appeal is set for hearing, the following procedures apply: 
1.  The city council shall review the grounds upon which the appeal is based, the record on appeal and any additional relevant information received at the hearing before it to determine whether the planning commission exceeded its authority, whether there was a fair hearing before the agency or whether the agency abused its discretion and the appellant was prejudiced by such abuse. 
2.  Each appellant and the subdivider may appear at any hearing under this section and shall be heard. The council may, in its discretion, conduct a full or partial hearing de novo. Unless specifically authorized by the council, any hearing shall be limited to the grounds specifically stated in the notice of appeal. The council may by resolution adopt procedural rules it deems appropriate or convenient for conducting hearings under this section. 
3.  When the council finds that the evidence supports any finding or determination which prohibits approval under Government Code Sections 66473, 66473.5 or 66474, the council shall not affirm an approval or reverse a denial of approval of a tentative map, unless appropriate conditions sufficient to overcome all such findings are imposed. 
4.  The council may continue any hearing under this section to a specific time, date and place. 
5.  The council may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any action of the planning commission which has been appealed and may, in its discretion, refer any application back to the planning commission for further review and report. 
G.  If the council determines that a further hearing should be held before the planning commission, it may, with the applicant's consent, dismiss the appeal without prejudice and refer the application to the secretary of the agency for refiling pursuant to Section 16.08.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.140)  
16.08.150 - Modification of tentative maps. 
Upon application of the subdivider, an approved tentative map or its conditions of approval may be modified by the planning commission if it finds that there are changes in circumstances which justify the modifications. The provisions of this chapter for review of and action on tentative maps shall apply to any proposed modification, but the hearing before the planning commission or city council shall be confined to consideration of and action on the proposed modifications. Modification of an approved tentative map or conditions of approval by the planning commission or city council shall not extend the time limits imposed by Section 16.12.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.150)  
16.08.160 - Extensions of time. 
A.  Prior to the expiration of an approved tentative map and in lieu of filing a new map application, a subdivider may file with the planning division an application for an extension of time on the tentative map. An extension of time may be approved, conditionally approved or denied by the planning commission. The provisions of this chapter for review of an action on new tentative maps shall apply to any proposed extension of time, but the hearing before the planning commission or city council shall be confined to consideration of and action on the proposed extension and any proposed changes in, additions to or deletions from the original conditions of approval. Development standards and policies in effect at the time an extension is approved apply to and new or updated conditions of approval shall be imposed on maps for which an extension of time is approved, unless the revised or new standards, policies or conditions would be unreasonable in light of the circumstances of a particular subdivision at the time an extension is approved. 
B.  The period of any extension granted shall be set by the planning commission and shall run from the date of expiration of the tentative map. More than one extension of time may be granted, but the total of all extensions shall not exceed three years. 
C.  Any interested person may appeal a decision made under this section to the city council. The appeal shall be made pursuant to and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 16.08.140 of this chapter, except that it shall be filed within fifteen (15) days of the decision. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.08.160)  
Chapter 16.12 - FINAL MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.12.010 - Parcel map waiver. 
A.  The filing of a parcel map for record may be waived when preparation of a tentative map by a registered civil engineer, licensed land surveyor, licensed architect, licensed landscape architect or professional land use planner is not required under Section 16.08.020A of this title; provided, that the planning commission specifically finds that the proposed land division complies with all development standards and all other city standards and requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection and all other requirements of the Map Act and this chapter. A waiver of recordation of a parcel map shall expire concurrently with the approved tentative map upon which the waiver is based. 
B.  Whenever the planning commission approves a waiver of recordation of a parcel map, the development services director or his or her designee shall issue a notice of waiver of parcel map which shall contain such information as the city council may by resolution direct. The director of public services shall cause the notice to be filed for record. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.12.010)  
16.12.020 - Filing of maps. 
A.  All tentative maps expire twenty-four (24) months from the date of approval. For a final map or parcel map, a tracing and five legible prints of the map in the required form, any agreements and security required under Sections 16.16.040, 16.16.050, 16.16.060 and 16.16.070 of this title, and any other evidence necessary to establish that all conditions of approval of the tentative map are satisfied shall be filed in the department of public services prior to expiration of the tentative map. An application for waiver of recordation of a parcel map shall be filed with the planning division prior to expiration of the tentative map and shall include evidence that all conditions of approval of the tentative map are satisfied and any agreements and security required under Sections 16.16.040, 16.16.050, 16.16.060 and 16.16.070 of this title have been filed in the department of public services. 
B.  At the time of filing, map checking fees shall be paid to the department of public services. The fee for recording a final map, parcel map or notice of waiver of parcel map and any related documents shall be deposited with the department of public services prior to recordation. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.12.020)  
16.12.030 - Review—Approval procedures. 
A.  The planning division and the department of public services shall review each parcel map or final map submitted for recordation and any related documents. Upon determining that a parcel map or final map substantially conforms to the approved tentative map and that all conditions of approval are satisfied, the director of public services, or his or her designee, shall approve or conditionally approve the map. An approved parcel map shall be filed for record by the department of public services. A final map shall be filed with the clerk of the city council and the director of public services shall recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval to the council. 
B.  Any final map or parcel map which fails to meet the requirements of the Map Act, this chapter or the development standards may be approved when such failure of the map is a result of a technical and inadvertent error and the director of public services determines that such error does not materially effect the validity of the map. 
C.  If a map is determined not to substantially conform to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the map shall be returned to the applicant, or his or her agent, who shall be advised of deficiencies in the map. No final map for a land project shall be approved unless a specific plan for the area proposed to be included within the land project has been adopted and the city council finds that the proposed land project, together with provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with that plan. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.12.030)  
16.12.040 - Conditions—Notations on map. 
The development services director or his or her designee shall cause appropriate conditions or notations to be written or printed on the face of any final or parcel map or included in any notice of waiver of parcel map, when the planning commission or city council has so directed. If the director of public services, county health officer, or development services director or his or her designee determines that a notation on the face of any final or parcel map or in any notice of waiver of parcel map is necessary or desirable to protect the public interest with respect to the proposed land division, the director of public services shall, with the concurrence of the city counsel, make such notation. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.12.040)  
16.12.050 - Certificate of ownership. 
A certificate of ownership consenting to the preparation and recordation of a parcel map or notice of waiver of parcel map, shall be signed by all record title owners of property proposed for division by parcel map or pursuant to a waiver of parcel map. The certificate and all dedications or offers of dedication shall appear on the face of the parcel map, or be attached as an exhibit to the map or notice of waiver of parcel map, or appear on separate instruments recorded concurrently with the map or notice. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.12.050)  
16.12.060 - Soils investigation report. 
If a soils investigation report has been prepared, the fact that the report has been made, the name and registration number of the engineer who prepared it and the date of the report shall be noted on the face of the map. Approval of the map does not constitute approval of the preliminary soils report, soils investigation report or the engineer's true statement of soil conditions. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.12.060)  
16.12.070 - Reversion to acreage. 
A final map or parcel map may be reverted to acreage by the city council pursuant to Chapter 6 (commencing with Government Code Section 66499.11) of the Map Act. In addition, a parcel map may be recorded pursuant to Government Code Section 66499.20-1/4 for the purpose of reverting to acreage land previously subdivided and consisting of four or less contiguous parcels under the same ownership. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.12.070)  
16.12.080 - Resubdivision. 
Subdivided lands may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage pursuant to provisions of Government Code Section 66499.20-1/2. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.12.080)  
16.12.090 - Modification of recorded maps. 
A recorded final map or parcel map or the conditions applied to it may be modified as provided in Government Code Section 66472.1. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.12.090)  
Chapter 16.16 - IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.16.010 - Map approval required before commencement of work. 
No work of improvement, construction of any permanent structure or installation of a mobile home shall commence before the final map, parcel map, or notice of waiver of parcel map is filed for record. This section does not apply to clearing for purposes of surveying to prepare a map or to any construction or improvement approved as a condition of approval of a tentative map, provided that improvement and construction plans have been checked and approved by the department of public services and any use permit, building permit or other entitlement for use or other grant of approval for the work which may be required by law is first secured. As used in this chapter, "work" includes "improvement" and "construction" includes "installation." 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.16.010)  
16.16.020 - Tentative map approval— Conditions for commencement of work. 
A.  When a tentative map has been approved or conditionally approved, construction of improvements may begin if and only if: 
1.  Water potability and quantity have been approved in writing by the public works director and if necessary, the county health officer; 
2.  The estimated cost of construction plan checking and city inspection services, as determined by the director of public services, has been deposited with the director and improvement and construction plans, in a form as required herein, have been approved in writing by the director. The plans shall show the complete plans, profiles, and details for all street work and bridges, drainage channels and embankments, including sedimentation and erosion controls; the location of underground utilities which may control the location and elevation of storm drains and culverts; the location of fire hydrants and street monuments; curbs, gutters, sidewalks, fences, gates and driveways if constructed in conjunction with subdivision improvements; grading for streets, lots, and improvements; and any other improvements or work which may be required. If the plans include five or more sheets, a key map showing the relationship among all sheets shall be included in the first sheet of plans; 
3.  In the case of improvements which include sanitary sewers, storm drains or water systems to be accepted by or operated by a public agency, the plans are reviewed and approved by the accepting jurisdiction prior to approval of the remainder of the plans; 
4.  The plans and profiles are submitted on sheets of uniform size, as determined by the director of public services; a border is provided with a suitable title block in the lower right-hand corner; and the scales for various portions of the drawings, and the north point where applicable, are shown on all sheets. Reference may be made to applicable city standard details in lieu of duplicating the drawings therein; 
5.  After preparation of a required soils investigation report, a true statement of soil conditions is filed with the department of public services prior to approval of the plans. The statement shall indicate the maximum fill material used or proposed to be used on each lot and that the soil has been or will be prepared in accordance with the recommendations of a qualified registered civil engineer. 
B.  1.  The plans shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer for all tentative maps which propose creation of five or more parcels or which propose or will require any of the following: (a) the use of more than one culvert or a single culvert in excess of eighteen inches in diameter; (b) a cut bank, filled bank or fill area of over five feet vertical height; or (c) a street grade in excess of ten percent. 
2.  When preparation of plans by a registered civil engineer is not required, the plans shall include horizontal and vertical alignments; typical sections and the sizes and locations of culverts, as previously approved by the department of public services, and any other information required by the department of public services. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.16.020)  
16.16.030 - Department of public services— Approval and inspection required. 
A.  The department of public services and, if necessary the county health officer, shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove, or specify necessary corrections to the plans not more than thirty (30) days after submission of the plans to them and shall report their determinations to the subdivider or his agent. The director of public services may specify phases of construction and require appropriate inspections to be made at the end of a phase as a condition precedent to undertaking the next phase. When improvements are required, approval of the plans by the department of public services and the health department is a condition precedent to approval of a final map or parcel map pursuant to Sections 16.12.020, 16.12.030, 16.12.040, 16.12.050 and 16.12.060 of this chapter. 
B.  Construction of improvements shall be inspected by the department of public services and the county health officer, as appropriate. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.16.030)  
16.16.040 - Conditional agreement for subdivision improvements. 
A.  If any required improvements are not approved as complete by the department of public services at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, the subdivider, as a condition precedent to approval of the map, shall enter into an agreement to construct the improvements within one year of the recordation of the map pursuant to Government Code Section 66462. The term of any such agreement for the completion of required improvements may be extended by subsequent agreement(s) for a combined additional period not to exceed five years, subject to the following findings by the city council prior to approving any such extension: 
1.  The extension will not cause or contribute to public health or safety problems, or impede the orderly development of the surrounding area; 
2.  All of the parcels created in the subdivision remain under common ownership; and 
3.  Performance security as of the date of the extension of time to complete the improvements is adequate to insure completion of the remaining improvements. 
An extension may be conditioned upon construction of the improvements to meet city standards in effect when the extension is approved, as set forth in the agreement extending the time of performance, and these standards shall then supersede any prior standards approved or agreed upon if made applicable. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.16.040)  
16.16.050 - Dedication to public use. 
Whenever improvements are to be dedicated to public use or accepted for maintenance by the city, the subdivider shall, prior to approval of the final map, parcel map or waiver of parcel map, enter into an agreement to maintain the improvements at no expense to the city against any defective work or labor done or defective materials used. As used in this section and Section 16.16.060 of this chapter, a defect in work, labor or materials includes, but is not limited to, the failure of an improvement, during the term of an agreement, to meet applicable city standards or to be fit for its intended use. The term of the agreement shall be one year from the date of acceptance of the dedication or of acceptance of the improvement for maintenance by the city unless the director of public services determines that the condition and circumstances in a particular case require a longer period. In lieu of agreement with the subdivider, the city may, at its option, enter into an equivalent agreement with the contractor who performed the work. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.16.050)  
16.16.060 - Security—Required when. 
If any improvements are not approved as complete by the department of public services at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall furnish good and sufficient security as set forth in Government Code Sections 66499 et seq.: 
A.  In an amount not less than one hundred (100) percent of the total estimated cost of the improvements or of the acts to be performed, conditioned upon faithful performance of the acts or agreements; 
B.  In an additional amount of not less than fifty (50) percent of the total estimated cost of the improvements or the performance of the required acts, to secure payment to the contractor, his or her subcontractors and others who furnish labor, materials or equipment to them for the improvements or performance of the required acts; 
C.  In an additional amount, to be determined by the director of public services, necessary to guarantee and warranty the work for a period of one year, following the completion of the work and the acceptance of it for maintenance by the city, against any defective work or labor done or defective materials furnished. If the maintenance agreement is made with the contractor instead of the subdivider pursuant to subsection B of this section, the city may accept the security required by this section from the contractor. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.16.060)  
16.16.070 - Determination of acceptance. 
After the improvements are constructed or installed, and the subdivider has requested acceptance of them for maintenance by the city, the city council shall determine whether the improvements are satisfactory. After an agreement for maintenance is executed under Section 16.16.050 of this chapter, and security is delivered to the department of public services under Section 16.16.060 of this chapter, the city council may accept satisfactory improvements for maintenance by the city. If improvements offered for acceptance are found to be unsatisfactory, the council shall not accept them but shall direct the director of public services to advise the subdivider or his or her agent in writing of the deficiencies. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.16.070)  
16.16.080 - Determination of balance due. 
Following the completion of improvements to be accepted by the city and prior to the filing of the final map or parcel map, the director of public services shall determine the actual cost of construction plan checking and city inspection services and advise the subdivider thereof. If that amount exceeds the estimate deposited with the director under Section 16.16.020 of this chapter, the subdivider shall pay the balance due to the director, and if the actual cost is less than the estimate, the director shall promptly refund the overpayment to the subdivider. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.16.080)  
Chapter 16.20 - PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.20.010 - Application approval. 
A.  The planning division, after consultation with the staff technical advisory committee (T.A.C.), may approve or conditionally approve an application for a property line adjustment without submission of a tentative map; provided, that no parcel resulting from the adjustment will conflict with the requirements of the general plan, zoning plan, building ordinance, or the development standards. The decision of the planning division may be appealed to the planning commission and if necessary, to the city council in the same manner and subject to the same procedures as established in Section 16.08.140 of this title for tentative map applications. The scope of any appeal hearing on the merits of a proposed property line adjustment shall be limited to the substantive requirements of this section. 
B.  Application for approval of a property line adjustment under this section shall be made to the planning division and shall include an eight and one-half inch by eleven (11) inch plat showing the proposed adjustment, any required fee, and such other information as the development services director or his or her designee may require. The provisions of Section 16.08.010 of this title, except the requirement of the filing of a tentative map, apply to applications for approval of a property line adjustment. The owners of all parcels affected by the property line adjustment shall sign the application. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.20.010)  
16.20.020 - Alteration of boundary lines— Exhibit required. 
Whenever boundary lines(s) shown on a recorded parcel or final map would be altered as a result of a proposed property line adjustment, an accurate drawing referred to herein as a plat shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor, on an eight and one-half inch by eleven (11) inch format, where feasible, and shall be an accurate representation of all adjusted boundary lines, and shall include, but not be limited to, all property, mathematical or survey information such as courses, distances and bearings necessary to accurately reflect the adjusted property lines and parcels. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.20.020)  
16.20.030 - Notice of waiver—Other documents. 
After approval of the property line adjustment, a notice of waiver of parcel map shall be filed for record by the planning division. A final version of the plat shall be attached to the notice as an exhibit and incorporated within the notice by reference. Any deed or other document required to comply with the requirements of this section shall be recorded simultaneously with the notice. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.20.030)  
16.20.040 - Deed recordation—Amendment of assessment district map. 
As used in this subsection, "deed" includes a grant of fee title to the property affected and any other document necessary to relieve the property affected of any lien or encumbrance which, if foreclosed, released or reconveyed would conflict with a property line adjustment previously approved. Any deed filed for record pursuant to this section shall contain the words "property line adjustment" in bold letters at least one-fourth inch high at the top center of each page and shall contain in the text the following language: 
This deed is for the purpose of adjusting property lines only and does not convey a separate parcel. 
When the property line adjustment affects any parcel that is part of a recorded map, the deed shall provide a space to record a reference to the book and page in the official records of all maps so affected. If any of the parcels affected by a property line adjustment is subject to a lien resulting from an assessment district proceeding or equivalent proceeding for the financing of public improvements, the applicant shall secure an amendment of the assessment district map and any other documents of record to reflect the adjusted property line. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.20.040)  
16.20.050 - Request for consolidation of parcels. 
The grantee or donee of any real property conveyed to effectuate a property line adjustment pursuant to this chapter shall sign a request that the city assessor consolidate affected assessor's parcels in the grantee's or donee's ownership as necessary to prevent an increase in the number of assessor's parcels shown on the city assessment roll. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.20.050)  
16.20.060 - Limitations of this chapter. 
A.  Approval of a property line adjustment and recordation of a notice of waiver of parcel map pursuant to this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to be approval for development of any parcel affected by the property line adjustment. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to prevent the filing of an application for approval of a tentative map for the purpose of adjusting one or more property lines of parcels shown on a recorded map. 
Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to prevent the use of a property line adjustment, as provided in this chapter, to merge contiguous lots or parcels of real property on a recorded parcel map or final map. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.20.060)  
Chapter 16.24 - ZONE OF BENEFIT 
Sections: 
 
16.24.010 - Establishment. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 66484, the city council may establish zones of benefit and levy fees therefor, as set out in Sections 16.24.020 through 16.24.070 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.24.010)  
16.24.020 - Benefit fee—Purpose. 
A benefit fee may be levied by the city council for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways, and canyons or of constructing major thoroughfares when such are included in the transportation element, circulation element or flood control provisions of the conservation element of the general plan. No fee shall be levied for reimbursement or costs incurred for major thoroughfares or bridges constructed prior to the time of adoption of a zone of benefit, provided however, a fee may be levied for the addition to or reconstruction or relocation of an existing major thoroughfare or bridge. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.24.020)  
16.24.030 - Notice—Hearing. 
The boundaries of the area of benefit, the actual or estimated costs and the method of allocation of such costs to the area of benefit and fee apportionment shall be established by the city council after notice is given as required by law and a public hearing is held before the council. The notice shall contain preliminary information on the proposed boundaries of the area, estimated costs, the proposed method of fee apportionment and the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.24.030)  
16.24.040 - Hearing—Protest— Reconsideration. 
If at the time the public hearing is opened written protests of the owners of more than one-half of the area included within the proposed area of benefit have been filed with the clerk of the council and sufficient protests are not withdrawn in writing prior to the conclusion of such public hearing, so as to reduce the area represented to less than one-half of that to be benefitted, the proceeding shall be abandoned and shall not be reconsidered for at least one year from the date of the abandonment, except as provided in Government Code Section 66484. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.24.040)  
16.24.050 - City council resolution. 
After the hearing, the council may adopt a resolution establishing a zone of benefit and levying fees within the zone. The resolution shall include a description of the boundaries of the area of benefit, the total costs, whether actual or estimated, to be levied as fees and the method of fee apportionment. A certified copy of the resolution shall be filed for record with the county recorder. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.24.050)  
16.24.060 - Payment of fees. 
A.  Fees levied pursuant to Section 16.24.050 of this chapter are payable as a condition precedent to approval of a final subdivision map or a building permit, or any similar development entitlement. 
B.  Payment of fees shall not be required unless the major thoroughfare is in addition to, or a reconstruction of, any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time the resolution is adopted or the planned bridge facility is an original bridge, or an addition to an existing bridge facility serving the area at the time the resolution is adopted. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.24.060)  
16.24.070 - Condition for approval of tentative map. 
Approval of a tentative map may be conditioned upon adoption by the city council of a resolution establishing a zone of benefit. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.24.070)  
Chapter 16.28 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
16.28.010 - Administrative procedures. 
Administrative procedures for enforcement of this title and the Map Act shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.28.010)  
16.28.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  No person shall sell, lease, finance, convey or create by any means any parcel for which a final map or parcel map is required by the Map Act or this part until the map thereof fully complies with the provisions of the Map Act and this chapter and has been filed for record by the city clerk. 
B.  No person shall commence construction or installation of any building or mobile home for sale, lease or financing, except for model homes, or occupy or allow the occupancy thereof on any parcel when the Map Act or this part requires a final or parcel map for the parcel, until the map thereof fully complies with the Map Act and this chapter and has been filed for record by the city clerk. 
C.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than one year, or by both, for each offense. 
(Ord. 97-98 § 15.28.020)  
Title 17 - ZONING 
Chapters:  
Chapter 17.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections:  
Article I. - Zoning Plan Generally 
 
17.02.005 - Title. 
This title is the "zoning plan" for the city, consisting of regulations and maps. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this title are: 
A.  To promote and protect the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare; 
B.  To implement the city general plan, and to facilitate and guide growth in accordance with the general plan; and 
C.  To protect the social and economic stability of residential, commercial, industrial, resource production, and recreational activities within the city through the orderly, planned use of the land. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.015 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this title apply throughout the incorporated portions of the city limits and apply to lands owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the state or local government, or any unit or agency of either of them, to the extent permitted by law, or by the consent of or agreement with the state or local government or unit or agency thereof, that is affected by this title. The provisions of this title apply to public lands as defined in the Federal Land Policy and Management Act (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) to the extent permitted by that act or other federal law, or regulations adopted pursuant thereto or agreements made with the city. The provisions of this title do not apply to federal reservations or to land owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city. As used in this subsection, "local government" includes, but is not limited to, school districts and special districts. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.020 - Scope. 
The zoning plan consists of the establishment of various zone districts to be used within the city limits. Within some, all or none of the districts it shall be lawful, and within some, all or none of the districts it shall be unlawful, to erect, construct, alter or maintain certain buildings, or to carry on certain trades or occupations, or to conduct certain uses of land or of buildings. Within the districts the height and bulk of future buildings shall be limited, and certain open spaces shall be required around future buildings. Each district shall consist of additional appropriate regulations to be enforced, all as set forth in this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.025 - Establishment of zone districts. 
A.  The designations, locations, boundaries and regulations of the zone districts in the zoning plan shall be established by ordinance of the city council. The city council may, by ordinance, incorporate maps or diagrams into the zoning plan by reference when necessary or convenient to accomplish the purposes of this title. 
B.  The following zone districts are established as principal districts: 
1.  Resource zone districts: 
MR Mineral resource 
HP Habitat protection 
OS Open space 
F-1 Designated floodway 
2.  Residential zone districts: 
R-R Rural residential 
R-1 One-family residential 
R-M One-family mobile home 
R-2 Two-family residential 
R-3 Multiple-family residential 
R-4 Multiple-family residential—Office 
MHP Mobile home park 
IR Interim rural residential 
3.  Commercial zone districts: 
C-1 Local convenience center 
C-2 Community commercial 
C-O Office commercial 
C-H Highway commercial 
C-R Recreation commercial 
C-M Commercial—Light industrial 
MU Mixed use 
4.  Industrial zone districts: 
M-L Light industrial 
M General industrial 
5.  Special zone districts: 
PF Public facility 
PD Planned development 
U Unclassified 
C.  The following zone districts are established to be combined with appropriate principal districts: 
B Building site 
F-2 Restrictive flood 
T Mobile home 
SP Specific plan 
DR Design review 
D.  All of the incorporated territory of the city which is not otherwise zoned is hereby zoned unclassified (U). 
E.  Upon expiration of an interim urgency zoning ordinance, the land affected by the ordinance shall be subject to the regulations applicable to the land immediately prior to the adoption of the urgency ordinance, unless the urgency ordinance provides otherwise or is repealed or superseded by another ordinance. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.030 - Zone maps. 
A.  A series of maps, known as "zone maps," shall be utilized to show the designations and boundaries of each zone district within the city limits, and shall show base data as the development services director or his or her designee deems useful or the planning commission or city council directs. The maps shall be maintained by the planning division. 
B.  A series of maps, known as "special zone maps," may be utilized to show certain districts or areas in more detail or in a different arrangement than shown on the zone maps. The maps shall be maintained by the planning division. 
C.  The development services director or his or her designee shall revise any of the previously referenced maps to show amendments to the zoning plan, including changes in designations, rezoning of property and clarification of district boundaries made pursuant to Section 17.94.020. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.035 - Effect. 
Except as otherwise provided: 
A.  No building shall be erected or placed, and no existing structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building or premises be used, designated, or intended to be used for any purpose, or in any manner other than is included among the uses listed in this title as permitted in the district in which such building, land or premises is located. 
B.  No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit designated in this title for districts in which such building is located. 
C.  No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any required open space be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, building site and building location regulations specified in this title for the district in which such building or open space is located. 
D.  No yard or other open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one building site shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other building site. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.036 - Marijuana products, uses and activities. 
Unless expressly permitted by this Code, or the California Health and Safety Code section 11362.1(a), all cultivation, manufacture, distribution, possession, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, distribution, delivery or sale of marijuana or marijuana products is prohibited within the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-257, § 1, 3-21-2017)  
Article II. - Definitions 
 
17.02.040 - Generally. 
Unless otherwise provided, whenever the words or terms listed in this article are used in this title, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this article. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.041 - Permit fees. 
The fee for each permit and environmental review services shall be as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 07-182 § 4)  
17.02.045 - Acreage, gross. 
"Gross acreage" means the total land area within a lot, including all easements. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.050 - Acreage, net. 
"Net acreage" means the total land area within a lot which is usable for yard or building purposes, excluding, but not limited to: 
A.  Easements for roads, driveways, improved surface drainages, canals or irrigation ditches (if easements do not exist for drainages, canals or ditches, net acreages shall exclude the actual area of these features), and major utility transmission and gas lines (not including local distribution lines); 
B.  The "pole" portion of a flag lot; 
C.  A designated floodway. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.055 - Agriculture. 
"Agriculture" means the activity of growing and harvesting crops, rearing and managing livestock or bees; the production of plants and animals useful to man. "Agriculture" does not include the processing of agricultural products. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.057 - Agricultural processing plant. 
"Agricultural processing plant" means a building, facility, area, open or enclosed, or any location for the refinement, treatment, or conversion of agricultural products where physical, chemical or similar change of an agricultural product occurs. Examples of agricultural processing include, but are not limited to, fruit dehydrators, cold storage houses, hulling operations, and the sorting, cleaning, packing, and storing of agricultural products preparatory to sale and/or shipment in their natural form including all uses customarily incidental thereto. "Agricultural processing" shall not include wineries, or manufacturing of secondary products using agricultural products such as commercial kitchens, bakeries, breweries, woodworkings and wood processing plants. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.059 - Aircraft. 
"Aircraft" means any mechanical contrivance, known or hereafter invented, for use or designed for flight in the air and requiring registration with the Federal Aviation Administration, or needing an airport, landing strip or helipad for landing, take-off or taxiing. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.060 - Airport. 
"Airport" means any area of land or water used or intended to be used for the landing and take off of aircraft and appurtenant areas uses or intended to be used for airport buildings, facilities or rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.065 - Alley. 
"Alley" means a legal and/or physical access open to public travel, affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting lots, and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.070 - Automobile wrecking yards. 
See "junk yards." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.075 - Barn. 
See "building, agricultural." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.080 - Base flood. 
"Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeding in any given year (i.e., the "one hundred (100) year" flood). 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.085 - Bed and breakfast guest facility. 
"Bed and breakfast guest facility" means an owner-occupied one-family residence that provides guest rooms, without individual kitchen facilities, for temporary sleeping accommodations for overnight guests. Such use may include meal service limited to the overnight guests. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.100 - Building. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal or personal property. "Building" does not include any tent, trailer, recreational vehicle or other vehicle. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.105 - Building, agricultural. 
"Agricultural building" means a detached structure designed and constructed to house farm implements or supplies, hay, grain, poultry, livestock, or other horticultural products. This structure shall not be a place of human habitation or a place of employment where agricultural products are processed, treated, packaged or sold; nor shall it be a place frequented by the public. "Agricultural building" does not include any structure which is used primarily for the storage of nonagricultural items. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.110 - Building frontage. 
"Building frontage" means those building elevations which face upon a road or parking area between the building and the road. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.115 - Building height. 
See "structural height." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.120 - Building, primary. 
"Primary building" means a building or mobile home in which the principal use is conducted. A building or mobile home containing a dwelling unit or units situated on a building site in a residential district is deemed to be the primary building on that building site. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-223, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.02.125 - Building, residential accessory. 
"Residential accessory building" means a detached building subordinate to and located on the same building site as a residence, the use of which is incidental to that of the residential use. "Residential accessory building" does not include any building designed or used for human habitation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.130 - Building site. 
"Building site" means land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or interrelated buildings, together with all open space required by this title, which is located on a lot that has been lawfully created and meets all criteria of the city for the intended use. (Also, see Section 17.84.010 of this title.) 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.135 - Campgrounds. 
"Campgrounds" means land or premises used or intended to be used, let or rented for occupancy by campers traveling by automobile or recreational vehicle, or for occupancy by tents or similar quarters. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.140 - Caretaker's or night watchman's quarters. 
"Caretaker's or night watchman's quarters" means an area not larger than four hundred (400) square feet, designed to be used by one person, either a caretaker or night watchman. within a main building in which an authorized commercial or industrial use exists, and is incidental to the established commercial or industrial use. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.142 - Cemetery. 
"Cemetery" means land dedicated for the burial of human remains, and for this chapter including columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums and mortuaries. A chapel, or similar structure, may be included in a cemetery if used solely for ceremony and respect of those reposed on-site. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.145 - Church. 
"Church" means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, maintained and controlled by a body organized to conduct religious worship and used primarily for religious worship and related activities. "Church" does not include "school." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.150 - Condominium. 
"Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on the real property, such as an apartment, office or store. In addition, a condominium may include a separate, interest in other portions of the real property. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.152 - Contractor's equipment storage yard. 
"Contractors equipment storage yard" means storage of equipment, vehicles, or other materials commonly used in the contractor's type of business; storage of materials used for repair and maintenance of contractor's own equipment; and buildings or structures for uses such as offices and repair facilities related to the contractor's business. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.155 - City. 
"City" means the city of Shasta Lake, county of Shasta, state of California. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.160 - City boundary. 
"City boundary" means the boundary of the city. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.165 - Day care center. 
"Day care center" means any child day care facility other than a small or large day care home, including infant centers and preschools. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.170 - Day care home, large. 
"Large day care home" means a home which regularly provides nonmedical care, protection and supervision for seven to twelve (12) children, inclusive, for a period of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away. "Children" includes the children of the licensee and assistant that are under the age of ten, and all other children under the age of eighteen (18). 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.175 - Day care home, small. 
"Small day care home" means a home which regularly provides nonmedical care, protection and supervision for six or fewer children, for a period of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away. "Children" includes the children of the licensee under the age of ten, and all other children under the age of eighteen (18). 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.178 - Density. 
"Density" means the total number of dwelling units permitted per acre of land. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.180 - Designated floodway—Regulatory floodway. 
"Designated floodway—Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the one hundred (100) year flood (base flood) without increasing the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.185 - Dog kennel. 
"Dog kennel" means the ownership, boarding, breeding, training or sale of seven or more dogs at least four months of age, except a veterinary hospital or an animal shelter operated by a governmental agency. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.190 - Duplex. 
See "residence, two-family." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.195 - Dwelling, multiple. 
See "residence, multiple-family." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.200 - Dwelling, one-family. 
See "residence, one-family." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.205 - Dwelling unit. 
"Dwelling unit" means one or more habitable rooms, designed to be occupied by one family, with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.210 - Easement. 
"Easement" means an area of a lot reserved for use for public utilities or public or private purposes. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.213 - Exploration work for minerals. 
"Exploration work for minerals" means the search for minerals by geological, geophysical, geochemical or other techniques, including but not limited to, sampling, assaying, drilling, or any surface or underground works needed to determine the type, extent or quality of the minerals present but does not include "mining" as used in Section 17.12.030B of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.215 - Family. 
"Family" means one or more persons occupying premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house, hotel, club or similar dwelling for group use. "Family" does not include a fraternal, religious, social or business group. "Family" shall be deemed to include domestic servants employed by a family. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.220 - Farm labor quarters. 
"Farm labor quarters" means buildings or mobile homes located on land owned by the laborer's employer, inhabited solely by persons and their families while employed in agricultural activities on land owned by the laborer's employer. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.223 - Fence. 
"Fence" means a fence shall comply with requirements of Section 17.84.030A of this title and shall not be constructed of the following materials: tires, sheet metal, scrap metal, plastic sheeting or paneling, or other material or junk, as defined, that may be considered a nuisance as defined by this code. Use of barbed or razor wire as fencing is not allowed in residential districts in urban or suburban areas. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.225 - Floodproof. 
"Floodproof" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to land or improvements appurtenant to real property, including, but not limited to, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.228 - Floor area ratio. 
"Floor area ratio," also known as FAR, is the gross building area (of all structures on the property) divided by the lot area. An example of how a FAR is applied to a building site is shown below. 
  
(Ord. No. 14-223, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.02.230 - Forest management. 
"Forest management" means the application of business methods and forestry principles to the operation of a forest property for the purpose of maintaining forest resources and producing a continuous supply of forest products. Forest management practices include, but are not limited to, site preparation, planting, harvesting, road construction, insect and disease control, inventory and fire protection. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.235 - Garage or carport, private. 
"Private garage or carport" means a residential accessory building designed and intended primarily for the storage of private motor vehicles. (Also, see Section 17.88.140 of this title.) 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.240 - Group foster home. 
"Group foster home" means a state or county authorized, certified or licensed foster care facility, serving more than six mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent or neglected children, which provides care on a twenty-four (24) hour basis; or such a facility, serving more than six children or adults, which is licensed by the state or county or certified by a state-licensed child placement agency and is institutional or medical in nature. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.245 - Guest house. 
"Guest house" means an attached or detached building which provides living quarters for guests and: 
A.  Contains no kitchen or cooking facility; 
B.  Is clearly subordinate and incidental to the principal residence on the same building site; and 
C.  Is not rented or leased, whether compensation be direct or indirect. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.250 - Height. 
See "structural height." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.255 - Home occupation. 
"Home occupation" means an income-producing activity conducted within a residence or a residential accessory building and carried on only by the inhabitants thereof. Such activity is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for residential purposes and does not change the character thereof. (Also, see Section 17.88.220 of this title.) 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.260 - Hotel. 
See "motel." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.265 - Hydropower facility, small. 
"Small hydropower facility" means machinery, including related structures and equipment, that generates electricity from turbines powered by water diverted from the natural flow of a creek, stream or river, which may be impounded by a dam or other diversion structure to create a reservoir, and that is capable of producing not more than thirty (30) megawatts of electricity. "Small hydropower facility" includes the site at which the facility is located. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.270 - Junk. 
"Junk" means fabricated items which are either abandoned or no longer usable for the purpose for which they were made, and which are not presently being restored or repaired; provided, however, that "junk" does not include agricultural machinery, or equipment, or parts thereof in A-1, EA, TL, OS, and U districts. "Junk" does not include old auto bodies used in functional flood-control or erosion projects. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.275 - Junk yard—Wrecking yard. 
"Junk yard" or "wrecking yard" means the use of more than two hundred (200) square feet of the area on any lot or contiguous lots for the storage of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials, and/or for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery, but not including agricultural machinery or parts thereof in A-1, EA, TL, OS and U districts. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.280 - Junk yard or wrecking yard, screened. 
"Screened junk yard" or "screened wrecking yard" means a junk yard or wrecking yard which is screened. A junk yard or wrecking yard shall be deemed screened if no part thereof is visible from any public street or adjoining land under different ownership. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.285 - Kitchen. 
"Kitchen" means any room or area intended or designed to be used for the preparation or cooking of food. "Kitchen" does not include a wet bar. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.290 - Large day care home. 
See "day care home, large." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.292 - Logging contractor's yard. 
"Logging contractor's yard" means any facility, including any building or outdoor area, used to store, service, maintain or repair a logging truck or related heavy logging equipment. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.295 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel of land upon which more than one building site may be designated unless applicable zone district regulations provide otherwise. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.300 - Lot, corner. 
"Corner lot" means a lot having frontage on two intersecting streets having an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.305 - Lot depth. 
"Lot depth" means the average lineal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured perpendicular to the front lot line. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.310 - Lot, flag. 
"Flag lot" means an L-shaped lot in which one arm of the lot, typically thirty (30) feet in width (pole portion), fronts on the street and is used solely as a driveway. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.315 - Lot, interior. 
"Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.320 - Lot, key. 
"Key lot" means the first lot to the rear of a corner lot, the front lot line of which is a continuation of the side line of the corner lot, regardless of any alley or right-of-way between the corner and key lots. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.325 - Lot line, front. 
"Front lot line" means the lot line abutting a road. In the case of a lot that abuts more than one road, the property owner may choose which road the front lot line is on; except, in a group of developed lots, the front line shall be on the same side as the developed lots. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.330 - Lot line, rear. 
"Rear lot line" means the lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, a line a minimum of ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.335 - Lot line, side. 
"Side lot line" means any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.340 - Lot, through. 
"Through lot" means a lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on two roads. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.345 - Lot width. 
"Lot width" means the lineal distance between the side lot lines, measured at a right angle to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot line. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.350 - Lowest floor. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the building's lowest floor, provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.355 - Manufactured home. 
"Manufactured home" means a mobile home as defined in Section 17.02.365 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.357 - Mining. 
"Mining" means all or any part of the process involved in the mining of minerals by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open pit mining or minerals naturally exposed, mining by auger method, dredging and quarrying, underground mining and surface work incidental to an underground mine. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.360 - Ministorage. 
"Ministorage" means any structure(s) designed or built with compartments to be used for individual storage of household items or business inventory by two or more clients on a lease or rental basis. In no case may storage spaces be used in a retail, wholesale, business or service function, nor shall the storage spaces be used for workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing or similar uses or functions. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.365 - Mobile home. 
"Mobile home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain a dwelling unit, to be used without a permanent foundation, and containing more than three hundred twenty (320) square feet of floor space and the mobile home is either certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of the 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 85401 et seq.) or the mobile home complies with all adopted safety criteria established for mobile homes constructed before the effective date of the 1974 Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act. "Mobile home" does not include any automobile, trailer, camp trailer, camper, house car, motor vehicle, recreational vehicle or other vehicle defined in the California Vehicle Code, or any factory-built housing as defined in the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.370 - Mobile home, duplex. 
"Duplex mobile home" means a mobile home designed and equipped to contain two dwelling units. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.375 - Mobile home park. 
"Mobile home park" means any area or tract of land where five or more mobile home spaces are rented or leased or offered for rent or lease. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.380 - Motel. 
"Motel" means one or more buildings containing guest rooms and facilities for temporary or transient sleeping accommodations. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.390 - Night watchman's quarters. 
See "caretaker's quarters." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.395 - Nonconforming buildings and uses. 
"Nonconforming buildings and uses" means those structures, buildings, mobile homes and uses which were lawful when established, but which do not conform to subsequently established zoning requirements. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.397 - Nursery, retail. 
"Retail nursery" means the retail handling of any article, substance or commodity related to the planting, maintenance or harvesting of garden plants, shrubs, trees, packaged fertilizers, soils, chemicals or other nursery goods and related products in small quantities to the consumer. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.398 - Nursery, wholesale. 
"Wholesale nursery" means the growing, storage and sale of garden plants, shrubs, trees or vines for resale, including incidental retail sales conducted from within a building not exceeding twenty (20) percent of the combined wholesale and retail sales volume during any year. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.400 - Parcel. 
See "lot." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.405 - Parking space. 
"Parking space" means an accessible and usable space for parking motor vehicles off the street. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.410 - Planning commission. 
"Planning commission" means the city planning commission. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.415 - Private energy producer. 
"Private energy producer" means a person or entity engaged in private energy production, or that owns the means thereof, and is not a public utility subject to the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.420 - Private energy production. 
"Private energy production" means production of natural gas or electricity from other than a conventional power source, when that energy is not sold directly to members of the public. As used in this section, "conventional power source" includes nuclear energy, any hydropower facility with greater than thirty (30) megawatts of electrical capacity, and combustion of fossil fuels, except when used in cogeneration technology. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.425 - Public use. 
"Public use" means the use of land owned or possessed by a public entity for public facilities or services, when the land, facility or service is available to members of the public in common with each other, including, but not limited to, public parks, human cemeteries, schools, fire halls, libraries, hospitals and other public buildings and uses. "Public use" includes quasi-public uses such as private nonprofit education facilities, civic oriented facilities and hospitals which are, in each case, compatible in scale and spatial arrangement with the surrounding community. "Public uses" do not include public utilities, airports or churches. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.430 - Public utility. 
"Public utility" means the use of land for public utility purposes by an entity providing pipeline, gas, electrical, telephone, telegraph, water or sewage service that is subject to the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. "Public utility" also includes the use of land for utility purposes, whether or not owned, controlled or operated by a public entity, whose services are performed for or commodities delivered to the public or any portion thereof. Private energy production, transmission relay, repeater, translator, radio and television towers and equipment and cable television facilities are also considered public utilities. "Public utility" does not include airports or television, radio or community television antenna system administration offices or other types of administrative offices or maintenance yards. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.435 - Recreational vehicle. 
"Recreational vehicle" means any motorhome, travel trailer, truck camper or camping trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency purposes, and which may be moved upon a public highway without a special permit or chauffeur's license or both. The vehicle may not exceed three hundred twenty (320) square feet in size. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.440 - Recreational vehicle park. 
"Recreational vehicle park" means an area or tract of land developed and operated with one or more spaces which are rented or leased for parking and utilizing recreational vehicles on a temporary basis. Some spaces may also be used for tent camping. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.442 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-233, § I, adopted May 20, 2014, repealed former § 17.02.442 in its entirety which pertained to the definition of a family care residence and derived from Ord. No. 97-99 § 1.  
17.02.445 - Residence, multiple-family. 
"Multiple-family residence" means a building or buildings containing three or more dwelling units, such as an apartment house, apartment hotel or flat. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.450 - Residence, one-family. 
"One-family residence" means a detached building containing a single dwelling unit, including a mobile home certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974 that complies with all provisions of this code and the city development standards applicable to mobile homes installed on foundation systems and that would be defined as a mobile home if not installed on a foundation system. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.455 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-233, § I, adopted May 20, 2014, repealed former § 17.02.455 in its entirety which pertained to the definition of a senior citizen residence and derived from Ord. No. 97-99 § 1.  
17.02.460 - Residence, two-family. 
"Two-family residence" means a building containing two independent dwelling units under one roof (duplex), including a duplex mobile home certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974 that complies with all provisions of this code and county development standards applicable to mobile homes installed on foundation systems, and that would be defined as a mobile home if not installed on a foundation system. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.465 - Residential care facility. 
"Residential care facility" means a facility which is state-licensed or county-licensed or certified by a state-licensed child placement agency that provides noninstitutional and nonmedical care for six or fewer children or adults. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.470 - Residential facility for the elderly. 
"Residential facility for the elderly" means a facility, for residents that are sixty (60) years of age or older or are handicapped. Care may include laundry, dietary and nursing services provided nursing services are available no more than eight hours in a twenty-four (24) hour period. General plan residential densities shall apply. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.475 - Restaurant, fast food. 
"Fast food restaurant" means any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, for consumption either within the restaurant building or for take-out consumption, and whose design or principal method of operation includes serving food and beverages in edible containers or in paper, plastic or other disposable containers. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.480 - Restaurant, standard. 
"Standard restaurant" means any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, usually for consumption within the restaurant, and whose design or principal method of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics: 
A.  Customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served foods and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which said items are consumed. 
B.  A cafeteria-type operation where foods and beverages generally are consumed within the building. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.485 - Restrictive flood zone—Area of shallow flooding. 
"Restrictive flood zone," also "area of shallow flooding," means the lowlands adjacent to the designated floodway (regulatory floodway) and subject to unpredictable and indeterminate overflow by floodwaters of a base flood, with approximate average water depths of one foot or more, where a clearly defined channel does not exist. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.490 - Retail sales. 
"Retail sales" means the selling of goods, wares or merchandise directly to the ultimate consumer. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.495 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-233, § I, adopted May 20, 2014, repealed former § 17.02.495 in its entirety which pertained to the definition of rooming houses or boarding houses and derived from Ord. No. 97-99 § 1.  
17.02.500 - School. 
"School" means a place for systematic instruction in any branch or branches of knowledge, including public, parochial and nonprofit elementary or secondary schools, attendance at which satisfies the requirements of the Compulsory Education Law (Education Code Section 48200 et seq.). 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.505 - Screened junk yard or wrecking yard. 
See "junk yard or wrecking yard, screened." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.510 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-233, § I, adopted May 20, 2014, repealed former § 17.02.510 in its entirety which pertained to the definition of servant's quarters and derived from Ord. No. 97-99 § 1.  
17.02.515 - Shopping center. 
"Shopping center" means a group of three or more businesses which function as an integral unit on a single or contiguous parcel(s) which utilize common off-street parking and access. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.520 - Sign. 
"Sign" means any visual device or representation designed or used for communicating a message, or identifying or attracting attention to a premises, product, service, person, organization, business or event. "Sign" does not include such devices visible only from within a building, nor does it include official notices issued by a court, public body or officer, or directional, warning or information signs required by or authorized by federal, state, county or city authority. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.525 - Sign, appurtenant. 
"Appurtenant sign" means a sign relating only to goods sold or services rendered on the building site on which the sign is located. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.530 - Sign, building. 
"Building sign" means any sign attached parallel to or painted on any exterior wall face of a building. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.535 - Sign, freestanding. 
"Freestanding sign" means any sign permanently supported by one or more uprights, braces, poles or other similar structural components when utilizing earth, rock, the ground or any foundation set in the ground as a primary holding base, and not attached to or enclosed by any building. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.540 - Sign, ground. 
"Ground sign" means a sign placed upon a foundation or a slab and not supported by uprights, braces, poles or other similar structural components. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.545 - Sign, outdoor advertising. 
"Outdoor advertising sign" means any sign other than an appurtenant sign. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.550 - Sign, roof. 
"Roof sign" means any sign erected, constructed and placed on or over the roof of a building or of any architectural feature which visually appears to be the roof. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.555 - Skilled nursing/intermediate care facility. 
"Skilled nursing/intermediate care facility" means a facility or a part of a hospital which provides twenty-four (24) hour inpatient care. Twenty-four (24) hour inpatient care may include skilled nursing, physician and pharmaceutical services and an activity program. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.560 - Small day care home. 
See "day care home, small." 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.565 - Story. 
"Story" means the portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above, then the space between the floor and ceiling above it. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.570 - Street frontage. 
"Street frontage" means the portion of a lot fronting on a street. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.575 - Structural alterations. 
"Structural alterations" means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.580 - Structural height. 
"Structural height" means the height of a structure measured from the average finished grade at the base of the structure to the highest point of the structure. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.585 - Structure. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, except fences under six feet in height, the use of which requires location on or in the ground or attachment to something located on or in the ground. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.590 - Substantial improvement. 
A.  "Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction or modification of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either (1) before such work is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
B.  "Substantial improvement" does not include (1) any modification of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.595 - Townhouse. 
"Townhouse" means a one-family dwelling unit attached to one or more one-family dwelling units, provided only one dwelling unit is located on a lot. A townhouse may also include an undivided interest in common in a lot that is contiguous to the townhouse lots. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.600 - Trailer. 
"Trailer" means any recreational vehicle, van or other vehicle, without motor power, not exceeding three hundred twenty (320) square feet in size, constructed to travel upon public streets and highways, and designed or used for temporary human habitation. "Trailer" does not include mobile home. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.605 - Truck terminal. 
"Truck terminal" means any facility designed to serve as a carrier end point for the delivery and receipt of goods, which may include loading docks, storage sheds, management offices, truck storage and employee and customer parking. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.610 - Truck yard. 
"Truck yard" means any facility, including buildings and/or outdoor storage, servicing, maintenance and/or repair of two or more vehicles having a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds each. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.615 - Use. 
"Use" means the purpose for which land or premises or a structure, building or mobile home thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.620 - Use, accessory. 
"Accessory use" means a use that is subordinate to an existing principal use, is customarily a part of and is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use, and does not change the character of that use. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.625 - Vehicle trip. 
"Vehicle trip" means a one-way trip by a motorized vehicle. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.630 - Watercourse. 
"Watercourse" means a drainageway which has a defined bed, banks and channel and which carries a flow of water at least periodically. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.635 - Wet bar. 
"Wet bar" means a sink and small refrigerator. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.640 - Yard. 
"Yard" means an open space, on the same lot with a building, which is unoccupied by any structure and unobstructed from the ground upward by any structure, except as otherwise provided in this title, exclusive of any portion of any court, street, alley, sidewalk or road right-of-way. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.645 - Yard, front. 
"Front yard" means a yard measured from the edge of the easement or right-of-way or adopted plan line extending across the front of the lot between the side lot lines and to a depth required by the district in which the lot is situated. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.650 - Yard, rear. 
"Rear yard" means a yard extending along the back of the lot between the side lot lines and to a depth required by the district in which the lot is situated. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.655 - Yard, interior side. 
"Interior side yard" means a yard along the interior side line of the lot to a width required by the district in which the lot is situated, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.02.660 - Yard, street side. 
"Street side yard" means a yard along a side street, right-of-way or easement to a width required by the district in which the lot is situated, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.10 - CANNABIS BUSINESS LAND USE 
 
17.10.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to define where cannabis business as a land use can be located within the identified zoning districts as called out in the land use table in section 17.10.20. For zoning districts not called out in the table it shall be presumed that the business is expressly not permitted or allowed within that zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 17-258, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
17.10.015 - Intent. 
The intent of this section shall be to ensure that cannabis businesses are operated in such a manner as to ensure the public health and safety of the residents and businesses of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-258, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
17.10.020 - Land use table. 
The land use table shall be used to determine whether a cannabis business is permitted (P), not permitted (NP), or permitted with a conditional use permit (CUP). If a zoning district in title 17 is not listed in the land use table, the use is not permitted. 
  
Footnotes: 
1 Three total dispensaries are permitted; each must be located on Shasta Dam Boulevard or in a previously established location housing an existing dispensary in operation at the time this chapter is adopted. 
2 Permitted use for distribution only. Must be less than two thousand (2,000) square feet and have no warehouse structure. 
3 Volatile manufacturing not permitted if the building is within nine hundred (900) feet of a residential parcel. 
4 Permitted use for buildings under two thousand (2,000) square feet—subject to CUP for buildings over two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
5 Retail sales not allowed. 
Land use classifications: 
Greenhouse, commercial A - permitted cultivation area: 0 to 5,000 square feet 
Greenhouse, commercial B - permitted cultivation area: 5,001 to 10,000 square feet 
Greenhouse, commercial C - permitted cultivation area: 10,000 to 22,000 square feet 
ZONING DISTRICTS 
R 	Residential Zoning Districts 
VC 	Village Commercial 
C-2 	Community Commercial 
CM 	Commercial—Light Industrial 
DR 	Design Review 
ML 	Light Industrial 
M 	Industrial 
SGIP-PD 	Shasta Gateway Industrial Park—Planned Development 
 
(Ord. No. 17-258, § 1, 5-2-2017; Ord. No. 18-268, 4-3-2018)  
17.10.030 - Definitions. 
The definitions listed here are applicable throughout this code where cannabis is referenced. All definitions are intended to comply with those in this code, state regulations, Business and Professions Code, and in the California Health and Safety Code, and as they may be amended. 
"Accessory building" means a detached building subordinate to and located on the same parcel as a residence, the use of which is incidental to that of the residence. Accessory building does not include any tent, trailer, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle, or any building designed or used for human habitation. 
"Applicant" shall mean a person who is required to file an application for a permit or license under this chapter. 
"Cannabis" means all parts of the plant cannabis sativa linnaeus, cannabis indica, or cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. For purposes of this section the terms cannabis and marijuana shall have the same meaning. 
"Cannabis dispensary" means a premise where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of non-medical cannabis or medical cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale, including an establishment that delivers, pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 19340, cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale. 
"Cannabis manufacturing site" means the premises that produces, prepares, propagates, or compounds manufactured cannabis or cannabis products, directly or indirectly, and is owned and operated by a licensee for these activities. 
"Cannabis testing facility" means a public or private laboratory licensed and certified, or approved by the Bureau of Cannabis Regulation or any other regulatory body controlling testing facilities, to conduct research and analyze cannabis, cannabis products, and cannabis concentrate for contaminants and potency. 
"Canopy" means the total combined canopy area for all locations on a property where cannabis is being cultivated, including indoor areas, outdoor areas, or a combination of both, as measured by the horizontal extent of the plant or combination of plants at the widest point and measured in a straight line. 
"Commercial cannabis business" includes cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, delivery, or sale of cannabis, medical cannabis or a cannabis or medical cannabis product, except as related Business and Professions Code Section 19319, and as it may be amended or Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 through 11362.45 and as they may be amended. 
"Cultivation" and/or "cultivate" shall mean the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, processing, or storage of one or more cannabis plants or any part thereof. 
"Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed, that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of cannabis or cannabis products. 
"Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between licensed entities. 
"Distributor" means a person licensed to engage in the business of purchasing cannabis from a licensed cultivator, or cannabis products from a licensed manufacturer, for sale to a licensee. 
"Employee" shall mean any person (whether paid or unpaid) who provides regular labor or regular services for a cannabis business, including but not limited to the location of a cannabis dispensary business. 
"Indoor cultivation facility" shall mean a facility which is licensed by the city and the state for the growing of cannabis within an enclosed building for the purposes of wholesale of cannabis to cannabis manufacturing facilities or cannabis dispensaries. 
"Manager" shall mean an employee responsible for management and/or supervision of a cannabis dispensary business. 
"Mixed light cultivation facility" means cultivation using a combination of natural and supplemental artificial lighting at a maximum threshold in a permanent facility in compliance with the state building code as determined by the state licensing authority. 
"Non-climbable fence" means a fence with a smooth exterior surface that is not equipped with steps or other provisions for climbing. 
"Nursery" means a commercial cannabis licensee that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis. 
"Primary caregiver" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(f). 
"Qualified patient" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(f). 
"Retail nursery" means sale of cannabis' clone-only by a cannabis nursery; with no mature plants or any other products for sale, subject to approval by the state. 
"School" means any public or private school providing instruction in kindergarten or grades 1 to 12, inclusive, but does not include any private school in which education is primarily conducted in private homes. 
"Transporter" means a person who holds a license by the Bureau of Cannabis Regulation to transport cannabis or cannabis products in an amount above a threshold determined by the bureau between licensees that have been issued a license pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-258, § 1, 5-2-2017; Ord. No. 18-268, 4-3-2018)  
17.10.040 - Development standards. 
Commercial cannabis businesses shall meet all of the standards for the zoning district in which they are allowed and located. They shall meet the other development requirements as referenced in that zoning district and found elsewhere in this code. 
(Ord. No. 17-258, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
17.10.050 - Permits. 
All commercial cannabis business allowed as shown in section 17.10.20 are required to obtain a business license as required by title 5—business license and a regulatory license as required by chapter 8.06—commercial cannabis licenses and standards. 
(Ord. No. 17-258, § 1, 5-2-2017)  
Chapter 17.12 - MINERAL RESOURCE (MR) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.12.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the mineral resource (MR) district is to protect lands with substantial mineral resources that are currently being mined or likely to be used for mineral extraction. This district is consistent with the mineral resource (M) general plan designation. This district may also be applied to other areas where there are mineral deposits that can be mined commercially, provided there are no conflicts with other general plan policies. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.12.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the MR district: 
A.  Exploration work for minerals, except as provided in Section 17.12.030B of this chapter; 
B.  Agricultural uses, forest management; 
C.  Low-intensity recreational uses which require only minor improvements, such as a hunting or fishing club. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.12.030 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the MR district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Living quarters for the use of the owner(s), security personnel, or laborers employed on site; 
B.  Notwithstanding any provision of Section 17.12.020A of this chapter to the contrary, any mining activity, either underground or open pit, as defined by the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (Article 5, Chapter 9, Division 2 (Section 2770, et seq.) of the California Public Resources Code); 
C.  Mills and other facilities, buildings or structures related to or used in connection with the storing, transportation, processing or refining of mined materials or products derived therefrom. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.12.040 - Other permitted uses. 
The following other uses are permitted in the MR district: 
A.  The uses allowed by and subject to the provisions of Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.12.020 and 17.12.030 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.12.050 - Site development standards. 
The following site development standards apply in the MR district: 
A.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site requirement is twenty (20) acres, or as specified by use permit, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this chapter. 
B.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, thirty (30) feet; 
2.  Side, thirty (30) feet; 
3.  Rear, thirty (30) feet. 
C.  Maximum Structural Height. Maximum permitted structural height is forty-five (45) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title. 
D.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
E.  Reclamation Plans. All approved mining activities shall be accompanied by a reclamation plan for the rehabilitation, reuse and erosion control of the mined area. The reclamation plan shall be in accordance with Chapter 18.04 of the Shasta County Code. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.14 - HABITAT PROTECTION (HP) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.14.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the habitat protection (HP) district is to protect lands having significant wildlife habitat values. This district is consistent with the natural resource protection-habitat (N-H) general plan designation and the N-H-RB-C general plan designation for the Day Bench area. This district may also be applied to other areas that have important wildlife habitat characteristics, provided there are no conflicts with other general plan policies. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.14.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the HP district: 
A.  One-family residence; 
B.  A mobile home, in lieu of a one-family residence, provided the parcel is forty (40) acres or larger in size; otherwise the T district must be combined; 
C.  Forest management; 
D.  Habitat enhancement or improvement projects, as approved by the Department of Fish and Game; 
E.  Low-intensity recreational uses which require only minor improvements, such as a hunting or fishing club; 
F.  Agricultural uses; 
G.  Sale of products grown on the premises. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.14.030 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the HP district if an administrative permit is issued, and subject to the provisions of Sections 17.88.170 through 17.88.250 of this title: 
A.  Home occupation; 
B.  Large day care home. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.14.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
An accessory dwelling unit is permitted in the HP district if a use permit is issued provided the residential density permitted by the general plan is not exceeded. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.14.050 - Other permitted uses. 
The following other uses are permitted in the HP district: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Section 17.14.020 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.14.060 - Site development standards. 
The following site development standards apply in the HP district: 
A.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site requirement is one acre if one of the following criteria is met, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this title: 
1.  In all habitat areas except the Day Bench area, the maximum residential density may not exceed one dwelling per the acreage indicated on the zoning map; except the density may be doubled if the development is clustered and other habitat protection features are incorporated into the project to the degree necessary to reduce the negative impacts on wildlife created by the additional density to the level of impact created by not utilizing the clustering alternative. The clustered lots must be sited to reduce the impacts on critical wildlife habitat components, such as watering sites and thermal areas. 
2.  In the Day Bench area the maximum residential density may not exceed one dwelling per five acres. Residential clustering, along with other habitat protection criteria, is required to the degree necessary to mitigate the impacts from development to below a level of significance. 
B.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, thirty (30) feet; 
2.  Side, thirty (30) feet; 
3.  Rear, thirty (30) feet. 
C.  Maximum Structural Height. The following structural height restrictions apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title: 
1.  Main building, thirty-five (35) feet; 
2.  Accessory building, one story, not to exceed twenty (20) feet. 
D.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.16 - OPEN SPACE (OS) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.16.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the open space (OS) district is to protect as open space, lots, or portions of lots, that are (A) most properly kept as open space, (B) needed as a greenbelt or buffer along significant river and creekside corridors or around important natural features, or (C) kept in open space for health or safety reasons. This district is consistent with the natural resource protection-open space (N-O) general plan designation. This district may also be applied to other areas to protect significant river or creekside corridor habitat areas or other important natural areas, or to properties where development should be limited due to health or safety reasons. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.16.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the OS district: 
A.  Forest management; 
B.  Low-intensity recreational uses which require only minor improvements, such as a hunting or fishing club; 
C.  Agricultural uses. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.16.030 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the OS district if an administrative permit is issued, and subject to the provisions of Sections 17.88.220 and 17.88.230 of this title: 
A.  Home occupation; 
B.  Large day care center. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.16.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the OS district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  One-family residence, or mobile home in lieu of a one-family residence; 
B.  Golf course; 
C.  Playground; 
D.  Commercial riding stable. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.16.050 - Other permitted uses. 
The following other uses are permitted in the OS district: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.16.020 and 17.16.040 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.16.060 - Site development standards. 
The following site development standards apply in the OS district: 
A.  Minimum Lot Size. Minimum lot size is twenty (20) acres if designated in the general plan as natural resource protection-open space (N-O). If applied as a greenbelt or buffer, the lot size shall be as shown on a recorded parcel or final map, use permit or specific plan, or shall otherwise be indicated on the zoning map. 
B.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, thirty (30) feet; 
2.  Side, thirty (30) feet; 
3.  Rear, thirty (30) feet; 
C.  Maximum Structural Height. The following structural height restrictions apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title: 
1.  Main building, thirty-five (35) feet; 
2.  Accessory building, one story, not to exceed twenty (20) feet. 
D.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.22 - DESIGNATED FLOODWAY (F-1) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.22.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the designated floodway (F-1) district is to maximize the use of land located within the designated floodway in a manner consistent with the need to protect life and property, and to minimize environmental damage to riparian and aquatic habitats. This district is consistent with all general plan land use designations. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.22.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the F-1 district: 
A.  Flood control channels or works, if undertaken or constructed by a federal or state agency, the city or the county water agency; 
B.  Crop farming, truck gardening, orchards, viticulture, livestock grazing and other similar agricultural uses conducted in a manner which will not increase flood levels within the community during the occurrence of a base flood discharge; 
C.  Public roads, bridges and diversion drains, and public utility transmission towers, poles, lines and underground pipelines, when constructed and installed so that the flood levels will not increase within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; 
D.  Low-intensity recreational uses not involving landfill or excavation of natural materials, when conducted in a manner which will not increase flood levels within the community during the occurrence of a base flood discharge; 
E.  Private erosion or flood control projects, including prevention or reduction of erosion or flooding by a land owner on his property within the district, provided an agreement with the Department of Fish and Game is first obtained pursuant to Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 1600) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code; 
F.  Fish and wildlife protection or enhancement projects conducted or approved by a federal or state agency, the city or the county water agency. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.22.030 - Uses requiring a use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the F-1 district if a use permit is issued pursuant to Section 17.22.040 of this chapter: 
A.  Construction of levees, dikes or similar structures for flood control; 
B.  Excavation of natural materials and landfill projects, except on any designated stream subject to subsection D of this section; 
C.  Public utility uses other than those permitted under Section 17.22.020 of this chapter, except offices and service yards; 
D.  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, provided that certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is obtained demonstrating that encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.22.040 - Findings. 
No use permit for the F-1 district shall be approved unless the approving authority makes the following findings, in addition to those required by Section 17.92.020 of this title: 
A.  The proposed project will not endanger life, will not impair the ability of the designated floodway to carry and discharge the waters of a design flood and will not increase flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  Any domestic water supply system or sewage disposal system to be installed or used in connection with the proposed use is designed to prevent infiltration of or discharge into floodwaters. 
C.  The applicant has entered into an agreement with the Department of Fish and Game pursuant to Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 1600) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.22.050 - Development plans. 
In the F-1 district, every use permit application shall include plans and specifications for all proposed construction and such other information as the development services director or his or her designee may require. Encroachments permitted pursuant to subsection D of Section 17.22.030 of this chapter shall conform to the requirements of Sections 17.70.040 and 17.70.050 of this title, restrictive flood (F-2) district. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.22.060 - Vegetation removal. 
No natural riparian vegetation, including vegetation naturally occurring along a watercourse, but not including vegetation declared by law a public nuisance, shall be removed from any portion of the F-1 district adjacent to the Sacramento River or any stream designated a floodway by the State Reclamation Board, except by a federal or state agency, the city or the county water agency. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.22.070 - Residential density. 
No residential density shall be credited to portions of lots within the F-1 district that are within a residential general plan designation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.26 - RURAL RESIDENTIAL (R-R) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.26.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the rural residential (R-R) district is to provide rural residential living environments, usually located in and around rural communities, town centers and urban centers. This district is consistent with the rural residential A (RA) general plan designation and, if combined with an NRA-S, or NRA-WI or WII district, the natural resource protection-recreation (N-R) general plan designation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.26.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the R-R district: 
A.  One-family residence; 
B.  Agricultural uses, provided: 
1.  Animal husbandry provided the minimum parcel size for livestock (farm animals) listed is one acre and the total number of animals shall not exceed the numbers listed per acre: 
a.  One horse, pony, mule, burro, cow, llama, camel or similar sized animal per one-half acre; 
b.  Three goats, sheep, or similar sized animal per one-half acre; 
c.  Two swine per one acre; 
d.  Two adult emus, rheas, ostriches or similar sized birds per one acre subject to a use permit, the total number of chicks permitted shall be determined by the use permit. 
2.  No minimum parcel size is required for the following animals but the total number permitted shall not exceed the number listed per acre: 
a.  Twenty-five (25) turkeys, chickens, ducks, geese, rabbits, or similar sized animals per one-half acre; 
b.  Unlimited fish, frogs, worms, or similar sized animals. 
3.  Animals shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, as provided in Section 6.08.010 of this code, and in a manner that does not become a nuisance, as provided in Section 6.08.020 of this code. 
4.  The keeping of beehives and the selling of bee products resulting from the keeping of bees in accordance with Chapter 6.08 of the Shasta County Code and applicable state laws. 
C.  Sale of agricultural products grown on the premises. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.26.030 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-R district if an administrative permit is issued, and subject to the provisions of Sections 17.88.220 and 17.88.230 of this title: 
A.  Home occupation; 
B.  Large day care home. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.26.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-R district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Animals in numbers exceeding those permitted in Section 17.26.020(B)(1) of this chapter; 
B.  Group foster home; 
C.  Dog kennel; 
D.  Large animal veterinarian; 
E.  Golf course; 
F.  Wholesale nursery or greenhouse; 
G.  Commercial riding stable or riding academy; 
H.  Bed and breakfast guest facility, subject to the provisions of Section 17.88.270 of this title; 
I.  Church; 
J.  Temporary development sales office and contractor's yard; 
K.  Pet cemetery; 
L.  Accessory dwelling unit per Chapter 17.81, provided the residential density permitted by the general plan is not exceeded; 
M.  Logging contractor's yard. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.26.050 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses permitted in the R-R district are: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 and 17.88.130 through 17.88.150 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.26.020 and 17.26.040 of this chapter; as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.26.060 - Site development standards. 
The following site development standards apply in the R-R district; 
A.  Residential Density and Minimum Building Site. Unless part of a community plan area where residents prefer a certain minimum parcel size, lands in this district shall not be assigned maximum densities or minimum parcel sizes prior to the evaluation of site-specific data involving the criteria indicated in this section. Specific parcel size requirements should be applied only after collection and analysis of the data required to accurately make these recommendations. The data shall be provided by the property owner or agent. 
1.  Maximum Residential Density. The maximum residential density shall be determined by the following criteria: 
a.  The maximum density for land exceeding a thirty (30) percent slope is one dwelling unit per ten acres; 
b.  The maximum density for land not exceeding a thirty (30) percent slope is one dwelling unit per two acres; 
c.  Adequate water quality and quantity is proven, to the satisfaction of the city, to be available for the new uses; and that existing reasonable and beneficial water uses in the vicinity will not be adversely affected; 
d.  City sewage disposal capability is proven for each new building site, as required by applicable city standards; 
e.  All other city development standards are met. 
2.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this title, shall be two acres. 
B.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, thirty (30) feet; 
2.  Side, thirty (30) feet; 
3.  Rear, thirty (30) feet. 
C.  Maximum Structural Height. The following structural height restrictions apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title: 
1.  Main building, thirty-five (35) feet; 
2.  Accessory building, one story, not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
D.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 19-273, § 3, 3-5-2019)  
Chapter 17.28 - INTERIM RESIDENTIAL (I-R) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.28.010 - Purpose. 
The Interim Residential (I-R) district is to be applied to rural or suburban residential areas, on an interim basis, where it is apparent that more intensive suburban or urban development is imminent, or will occur when urban services become available. In these cases, a holding district is needed during the transition period from rural to suburban or urban land uses. This district is consistent with the suburban residentrial (SR) and urban residential (UR) general plan designations and is governed by conditions described by General Plan Policy LU-s. 
(Ord. 99-119 Att. B (part): Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.28.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the I-R district: 
A.  One-family residence; 
B.  Agricultural uses, provided: 
1.  Animal husbandry provided the minimum parcel size for livestock (farm animals) listed is one acre and the total number of animals shall not exceed the numbers listed per acre: 
a.  One horse, pony, mule, burro, cow, llama, camel or similar sized animal per one-half acre; 
b.  Three goats, sheep, or similar sized animal per one-half acre; 
c.  Two swine per one acre; 
d.  Two adult emus, rheas, ostriches or similar sized birds per one acre subject to a use permit, the total number of chicks permitted shall be determined by the use permit. 
2.  No minimum parcel size is required for the following animals but the total number permitted shall not exceed the number listed per acre: 
a.  Twenty-five (25) turkeys, chickens, ducks, geese, rabbits, or similar sized animals per one-half acre; 
b.  Unlimited fish, frogs, worms, or similar sized animals. 
3.  Animals shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, as provided in Section 6.08.010 of this code, and in a manner as to not become a nuisance, as provided in Section 6.08.020 of this code. 
4.  The keeping of beehives and the selling of bee products resulting from the keeping of bees in accordance with Chapter 6.08 of the Shasta County Code and applicable state laws. 
C.  Sale of agricultural products grown on the premises. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.28.030 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the I-R district if an administrative permit is issued subject to the procedures of Section 17.92.050 and Section 17.88.220 and 17.88.230: 
A.  Home occupation; 
B.  Large day care home. 
(Ord. 99-119 Att. B (part): Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.28.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the I-R district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Animals in numbers exceeding those permitted in Section 17.28.020(B)(1) of this title; 
B.  Dog kennel; 
C.  Group foster home; 
D.  Golf courses; 
E.  Wholesale nursery or greenhouse; 
F.  Commercial riding stable or riding academy; 
G.  Bed and breakfast guest facility, subject to the provisions of Section 17.88.270 of this title; 
H.  Church; 
I.  Accessory dwelling unit (ADU) per Chapter 17.81, provided the residential density permitted by the general plan is not exceeded. 
(Ord. 99-119 Att. B (part): Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.28.050 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses permitted in the I-R district are: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to applicable provisions of Chapter 17.88; 
B.  Upon issuance of a use permit, other uses found to be consistent with the stated purpose of the I-R district and that are similar in character and impact to those uses listed in Sections 17.28.020 through 17.28.040. 
(Ord. 99-119 Att. B (part): Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.28.060 - Site development standards. 
The following site development standards apply in the I-R district: 
A.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site requirement is five acres, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this title; 
B.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, thirty (30) feet; 
2.  Side, thirty (30) feet; 
3.  Rear, thirty (30) feet; 
C.  Maximum Structural Height. The following structural height restrictions apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title: 
1.  Main building, thirty (30) feet; 
2.  Accessory building, one story not to exceed fifteen (15) feet; 
D.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.30 - ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.30.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the one-family residential (R-l) district is to provide for fully serviced, urban-sized lots used exclusively for one-family residences and selected related uses. This district is consistent with the urban residential (UR) and suburban residential (SR) general plan designations. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.30.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the R-1 district: 
A.  One-family residence, except mobile homes on foundation systems are subject to subsection B of this section; 
B.  A mobile home certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) and installed on a foundation system and meeting other adopted development standards, in lieu of a frame-constructed dwelling, provided a certificate of compatibility is issued; 
C.  Recreational facilities incidental to a planned residential development, including a swimming pool, tennis courts, clubhouse, etc.; 
D.  Accessory dwelling units which meet the requirements of Chapter 17.81. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.30.030 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-1 district if an administrative permit is issued, and subject to the provisions of Sections 17.88.220 and 17.88.230 of this title: 
A.  Home occupation; 
B.  Large day care home. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.30.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-1 district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Golf course; 
B.  Church. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.30.050 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses permitted in the R-1 district are: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 and 17.88.130 and 17.88.140 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.30.020 and 17.30.040 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.30.060 - Site development standards. 
The following site development standards apply in the R-1 district: 
A.  Minimum Building Site. Provided that the residential density permitted by the general plan, including any permitted density bonus, is not exceeded, the following minimum building site requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this title: 
1.  Interior lot, six thousand (6,000) square feet; 
2.  Corner lot, seven thousand (7,000) square feet. 
B.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, twenty (20) feet; except that houses constructed with garages having a swing driveway, with the entrance facing the side property line, may have a minimum fifteen (15) foot setback; 
2.  Side, five feet on one side and twelve (12) feet on the opposite side. (Note: the minimum side yards required for any lot created prior to June 7, 1978 are five feet on each side); 
3.  Rear, fifteen (15) feet; 
4.  Interior yard space, fifteen (15) percent of the lot area, or nine hundred (900) square feet, which-ever is less, is required for an interior yard for each lot. This may include all of the open area from the required front yard setback line to the rear property line which has a minimum dimension of ten feet by fifteen (15) feet and shall be completely open from the ground to the sky, except for a patio or pergola, or a roof or balcony overhang not exceeding thirty (30) inches. 
C.  Maximum Structural Height. The following structural height restrictions apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title: 
1.  Main building, thirty (30) feet; 
2.  Accessory building, one story not to exceed twenty-two (22) feet. 
D.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. For each newly constructed one-family residence, each required parking area shall be covered. Each covered parking space shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and twenty (20) feet in depth of unobstructed area. This does not include areas for washers, dryers, water heaters, stairways, supporting columns or steps. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 19-273, § 3, 3-5-2019)  
Chapter 17.32 - ONE-FAMILY MOBILE HOME (R-M) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.32.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the one-family mobile home (R-M) district is to provide fully-serviced, urban-sized lots for mobile homes and one-family residences, and selected related uses. This district is consistent with the urban residential (UR) and suburban residential (SR) general plan designations. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.32.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the R-M district: 
A.  Mobile home, or a one-family residence in lieu of a mobile home; 
B.  Recreation facilities incidental to a planned residential development, including a swimming pool, tennis courts, clubhouse, etc.; 
C.  Accessory dwelling units which meet the requirements of Chapter 17.81. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.32.030 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-M district if an administrative permit is issued, and subject to the provisions of Section 17.88.220 of this title: 
A.  Home occupation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.32.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-M district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Large day care home; 
B.  Temporary development sales office; 
C.  Golf course; 
D.  Church. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.32.050 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses permitted in the R-M district are: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 and 17.88.130 and 17.88.140 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.32.020 and 17.32.040 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.32.060 - Site development standards. 
The following site development standards apply in the R-M district: 
A.  Minimum Building Site. Provided that the residential density permitted by the general plan, including any permitted density bonus, is not exceeded, the following shall apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this title: 
1.  Interior lot, six thousand (6,000) square feet; 
2.  Corner lot, seven thousand (7,000) square feet. 
B.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title: 
1.  Front, twenty (20) feet; 
2.  Side, five feet on one side and twelve (12) feet on the opposite side. (Note: The minimum side yards required for any lot created prior to June 7, 1978 are five feet on each side); 
3.  Rear, fifteen (15) feet; 
4.  Interior yard space: fifteen (15) percent of the lot area, or nine hundred (900) square feet, which-ever is less, is required for an interior yard for each lot. This may include all of the open area from the required front yard setback line to the rear property line which has a minimum dimension of ten feet by fifteen (15) feet and shall be completely open from the ground to the sky, except for a patio or pergola, or a roof or balcony overhang not exceeding thirty (30) inches. 
C.  Maximum Structural Height. The following structural height restrictions apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title: 
1.  Main building, thirty (30) feet; 
2.  Accessory building, one story not to exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
D.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.34 - TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.34.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the two-family residential (R-2) district is to provide fully serviced urban-sized lots for either one-family or two-family (duplex) residences and selected related uses. This district is consistent with the urban residential (UR) general plan designation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.34.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the R-2 district: 
A.  One-family residence; 
B.  Two-family residence; 
C.  Recreational facilities incidental to a planned residential development, including a swimming pool, tennis courts, clubhouse, etc.; 
D.  Accessory dwelling units which meet the requirements of Chapter 17.81. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.34.030 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-2 district if an administrative permit is issued, and subject to the provisions of Sections 17.88.220 and 17.88.230 of this title: 
A.  Home occupation; 
B.  Large day care home. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.34.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-2 district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Townhouses; 
B.  Temporary residential development sales office and contractor's yard; 
C.  Group foster home; 
D.  Golf course; 
E.  Church; 
F.  Bed and breakfast guest facility subject to the provisions of Section 17.88.270 of this title; 
G.  Residential facility for the elderly serving no more than fifteen (15) people; 
H.  Skilled nursing/intermediate care facility serving no more than fifteen (15) people. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.34.050 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses permitted in the R-2 district are: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 and 17.88.130 through 17.88.150 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.34.020 and 17.34.040 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.34.060 - Site development standards. 
The following site development standards apply in the R-2 district: 
A.  Minimum Building Site. Provided that the residential density permitted by the general plan, including any permitted density bonus, is not exceeded, the following minimum building site requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this title: 
1.  Interior lot, six thousand (6,000) square feet; 
2.  Corner lot, seven thousand (7,000) square feet. 
B.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, twenty (20) feet; 
2.  Side, five feet on one side and twelve (12) feet on the opposite side. (Note: the minimum side yards required for any lot created prior to June 7, 1978 are five feet on each side); 
3.  Rear, fifteen (15) feet; 
4.  Interior yard space: at least twenty (20) percent of the lot area is required for an interior yard. This may include all of the open area from the required front yard setback line to the rear property line which has a minimum dimension of ten feet by fifteen (15) feet and shall be completely open from the ground to the sky, except for a patio or pergola, or a roof or balcony overhang not exceeding thirty (30) inches. 
C.  Maximum Structural Height. The following structural height restrictions apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title: 
1.  Main building, thirty (30) feet; 
2.  Accessory building, one story not to exceed twenty-two (22) feet. 
D.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
E.  Outdoor Trash Storage. All outdoor trash storage and collection facilities are required to be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container. 
F.  Townhouses. Yard and building site standards may vary for townhouses if a use permit is issued, provided the minimum building site is not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 19-273, § 3, 3-5-2019)  
Chapter 17.36 - MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-3) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.36.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the multiple-family residential (R-3) district is to provide for higher density residential development in areas which have the services and facilities necessary for higher density residential uses. This district is consistent with the urban residential (UR) and urban residential high (URH) general plan designations. 
(Ord. 99-119 Att. B (part): Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.36.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the R-3 district: 
A.  Multiple-family residences; 
B.  Two-family residences; 
C.  Condominiums; 
D.  Accessory buildings and uses commonly found in multifamily or condominium developments, including garages, carports, laundry facilities and rental and administrative offices; 
E.  Recreational facilities incidental to a planned residential development, including a swimming pool, tennis courts, clubhouse, etc.; 
F.  Existing one-family residence that was lawfully established at the time of construction. 
(Ord. 99-119 Att. B (part): Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.36.030 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-3 district if an administrative permit is issued subject to the procedures of Section 17.92.050: 
A.  Home occupation. 
(Ord. 99-119 Att. B (part): Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 19-273, § 3, 3-5-2019)  
17.36.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-3 district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Residential facility for the elderly; 
B.  Group foster home; 
C.  Roominghouse or boardinghouse; 
D.  Private club, fraternity, sorority or lodge, except those for which the chief activity is a service customarily carried on by a business; 
E.  Golf course; 
F.  Church; 
G.  Day care center; 
H.  Parking for commercial uses, if abutting or opposite an alley from a commercial district; 
I.  Bed and breakfast guest facility, subject to the provisions of Section 17.88.270 of this title; 
J.  Skilled nursing/intermediate care facility. 
(Ord. 99-119 Att. B (part): Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.36.050 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses permitted in the R-3 district are: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the applicable provisions of Chapter 17.88. 
B.  Upon issuance of a use permit, other uses found to be consistent with the stated purpose of the R-3 districts, and that are similar in character and impact to those listed in uses listed in Sections 17.36.020 through 17.36.040. 
(Ord. 99-119 Att. B (part): Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.36.060 - Site development standards. 
The following site development standards apply in the R-3 district: 
A.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site requirement is eight thousand (8,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this title. 
B.  Maximum Residential Density. The maximum residential density of twenty (20) units per acre is permitted. 
C.  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width in the R-3 district is as follows: 
1.  Interior lot, seventy-five (75) feet; 
2.  Corner lot, eighty (80) feet. 
D.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, twenty (20) feet; 
2.  Side, five feet on one side and twelve (12) feet on the opposite side. (Note: the minimum side yards required for any lot created prior to June 7, 1978 are five feet on each side); 
3.  Rear, ten feet. 
E.  Courtyard. There shall be provided on each lot, for interior yard space, an area equal to at least twenty (20) percent of the lot which shall be separated from areas of automobile circulation. For the purposes of this district, interior yard space includes all of that area between the front yard setback and rear yard property line which has a minimum dimension of ten feet by fifteen (15) feet. Up to twenty-five (25) percent of the interior yard may be used for a deck. 
F.  Minimum Distance Between Main Buildings. The minimum distance between main buildings is as follows: 
1.  Buildings end-to-end, ten feet; 
2.  Buildings rear-to-end, fifteen (15) feet; 
3.  Buildings front-to-rear or rear-to-rear, twenty (20) feet; 
4.  Buildings front-to-front, when arranged around an open court, thirty (30) feet. 
G.  Maximum Structural Height. The following structural height restrictions apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title: 
1.  Main buildings, forty-five (45) feet; 
2.  Accessory buildings, one story not to exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
H.  Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.040 of this title. 
I.  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.050 of this title. 
J.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
K.  Outdoor Trash Storage. All outdoor trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container. 
L.  Recreational Vehicle Storage. One space per four residences, located in a fenced and gated area, shall be provided for recreational vehicle parking. 
M.  Development Plan. An applicant for either a building permit or a use permit shall submit a site plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee. If only a building permit is required for the use, then the director's approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit. If a use permit is required, then the director's approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 17-262, § 2, 8-15-2017)  
Chapter 17.37 - MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL— OFFICE (R-4) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.37.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the multiple-family residential— office (R-4) district is: 
A.  To encourage the assembly of existing small lots for the purpose of redevelopment, in accordance with the provisions of the redevelopment plan; 
B.  To encourage the development of new multiple-family residential and/or office uses together with facilities and services appurtenant thereto; and 
C.  To establish site development standards which provide for visually appealing development, protect property values, and protect the integrity of residential areas adjacent to the district. 
This district is consistent with the urban residential (UR) and the urban residential high (URH) general plan designations. 
(Ord. 99-119 Att. B (part): Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.37.020 - Uses requiring an administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-4 district if an administrative permit is issued, subject to the provisions of Sections 17.88.220 and 17.92.050: 
A.  Home occupation. 
(Ord. 99-119 Att. B (part): Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.37.030 - Uses requiring a use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-4 district if a use permit is issued and all site development standards specified in Section 17.37.040 are met: 
A.  Multiple-family residences; 
B.  Offices, including administrative, executive, business, editorial, professional, and medical offices; 
C.  Condominiums (residential or office). 
(Ord. 99-119 Att. B (part): Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.37.040 - Site development standards. 
The following are the minimum site development standards applicable in the R-4 district; however, alternate standards may be approved by the planning commission if the applicant demonstrates the alternate standard is not a threat to the health, safety, or well-being of the community, and it is necessary to minimize adverse environmental effects, is necessary for the economic viability of the proposed project, or it advances a standard that is innovative or superior in design. Alternate standards may be approved for a condominium project if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design, attractiveness and compatibility with its surroundings than would result if the routine development standards of this section were applied. 
A.  Site Location. The site must be located on a parcel(s) with frontage and/or direct access to a state highway, arterial, or collector road. 
B.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site requirement is one acre. 
C.  Maximum Residential Density. The maximum density of thirty (30) units per acre is permitted. 
D.  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width requirement is one hundred and fifty (150) feet. 
E.  Yards. The minimum yard required along a street right-of-way shall be twenty (20) feet. The minimum building setback from the rear property line shall be twenty (20) feet. The minimum side yard setback shall be five feet per story. The minimum distance between buildings shall be twenty (20) feet, except the minimum distance between principal buildings and accessory buildings shall be ten feet. 
F.  Single-Family Residential Buffer. Adjacent to legal conforming single-family residential areas, unless separated by a street or natural features such as topography or drainages, a buffer building setback shall be provided which shall be a minimum of the height of the proposed building, as measured from the finished ground level to the highest roof peak. However, the buffer shall be no less than twenty (20) feet for multiple-family residential use and thirty (30) feet for office uses. 
G.  Interior Yard Space. Each dwelling unit shall contain an interior yard or deck space of at least one hundred forty-four (144) square feet in size. This interior space shall be directly accessible from the unit served and completely separate from any area required for automobile circulation, landscaping, or front yards. All such yard or deck areas shall be provided with fencing or railing suitable for outdoor activity. Yard areas may encroach into required side and rear yards; however, decks may not. 
H.  Maximum Building Height. No principal buildings shall exceed four stories or forty-five (45) feet in height, as measured from the finished ground level to the top plate of the fourth story. No accessory building or other structure shall exceed one story or twenty (20) feet in height. 
I.  Access. Parking areas shall be served by no less than two access points to any one street unless unusual circumstances demonstrate the need for only one access point. 
J.  Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas. All off-street parking, loading and drives shall meet the requirements specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
K.  Lighting. All parking areas, driveways and walkways shall meet the requirements specified in Section 17.84.050 of this title, Lighting. 
L.  Trash Enclosures. Trash enclosures of a maximum height of one foot above the trash container and of sufficient size shall be provided to accommodate all trash and waste stored on the premises. All free-standing trash enclosures shall be constructed of solid masonry material or concrete tilt-up with decorative exterior surface finish compatible with the main structure(s). Split-face concrete block, stucco, or similar finish is recommended. However, where the enclosure is not visible from a public street or single-family residential area, the enclosure may be constructed of chain-link fencing with slats and properly screened with landscaping. 
Trash enclosures incorporated into the building shall be designed to be constructed of the primary material of the building. 
M.  Landscaping. Landscaping requirements shall be based on the minimum standards specified in Section 17.84.040 of this title, except; 
1.  A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the gross land area shall be landscaped. 
2.  Shade trees shall be planted in the parking lot(s) at a ratio of one tree for every four spaces and must be located within seven and one-half feet of a parking space or driveway aisle. The shade tree standard is not applicable to covered parking. 
N.  Fences. All fences shall be a minimum of block post spaced six feet on-center with solid wood insert. A landscaped earthen berm or combination of landscaped earthen berm is also acceptable, where appropriate. The maximum height of the fence, berm, or combination thereof, shall be six feet. Office uses shall have a solid masonry concrete wall or planted berm six feet in height, constructed along any lot line abutting an R-1 district, except for interior side lot lines where at a point twenty (20) feet nearest the front lot line, the wall or berm shall be only three feet high. 
O.  Signing. Multiple-family residential uses shall be limited to one monument sign along each street the project abuts with a maximum height of five feet. Office uses shall be limited to one monument sign with a maximum height of five feet, or one building surface mounted sign. All signs shall be indirectly lit. Monument signs are limited to two faces and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in size per face. Building surface mounted signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in size. The general appurtenant sign standards, except where modified herein, shall apply as specified in Section 17.84.060 of this title, Signs. 
P.  Maintenance Program. Continued good appearance depends on the extent and quality of maintenance. Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear, as well as for their appearance. Measures need to be identified for protection against weather, neglect, damage, and abuse. The provisions for washing and cleaning buildings and structures, and control of dirt and refuse, shall be included in the design. Configurations that tend to catch and accumulate leaves, dirt and trash shall be avoided. 
Q.  Development Plans. An applicant for a use permit shall submit development plans which indicate how the site development standards listed in this section will be met. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee. The approval shall occur as set forth in the approved use permit. 
(Ord. 99-119 Att. B (part); Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 17-262, § 2, 8-15-2017)  
Chapter 17.38 - MOBILE HOME PARK (MHP) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.38.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the mobile home park (MHP) district is to provide for the coordinated development and maintenance of mobile home parks. This district is consistent with all residential general plan designations, provided the residential densities of the applicable general plan designation are met. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.38.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the MHP district: 
A.  Mobile home parks meeting the development standards of Section 17.38.060 of this title; 
B.  Residential mobile homes placed in an approved mobile home park; 
C.  Accessory uses commonly found in mobile home parks, including a car garage or carport space, storage facilities, laundry facilities, recreational vehicle parking, maintenance equipment storage areas, space rental and administrative office and other accessory uses commonly found in mobile home parks; 
D.  Common recreation areas and facilities, including a swimming pool, tennis courts, clubhouse, etc. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.38.030 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the MHP district if an administrative permit is issued, and subject to the provisions of Sections 17.88.170 through 17.88.250 of this title: 
A.  Home occupation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.38.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the MHP district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Mobile home park or expansion of a mobile home park not meeting the development standards of Section 17.38.060 of this chapter; 
B.  Accessory structures or uses other than those identified in Section 17.38.020 of this chapter; 
C.  Convenience store; 
D.  Golf course. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.38.050 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses permitted in the MHP district are those found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.38.020 and 17.38.040 of this chapter; as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.38.060 - Site development standards. 
The following site development standards apply in the MHP district: 
A.  New Mobile Home Parks or Expansions. All new mobile home parks or expansions to existing mobile home parks shall be developed to the standards set forth in this section, unless a use permit is issued which provides an exception to the standards. 
B.  Minimum Lot Size. Each mobile home park shall be at least one acre in size. 
C.  Minimum Mobile Home Space Size. The minimum space size for each mobile home shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
D.  Maximum Residential Density. The maximum residential density is as provided by the general plan land use designation. 
E.  Yards. The following yard requirements shall apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Mobile home park exterior: 
a.  Front yard, ten feet, 
b.  Street side yard, ten feet, 
c.  Interior side and rear yard, none required; 
2.  Mobile Home Spaces (Park Interior). No mobile homes shall front on a public street: 
a.  Front yard, ten feet, 
b.  Side yard, five feet on one side and twelve (12) feet on the other side, 
c.  Rear yard, ten feet. 
F.  Maximum Structural Height. The maximum structural height is thirty (30) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title. 
G.  Walls and Landscaping. A solid masonry wall, concrete wall or block posts supporting solid wood inserts, six feet in height, shall be erected completely around the park. The wall shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all abutting exterior streets. The exterior yard areas shall be landscaped as specified in Section 17.84.040 of this title. 
H.  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.050 of this title. 
I.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
J.  Recreational Vehicle Parking. The requirement for recreational vehicle parking is one space per four mobile home spaces, located in a fenced and gated area. 
K.  Outdoor Trash Storage. All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container. 
L.  Vehicular Access and Circulation. Vehicle access and circulation requirements are as follows: 
1.  Main Entrance. The main vehicular entrance to a mobile home park shall consist of two ten-foot travel lanes for ingress and two ten-foot travel lanes for egress, separated by a landscaped median a minimum of ten feet in width. 
This entrance will extend to the intersection with the first cross street that connects with the park's internal circulation network. If a twenty (20) foot wide secondary access is provided, the main access may be reduced to not less than a twenty-four (24) foot wide undivided access. 
2.  Vehicular Circulation. 
a.  Except as provided in subsection (L)(1) of this section, all streets shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet in width, curb-to-curb, if guest parking is allowed on one side of the street; or a minimum of twenty-eight (28) feet in width, curb-to-curb, if no parking is allowed on the street. 
b.  All turning and cul-de-sac radii shall meet the city fire safety standards. 
c.  All streets shall be constructed and paved in accordance with city standards. 
d.  No fencing, landscaping or other material impediment to visibility more than two-and-one-half feet above curb level shall be installed or maintained at the intersection of any street. 
M.  Open Space and Recreation. 
1.  Common landscaped open space and recreation land shall be provided in the park as follows: 
a.  Common open space shall comprise sixteen (16) percent of the gross mobile home park acreage, if the park provides a common recreation center which possesses a total floor area of not less than twenty-five (25) square feet per lot for the first one hundred fifty (150) lots and fifteen (15) square feet per lot thereafter, but in no case less than two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
b.  Common open space shall be twenty (20) percent of the gross mobile home park acreage, if the park does not provide a common recreation center as described in subparagraph (a) of subsection (M)(1) of this section. 
2.  Park walkways, at least ten feet wide and leading to open space and recreation facilities, may count as part of the recreation area. 
3.  Recreation areas shall be provided at locations convenient to park residents and the park service centers. 
4.  Recreation areas may include space for common buildings and common use facilities, such as indoor recreation areas, swimming pools, outdoor courts for games and similar recreation facilities. 
N.  Other Standards. The mobile home park standards of the California Department of Housing and Community Development shall be met, except where the standards of the ordinance codified in this title are more restrictive. 
O.  Development Plan. An applicant for either a building permit or use permit shall submit a site plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section or in the use permit conditions will be met. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee. If only a building permit is required for the use, then the director's approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit. If a use permit is required, then the director's approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.40 - CITY CENTER COMMERCIAL (CC) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.40.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the city center zone district is to provide for municipal and social services integrated with recreation, open space and commercial uses in the acknowledged physical center of the city. Commercial uses and signage are restricted to those consistent with the pedestrian-oriented nature of the zone district. This zone district is consistent with the city center commercial (CC) land use designation. 
(Ord. 01-135 § 1 (part))  
17.40.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the CC district subject to issuance of a building permit, business license or other required permit(s): 
A.  Community center; 
B.  Government facilities; 
C.  Police, fire or sheriff station; 
D.  Professional or medical offices; . 
E.  Library; 
F.  Public park; 
G.  Performing arts center; 
H.  Senior center; 
I.  Museum/heritage center; 
J.  Conference/convention center; 
K.  Financial institution; 
L.  Sit-down restaurant/coffee shop; 
M.  Public transportation facilities; 
N.  Off-street parking facilities in conjunction with permitted uses. 
(Ord. 01-135 § 1 (part))  
17.40.030 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the CC district upon approval and validation of an administrative permit subject to the provisions of Section 17.92.050 of this title: 
A.  Temporary outdoor sales (e.g., Christmas tree/pumpkin sale); 
B.  Temporary outdoor event (e.g., farmer's market, concert). 
(Ord. 01-135 § 1 (part))  
17.40.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the CC zone district upon approval and validation of a conditional use permit, in addition to any other permits or licenses required for the use: 
A.  Retail sales, such as florist, bookstore, variety store, drug store, hardware store, gift shop, art galleries, grocery/food market; 
B.  Bed and breakfast; 
C.  Church/temple; 
D.  Communication/utility services; 
E.  Day care center; 
F.  Single-family or multi-family residence; 
G.  Health club; 
H.  Motion picture theater; Nurseries; 
J.  Outdoor sales in conjunction with an approved use; 
K.  Small collection recycling facility (no processing involved); 
L.  Public or private school or training facility; 
M.  Veterinary clinic. 
(Ord. 01-135 § 1 (part))  
17.40.050 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.40.020, 17.40.030, or 17.40.040 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 01-135 § 1 (part))  
17.40.060 - Site development standards. 
A.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site is ten thousand (10,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this title. 
B.  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width is as follows: 
1.  Interior Lot: sixty five (65) feet; 
2.  Corner Lot: seventy five (75) feet. 
C.  Yards. The following yard set-back requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020: 
1.  Front: 
a.  Non-Residential Uses: None; 
b.  Multi-family residential uses: See Section 17.36.060 of this title; 
c.  Single-family residential uses: See Section 17.030.060 of this title. 
2.  Rear: 
a.  Non-Residential Uses: 
i.  Abutting Non-Residential: None 
ii.  Abutting Residential: Ten (10) feet 
b.  Multi-family residential uses: See Section 17.36.060 of this title; 
c.  Single-family residential uses: See Section 17.30.060 of this title. 
3.  Side: 
a.  Non-Residential Uses: 
i.  Abutting Non-Residential: None. 
ii.  Abutting Residential: Five feet on one side and ten (10) feet on the opposite side. (Note: the minimum sideyards required for any lot created prior to June 7, 1978 are five feet on each side). 
b.  Multi-family residential uses: See Section 17.36.060 of this title; 
c.  Single-family residential uses: See Section 17.30.060 of this title. 
D.  Maximum Structural Height: 
a.  Non-Residential Uses: 
1.  Abutting Non-Residential: forty (40) feet 
2.  Abutting Residential: thirty (30) feet 
b.  Residential Uses: 
1.  Main building: thirty (30) feet 
2.  Accessory building: One story not to exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
E.  Landscaping: The landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.040 of this title. 
F.  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.050 of this title. 
G.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
H.  Signs. The intent of the city center commercial zone district is to create a pedestrian-oriented enclave within the commercial district. The allowable uses, including the residential uses, are smaller in scale and more similar to boutiques than large volume retail. In order to encourage this type of development, pole signs and similar large free standing signs have been prohibited in favor of smaller-scale monument signs. 
1.  Building signs shall not exceed a combined size of one-and-one-half square feet in area for each lineal foot of building frontage facing a public street. Only the longest frontage shall be considered in calculating the allowable sign size. 
2.  Monument sign. A single monument sign shall be permitted per parcel or grouping of uses. The sign shall not exceed one square foot per lineal feet of building up to a maximum of fifty (50) square feet, and subject to the following design parameters: 
a.  The sign shall not be mounted on a pole or similar structure. 
b.  The sign shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches in height. 
c.  The sign shall not impede sight-distance considerations for driveway access and/or roadways. 
d.  The sign shall be located in a landscaped area not less than twice the size of the sign. 
e.  The design of the sign enclosure, and colors shall be consistent with the building design of the project. 
3.  The general appurtenant sign standards shall apply as specified in Section 17.84.060 of this title. 
I.  Zone Walls. Zone wall requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.070 of this title. 
J.  Outdoor Trash Storage. All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obstructing fence at least one foot higher than the trash container(s). 
K.  Development Plan. An applicant for either a building permit or use permit shall submit a plan, which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director or designee. If only a building permit is required for the use, then the development services director's approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of a permit. If a use permit is required, then the director's approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. 
(Ord. 01-135 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.41 - VILLAGE COMMERCIAL (VC) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.41.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the village commercial zone district is to provide for a variety of public, commercial, and residential uses, emphasizing rehabilitation and in-fill to create a pedestrian-oriented "village." Commercial uses and signage are restricted to those consistent with the pedestrian-oriented nature of the zone district. This zone district is consistent with the village commercial (VC) land use designation. 
(Ord. 01-135 § 1 (part))  
17.41.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the VC district subject to issuance of a building permit, business license or other required permits: 
A.  Retail sales, such as florist, bookstore, variety store, drug store, hardware store, gift shop, art gallery, grocery/food market; 
B.  Professional or medical offices; 
C.  Convenience store; 
D.  Department/clothing store; 
E.  Financial institution; 
F.  Police, fire or sheriff station; 
G.  Museum/heritage center; 
H.  Sit-down restaurant/coffee shop; 
I.  Public transportation facilities; 
J.  Off-street parking facilities in conjunction with permitted uses. 
(Ord. 01-135 § 1 (part))  
17.41.030 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the VC district upon approval and validation of an administrative permit subject to the provisions of Section 17.92.050 of this title: 
A.  Temporary outdoor sales (e.g., Christmas tree/pumpkin sale); 
B.  Temporary outdoor event (e.g., farmer's market, concert); 
C.  Multi-family residence. 
(Ord. 01-135 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 19-273, § 3, 3-5-2019)  
17.41.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the VC district upon approval and validation of a conditional use permit, in addition to any other permits or licenses required for the use: 
A.  Bed and breakfast; 
B.  Bar, tavern, cocktail lounge; 
C.  Church/temple; 
D.  Communication/utility services; 
E.  Conference/convention center; 
F.  Day care center; 
G.  Funeral home/mortuary; 
H.  Health club; 
I.  Liquor store; 
J.  Motion picture theater; 
K.  Nurseries; 
L.  Outdoor sales in conjunction with an approved use; 
M.  Small collection recycling facility (no processing involved); 
N.  Public or private school/training facility; 
O.  Veterinary clinic. 
(Ord. 01-135 § 1 (part))  
17.41.050 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.41.020, 17.41.030, or 17.41.040 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 01-135 § 1 (part))  
17.41.060 - Site development standards. 
A.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site is ten thousand (10,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this title. 
B.  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width is as follows: 
1.  Interior Lot: sixty five (65) feet; 
2.  Corner Lot: seventy five (75) feet. 
C.  Yards. The following yard set-back requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020: 
1.  Front: 
a.  Non-Residential Uses: None; 
b.  Multi-family residential uses: See Section 17.36.060 of this title; 
2.  Rear: 
a.  Non-Residential Uses: 
i.  Abutting Non-Residential: None 
ii.  Abutting Residential: Ten feet 
b.  Multi-family residential uses: See Section 17.36.060 of this title; 
3.  Side: 
a.  Non-Residential Uses: 
i.  Abutting Non-Residential: None 
ii.  Abutting Residential: Five feet on one side and ten feet on the opposite side. (Note: the minimum sideyards required for any lot created prior to June 7, 1978 are five feet on each side). 
b.  Multi-family residential uses: See Section 17.36.060 of this title; 
D.  Maximum Structural Height: 
a.  Abutting Non-Residential: forty (40) feet 
b.  Abutting Residential: thirty (30) feet 
E.  Landscaping: The landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.040 of this title. 
F.  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.050 of this title. 
G.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in chapter 17.86 of this title. 
H.  Signs. The intent of the village commercial zone district is to create a pedestrian-oriented area within the commercial district. The allowable uses, including the residential uses, are smaller in scale and more similar to boutiques than large volume retail. In order to encourage this type of development, pole signs and similar large free standing signs have been prohibited in favor of smaller-scale monument signs. 
1.  Building signs shall not exceed a combined size of one-and-one-half square feet in area for each lineal foot of building frontage facing a public street. Only the longest frontage shall be considered in calculating the allowable sign size. 
2.  Monument sign. A single monument sign shall be permitted per parcel or grouping of uses. The sign shall not exceed one square foot per lineal feet of building up to a maximum of fifty (50) square feet, and subject to the following design parameters: 
a.  The sign shall not be mounted on a pole or similar structure. 
b.  The sign shall not exceed forty-two inches in height. 
c.  The sign shall not impede sight-distance considerations for driveway access and/or roadways. 
d.  The sign shall be located in a landscaped area not less than twice the size of the sign. 
e.  The design of the sign enclosure, and colors shall be consistent with the building design of the project. 
3.  The general appurtenant sign standards shall apply as specified in Section 17.84.060 of this title. 
I.  Zone Walls. Zone wall requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.070 of this title. 
J.  Outdoor Trash Storage. All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obstructing fence at least one foot higher than the trash container(s). 
K.  Development Plan. An applicant for either a building permit or use permit shall submit a plan, which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director or designee. If only a building permit is required for the use, then the development services director's approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of a permit. If a use permit is required, then the director's approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. 
(Ord. 01-135 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 19-273, § 3, 3-5-2019)  
Chapter 17.42 - LOCAL CONVENIENCE CENTER (C-1) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.42.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the local convenience center (C-1) district is to provide for a limited selection of convenience goods and services to residents in the immediate area. The primary tenant is normally a convenience market or small grocery store, which may be supplemented by a laundromat or other small establishments. This district is consistent with the commercial (C), urban residential (UR), suburban residential (SR), rural residential A (RA) and mixed use (MU) general plan designations. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.42.020 - Uses permitted within buildings. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the C-1 district if conducted within a building: 
A.  A convenience market as a primary use; 
B.  Secondary uses that accompany convenience market, including: 
1.  Retail sales, including a variety store, drug store, florist, confectionery store or delicatessen, 
2.  Service uses, including barber, beauty salon, standard restaurant, laundromat, laundry, dry cleaning, locksmith or shoe repair, 
3.  Small professional office, such as insurance or real estate sales. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.42.030 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses that are secondary to a convenience market are permitted in the C-1 district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Auto service station; 
B.  Day care center; 
C.  Commercial condominiums; 
D.  A one-family residence, when attached to the main building in which the commercial use exists, and the residence is inhabited by the owner or operator of the commercial use. Any permit required for the commercial use must first be issued. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.42.040 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses permitted in the C-1 district are: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Section 17.42.020 and 17.42.030 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.42.050 - Site development standards. 
The development standards for building site area and yards established by this section apply to all development in the C-1 district. However, alternate standards may be approved for a condominium project, as part of the use permit process if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design, attractiveness and compatibility with its surroundings than would result if the routine development standards in this section were applied. 
A.  Locational Criteria. Development must be located on a collector or arterial, as designated in the general plan; should have a potential or existing support population of one thousand (1,000) to three thousand five hundred (3,500) persons. 
B.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building requirement is ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
C.  Maximum Building Site. The maximum building site restriction is one-and-one half acres if the site is served by a community or package sewer system; three acres if the site is not served by a community or package sewer system. 
D.  Building Size. Building size requirements are as follows: 
1.  The primary use shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Secondary uses shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per use. 
3.  Larger businesses may be permitted if a use permit is secured, and the business is found to be compatible with the area. 
E.  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width requirements are as follows: 
1.  Interior lot, sixty-five (65) feet; 
2.  Corner lot, seventy-five (75) feet. 
F.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, ten feet; except where the district abuts a residential district, the front yard shall be the same as the residential district within twenty-five (25) feet of the residential district; 
2.  Interior side, none; except where the district abuts a residential district, the adjoining side yard shall be fifteen (15) feet; or if it abuts a freeway right-of-way, the yard shall be ten feet; 
3.  Street side, ten feet; 
4.  Rear, none; except where the district abuts a residential district, the rear yard shall be fifteen (15) feet; or if it abuts a freeway right-of-way, the yard shall be ten feet; 
5.  Exceptions. If a use permit is issued, front yard exceptions may be permitted in established commercial areas in which the majority of the buildings existed before the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title and they do not meet the yard requirement. When this exception is made, the front yard shall be at least a distance equal to the average front yard of fifty (50) percent of the buildings farthest from the street. 
G.  Maximum Structural Height. Maximum permitted structural height is one story not to exceed twenty (20) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title. 
H.  Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.040 of this title. 
I.  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.050 of this title. 
J.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
K.  Signs (Appurtenant). The requirements appurtenant signs are as follows: 
1.  Building signs shall not exceed a combined size of one square foot in area for each lineal foot of building frontage. 
2.  If there is one hundred (100) lineal feet or more of street frontage, one freestanding sign per lot, not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size and twenty (20) feet in height, shall be permitted. For a double-faced sign, each face shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. The sign shall be set back a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the front or street side property line or road right-of-way, and shall be located within a landscaped island equal to a minimum of one-half the total sign area of the free-standing sign. A portion of the allowable sign area may be allocated to combined off-site signs identifying two or more establishments when all are located within this district and they share adjoining lots for parking and access. 
3.  If there is less than one hundred (100) lineal feet of street frontage, one ground sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in size (twenty-five (25) square feet per face if double faced) and forty-two (42) inches in height shall be permitted, except the sign height may be six feet if located thirty-five (35) feet or more from the center of a driveway or a curb return at a street intersection. 
4.  The general appurtenance sign standards shall apply, as specified in Section 17.84.060 of this title. 
L.  Zone Walls. Zone wall requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.070 of this title. 
M.  Outdoor Trash Storage. All outdoor trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container. 
N.  Development Plan. An applicant for either a building permit or use permit shall submit a plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee. If only a building permit is required for the use, then the director's approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit. If a use permit is required, then the director's approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.44 - COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (C-2) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.44.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the community commercial (C-2) district is to provide for a wide range of facilities for the sale of goods and provision of personal services. When applied to shopping areas, the uses are generally conducted within a building, and may range in size from neighborhood centers, which may have a supermarket as a principal tenant, to a commercial center, which may also include a department or variety store as a principal tenant. When applied to commercial areas of town centers or other existing places with similar activities, the uses may be broadened to include outdoor retail uses, such as auto sales. This district is consistent with the commercial (C) and mixed use (MU) general plan designations. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.44.020 - Uses permitted within buildings. 
The following uses are permitted in a C-2 district if conducted within a building: 
A.  Retail sales; 
B.  Services, including: 
1.  Bank or other financial institution that provides a direct service to the public; insurance or real estate sales; 
2.  Repair shop for shoes, radios, televisions or other domestic appliances; 
3.  Laundry or cleaning establishment; laundromat; 
4.  Barber or beauty shop; 
5.  Standard restaurant; 
6.  Travel or ticket agency; 
7.  Photo studio; 
8.  Business, professional or medical office; medical, dental or optical laboratory; blueprinting; photocopying; 
9.  Nursery or garden supply; 
10.  Health club; 
C.  Print shop; 
D.  Emergency shelter (definition included in Section 17.81.015(B)) that meets the development standards of 17.81.050. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.44.030 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-2 district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Auto service station, self-serve and non- self-serve auto wash, auto repair services, excluding auto body and painting businesses, equipment rental; 
B.  Bar, nightclub or cardroom; 
C.  Motion picture theater, bowling alley, skating rink, video game center, lodge, club, fraternal organization, billiard parlor; 
D.  Fast food restaurant; 
E.  Sales of new or used autos, boats, motorcycles or mobile homes; 
F.  Miniature golf course; 
G.  Motel or hotel; 
H.  Bus terminal; 
I.  Veterinarian clinic, provided any kennels are located entirely within a building; 
J.  Day care center; 
K.  Outdoor storage or sales associated with any of the uses permitted in Section 17.44.020 of this chapter; 
L.  Outdoor advertising signs and structures other than those appurtenant to any permitted use, except they shall not be permitted in shopping centers. Such signs and structures shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet apart when on the same side of a public road and at least five hundred (500) feet apart when on the opposite side of a public road; 
M.  Commercial condominiums; 
N.  A one-family residence, when attached to the main building in which the commercial use exists, and the residence will be inhabited by the owner or operator of the commercial use. Any use permit required for the commercial use must first be issued. 
O.  Church. 
P  Reconstruction of a single-family residence that existed as of the effective date of this ordinance (September 21, 2001). 
(Ord. 01-134 § 1; Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.44.040 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses permitted in the C-2 district are: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of, Chapter 17.88, Article I, Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.44.020 and 17.44.030 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.44.050 - Site development standards. 
The development standards for building site area and yards established by this section apply to all developments in the C-2 district. However, alternate standards may be approved for a condominium project, as part of the use permit process, if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design, attractiveness and compatibility with its surroundings than would result if the routine development standards of this section were applied. 
A.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site requirement is ten thousand (10,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this title. 
B.  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width requirement is as follows: 
1.  Interior lot, sixty-five (65) feet; 
2.  Corner lot, seventy-five (75) feet. 
C.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, ten feet; except where the district abuts a residential district, the front yard shall be the same as the residential district within twenty-five (25) feet of the residential district; 
2.  Interior side, none; except where the district abuts a residential district, the side yard shall be fifteen (15) feet, or if it abuts a freeway right-of-way the yard shall be ten feet; 
3.  Street side, ten feet; 
4.  Rear, none; except where the district abuts a residential district, the rear yard shall be fifteen (15) feet, or if it abuts a freeway right-of-way the yard shall be ten feet; 
5.  Exceptions. If a use permit is issued, front yard exceptions may be permitted in established commercial areas in which the majority of the buildings existed before the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, and they do not meet the yard requirement. When this exception is made, the front yard shall be at least the distance equal to the average front yard of fifty (50) percent of the buildings farthest from the street. 
D.  Maximum Structural Height. Maximum permitted structural height is forty (40) feet; except within forty (40) feet of a residential district it shall be one story, not to exceed twenty (20) feet, except as otherwise prohibited in Section 17.84.030 of this title. 
E.  Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.030 of this title. 
F.  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.050 of this title. 
G.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
H.  Signs (Appurtenant). The requirements for appurtenant signs are as follows: 
1.  Building signs shall not exceed a combined size of one-and-one-half square feet in area for each lineal foot of building frontage. 
2.  If there is one hundred (100) lineal feet or more of street frontage, one freestanding sign per lot, not to exceed three hundred (300) square feet in size and thirty (30) feet in height shall be permitted. For a double-faced sign, each face shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. The sign shall be set back a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the front or street-side property line or road right-of-way, and shall be located within a landscaped island equal to a minimum of one-half the total sign area of the freestanding sign. A portion of the allowable sign area may be allocated to combined off-site signs identifying two or more establishments when all are located within this district and they share adjoining lots for parking and access. An additional freestanding sign, with the same size and height restrictions, is permitted if there is over three hundred (300) feet of street frontage. 
3.  If there is less than one hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage, one ground sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in size (twenty-five (25) square feet per face if double-faced) and forty-two (42) inches in height shall be permitted, except the sign height may be six feet if located thirty-five (35) feet or more from the center of a driveway or a curb return at a street intersection. 
4.  The general appurtenant sign standards shall apply, as specified in Section 17.84.060 of this title. 
I.  Zone Walls. Zone wall requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.070 of this title. 
J.  Outdoor Trash Storage. All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container. 
K.  Development Plan. An applicant for either a building permit or use permit shall submit a plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee. If only a building permit is required for the use, then the director's approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit. If a use permit is required, than the director's approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.46 - OFFICE COMMERCIAL (C-O) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.46.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the office commercial (C-O) district is to provide for well-designed professional, business and administrative offices, and business support services normally associated with such offices. This district is consistent with the commercial (C) and mixed use (MU) general plan designations. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.46.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the C-O district: 
A.  Professional, business and administrative offices, medical offices and clinics in which no retail trade is carried on and no stock of goods is maintained for sale, including: 
1.  Accountant, bookkeeper, income tax consultant, credit agency, collection agency, finance company, stockbroker, data processing center; 
2.  Attorney, appraiser, advertiser, real estate, title insurance, insurance, employment agency, secretarial service, travel agency; 
3.  Architect, engineer, draftsman, landscape architect, surveyor; 
4.  Physician, dentist, chiropractor, psychologist, optometrist; 
5.  Government, charitable, cultural, educational, recreational and social organizations; 
B.  Medical, dental and optical laboratories or laboratories accessory to any use described in subsection A of this section; 
C.  Business support services that provide technical or clerical assistance to any use described in subsection A of this section, including direct mail advertising, blue printing, photocopying, duplicating and temporary help or telephone message service; 
D.  Non-office commercial uses that are located in the main building or office complex of a permitted use and are primarily utilized by persons employed therein, including a standard restaurant, barber shop, beauty salon, and other incidental service uses. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.46.030 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-O district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Trade school; 
B.  Commercial condominiums; 
C.  Church; 
D.  Day care center; 
E.  Skilled nursing facility/intermediate care facility; 
F.  Lodge, club or fraternal organization. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.46.040 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses permitted in the C-O district are: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.46.020 and 17.46.030 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.46.050 - Site development standards. 
The development standards for building site area and yards established by this section apply to all developments in the C-O district. Alternate standards may be approved for a condominium project, as part of the use permit process, if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design, attractiveness and compatibility with its surroundings than would result if the routine development standards of this section were applied. 
A.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site requirement is ten thousand (10,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this title. 
B.  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width requirement is as follows: 
1.  Interior lot, sixty-five (65) feet; 
2.  Corner lot, seventy-five (75) feet. 
C.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, ten feet; 
2.  Interior side, none; except where the district abuts a residential district it shall be fifteen (15) feet, or if it abuts a freeway right-of-way the yard shall be ten feet; 
3.  Street side, ten feet; 
4.  Rear, none; except where the district abuts a residential district it shall be fifteen (15) feet, or if it abuts a freeway right-of-way the yard shall be ten feet. 
D.  Maximum Structural Height. The maximum structural height restriction is forty (40) feet, except within forty (40) feet of a residential district it shall be one story, not to exceed twenty (20) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title. 
E.  Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.040 of this title. 
F.  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.050 of this title. 
G.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
H.  Signs (Appurtenant). The requirements for appurtenant signs are as follows: 
1.  Building signs are not to exceed a combined size of one square foot in area for each lineal foot of building frontage. 
2.  If there is one hundred (100) lineal feet or more of street frontage, one freestanding sign per lot, not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in size and twenty-five (25) feet in height shall be permitted. For a double-faced sign, each face shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet. The sign shall be set back a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the front or street-side property line and shall be located within a landscaped island equal to a minimum of one-half the total sign area of the free-standing sign. A portion of the allowable sign area may be allocated to combined off-site signs identifying two or more establishments when all are located within this district and they share adjoining lots for parking and access. 
3.  If there is less than one hundred (100) lineal feet of street frontage, one ground sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in size (twenty-five (25) square feet per face if double-faced) and forty-two (42) inches in height shall be permitted, except the sign height may be six feet if located thirty-five (35) feet or more from the center of a driveway or a curb return at a street intersection. 
4.  The general appurtenant sign standards shall apply, as specified in Section 17.84.060 of this title. 
I.  Zone Walls. Zone wall requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.070 of this title. 
J.  Outdoor Trash Storage. All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container. 
K.  Development Plan. An applicant for either a building permit or a use permit shall submit a site plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee. If only a building permit is required for the use, then the director's approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit. If a use permit is required, then the director's approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.48 - HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL (C-H) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.48.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the highway commercial (C-H) district is to provide for the needs of recreation and business travelers. This district is intended to be applied to areas located near freeway interchanges, fronting on state highways or along arterials that provide access to major recreation designations. Highway commercial areas should be designed so that all or most of the needs of a traveler can be accommodated with one stop. This district is not intended to be used for strip commercial development along a highway. This district is consistent with all general plan designations, provided the locational criteria of the general plan area is satisfied. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.48.020 - Permitted uses. 
Any highway commercial use or combination thereof which is arranged and designed in such a manner as to result in a development that is internally compatible and compatible with its surroundings. The following are representative of highway commercial uses which could be permitted. Each district will be designed for a specific proposal: 
A.  Convenience food store; 
B.  Standard or fast food restaurant; 
C.  Novelty or curio shops, recreation equipment sales and repair; 
D.  Motel, recreational vehicle park; 
E.  Auto or truck service station; 
F.  Bus terminal; 
G.  Outdoor advertising signs and structures other than those appurtenant to any permitted use. Such signs and structures shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet apart when on the same side of a public road and at least five hundred (500) feet apart when on opposite sides of a public road. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.48.030 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses permitted in the C-H district are: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Section 17.48.020 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.48.040 - Application. 
An application for a C-H district shall contain a conceptual development plan of the project site showing the approximate location of buildings, building elevations, roads, walkways, parking and landscaping, the proposed uses of the buildings and grounds, staging of the development and other information which the development services director or his or her designee may require to properly evaluate and process the application. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.48.050 - Site development. 
Prior to construction of site improvements and structures, detailed development plans shall be submitted to the development services director or his or her designee for checking and approval to ensure reasonably close conformity with the approved conceptual development plans and with the intent of this section. The decision of the development services director or his or her designee may be appealed to the planning commission, as specified in subsection C of Section 17.94.060 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.48.060 - Modifications. 
Modifications to approval plans and statements or detailed plans may be permitted if a use permit is issued. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.50 - COMMERCIAL RECREATION (C-R) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.50.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the commercial recreation (C-R) district is to provide opportunities for the development of privately owned land for commercial recreational activities which need or utilize, and provide for the enjoyment of, the natural environment. This district is consistent with all general plan designations, if the proposed use blends harmoniously with the natural feature of the surrounding area. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.50.020 - Permitted uses. 
Any commercial recreation use or combination thereof which is arranged and designed in such a manner as to result in a development that is internally compatible and compatible with the natural environment is permitted in the C-R district. The following list is representative of types of commercial recreational uses which could be permitted. Each district will be designed for a specific proposal: 
A.  Campground, picnic area, dude ranch, resort, lodge, recreational vehicle park; 
B.  Marina, boat launch and storage facility, aerial tramway, gun club, ski lodge facility, commercial riding stable, commercial tourist attractions to areas with exceptional natural features, golf course; 
C.  Uses accessory to commercial recreation activities, such as a restaurant, grocery or convenience store, gift shop, bait shop, or gas pumps; 
D.  One-family residence for a manager or caretaker and residences for workers fully and necessarily employed onsite, dependent upon the nature and scale of the recreation or service use. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.50.030 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses permitted in the C-R district are: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Section 17.50.020 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.50.040 - Application. 
An application for a C-R district shall contain a or conceptual development plan of the project site showing the approximately location of recreation facilities and areas, open space areas, buildings, building elevations, roads, walkways, parking and landscaping, the proposed uses of the facilities and grounds, staging of the development and other information which the development services director or his or her designee may require to properly evaluate and process the application. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.50.050 - Site development. 
Prior to construction of site improvements and structures in the C-R district, detailed development plans shall be submitted to the development services director or his or her designee for checking and approval to ensure reasonably close conformity with the approved conceptual development plans and with the intent of this section. The decision of the development services director or his or her designee may be appealed to the planning commission, as specified in subsection C of Section 17.94.060 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.50.060 - Modifications. 
Modifications to approved plans and statements of detailed plans for the C-R district may be permitted if a use permit is issued. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.52 - COMMERCIAL-LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (C-M) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.52.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the commercial-light industrial (C-M) district is to provide for selected retail sales and services that are considered inappropriate in other commercial areas due to size or operating characteristics, such as wholesale sales, warehousing, distributing and storage activities and light manufacturing. This district is not intended to satisfy the need for routine or typical retail sales commonly found in local convenience centers or community commercial retail areas. This district is consistent with the commercial (C), industrial (I) and mixed use (MU) general plan designations. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.52.020 - Uses permitted within buildings. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-M district if conducted within a building: 
A.  Wholesale and retail sales and service uses, including: 
1.  Building, electrical and plumbing materials, and furniture, 
2.  Farm or ranch feed and related supplies sales, 
3.  Janitorial or restaurant supplies, 
4.  Nursery or garden supply, 
5.  Auto or truck parts and supplies, 
6.  Household appliance or furniture repair or service, including radio or television repair or furniture upholstery shops, 
7.  Auction house, 
8.  Building maintenance services, such as pest extermination, janitorial or grounds maintenance, 
9.  Communication services, such as telegraph, telephone and radio telephone businesses, or radio or television stations, 
10.  Printing, engraving, lithographing or publishing, 
11.  Equipment rental, 
12.  Taxidermist, 
13.  Veterinarian clinic, provided any kennels are located within a building, 
14.  Trade school, 
15.  Warehouse, ministorage or other storage buildings or wholesale distribution facilities, except those storing flammable or explosive material, 
16.  Food storage lockers and ice-making facilities; 
B.  Light manufacturing activities, including: 
1.  Combining, assembly or packaging of products, including: 
a.  Pharmaceuticals, drugs, toiletries or cosmetics, 
b.  Small equipment, instruments or appliances, such as medical, dental or optical equipment; drafting instruments, watches, clocks, musical instruments, cameras, photographic equipment (except film); hair-curling machines or electric razors, 
c.  Electronic and light electrical equipment, including radios, televisions and computers, 
d.  Food products, excluding those that may create obnoxious odors or smoke, 
2.  Light manufacturing activities, including manufacturing of ceramic products such as pottery, figurines, or small glazed tile, using only previously pulverized clay; hand tools, cutlery, and kitchen utensils, electronic and light electrical equipment, including radios, televisions and computers; jewelry manufacturing; manufacturing of neon signs; 
C.  Uses accessory to the primary use and contained within the same building site, including offices, print shops, cafeteria, etc. This does not include businesses open to the public; 
D.  Outdoor storage or sales in conjunction with a permitted use, provided: 
1.  Storage is located on the rear portion of the lot, 
2.  Storage is completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence (with necessary solid gates) not less than six feet in height, unless the storage area abuts an R district, in which case the screening shall meet the criteria established in subsection I of Section 17.52.050 of this chapter, 
3.  No material shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence enclosing the storage area; 
E.  Agricultural uses; 
F.  Caretaker's or night watchman's quarters. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.52.030 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-M district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Businesses that provide support services to the primary uses or that primarily serve employees of the primary uses, including blueprinting, photocopying, coffee shop or standard restaurant; 
B.  Auto or truck service station or wash; 
C.  Sales of autos, boats, trailers, mobile homes, agricultural equipment, trucks and construction equipment, and incidental repairs and services; truck terminal, truck yard; 
D.  Tire recapping, retreading or rebuilding; 
E.  Auto, boat, motorcycle or truck repair; auto body repair and painting; 
F.  Wholesale meat cutting and packing, provided there shall be no slaughtering, fat rendering or smoke curing; 
G.  Outdoor sales or outdoor storage areas in excess of the limits established in Section 17.52.020 of this chapter; 
H.  Carpet or rug cleaning plants; commercial laundries, such as those which provide a linen supply service, but not including personal laundromats; 
I.  Light metal fabrication, such as sheet metal and wrought iron fabrication; welding shops, machine shops, cabinet or furniture making; 
J.  Contractor's yard, air conditioning supply and service yards, and flea markets; 
K.  Outdoor advertising signs and structures other than those appurtenant to a permitted use. Such signs and structures shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet apart when on the same side of a public road, and at least five hundred (500) feet apart when on the opposite side of a public road; 
L.  Commercial and light industrial condominiums. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.52.040 - Other permitted uses. 
The following other uses are permitted in the C-M district: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.52.020 and 17.52.030 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.52.050 - Site development standards. 
The development standards for building site areas and yards established by this section apply to all development in the C-M district. However, alternate standards may be approved for a condominium project, as part of the use permit process, if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design, attractiveness, and compatibility with its surroundings that would result if the routine development standards of this section were applied. 
A.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site requirement is ten thousand (10,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this chapter. 
B.  Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width requirements are as follows: 
1.  Interior lot, sixty-five (65) feet; 
2.  Corner lot, seventy-five (75) feet. 
C.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided by Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, ten feet; except where the district abuts a residential district the front yard shall be the same as required by the residential district within twenty-five (25) feet of the residential district; 
2.  Interior side yard, none; except where the district abuts a residential district the minimum shall be fifteen (15) feet, or if it abuts a freeway right-of-way the yard shall be ten feet; 
3.  Street side, ten feet; 
4.  Rear yard, none; except where the district abuts a residential district the minimum shall be fifteen (15) feet, or if it abuts a freeway right-of-way the yard shall be ten feet; 
5.  Exceptions. If a use permit is issued, front yard exceptions may be permitted in established commercial areas in which the majority of the buildings existed before the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and they do not meet the yard requirement. When this exception is made, the front yard shall be a distance equal to the average front yard of fifty (50) percent of the buildings furthest from the street. 
D.  Maximum Structural Height. The maximum structural height is forty (40) feet; except within forty (40) feet of any residential district the maximum building height shall be one story not to exceed twenty (20) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title. 
E.  Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.040 of this title. 
F.  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.050 of this title. 
G.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
H.  Signs (Appurtenant). Appurtenant sign restrictions are as follows: 
1.  Building signs shall not exceed a combined size of one square foot in area for each lineal foot of building frontage. 
2.  If there is one hundred (100) lineal feet or more of street frontage, one freestanding sign per building site, not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet in size and thirty (30) feet in height, shall be permitted. For a double-faced sign, each face shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. The sign shall be set back a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the front or street-side property line and shall be located within a landscaped island equal to a minimum of one-half the total sign area of the freestanding sign. A portion of the allowable sign area may be allocated to combined offsite signs identifying two or more establishments when all are located within this district and they share adjoining lots for parking and access. 
3.  If there is less than one hundred (100) lineal feet of street frontage, one ground sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in size (twenty-five (25) square feet per face if double faced) and forty-two (42) inches in height shall be permitted, except the sign height may be six feet if located thirty-five (35) feet or more from the center of a driveway or a curb return at a street intersection. 
4.  The general appurtenant sign standards shall apply, as specified in Section 17.84.060 of this title. 
I.  Zone Walls. Zone wall requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.070 of this title. 
J.  Outdoor Trash Storage. All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher that the trash container. 
K.  On-site Performance Standards. On-site performance standards are as follows: 
1.  Odors. No use shall create objectionable odors readily detectable beyond the property line. 
2.  Dust and Smoke. No use shall create dust or smoke that is readily detectable beyond the property line (in addition to meeting all air pollution requirements). 
3.  Vibration. No use shall create vibration detectable without instruments at the property line. 
4.  Electromagnetic Interference. No use shall produce electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television service beyond the property line. 
5.  Glare. No use shall create intense light or glare that causes a nuisance or hazard beyond the property line. 
6.  Applicable Standards. Noise, atmospheric emissions, toxic or noxious matter, radiation, heat and humidity, fire and explosive hazards, or liquid and solid wastes shall be regulated by applicable county, state, federal or local standards. 
L.  Development Plan. An applicant for either building permit or use permit shall submit a site plan which indicates how the standard listed in this section will be met. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee. If only a building permit is required for the use, then the director's approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit. If a use permit is required, then the director's approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.54 - MIXED USE (MU) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.54.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the mixed use (MU) district is to provide for a variety of residential, commercial and light industrial uses that will not cause odors, noise, visual or other adverse impacts. Conflicts that may result from the intermixing of land uses should be addressed by site-specific performance standards. This district is consistent with the mixed use (MU) general plan designation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.54.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the MU district: 
A.  Agricultural uses; provided: 
1.  Animal husbandry does not exceed the following number of animals per one-half acre: 
a.  One horse, mule, steer or similar sized animal; 
b.  Three goats, sheep, hogs or similar sized animals; or 
c.  Twenty-five (25) turkeys, chickens, ducks, geese, rabbits or similar sized animals; 
2.  Animals shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and in a manner that does not become a nuisance; 
B.  Sale of products grown on the premises. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.54.030 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses, if accessory to a residence, are permitted in the MU district if an administrative permit is issued, subject to the provisions of Sections 17.88.220 and 17.88.230 of this title: 
A.  Home occupation; 
B.  Large day care home. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.54.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the M-U district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  One-family residence, or a mobilehome in lieu of a one-family residence, provided that for parcels created after January 10, 1984, the lot size must meet the building site requirement established in Section 17.54.060A of this chapter; 
B.  Second residence; 
C.  Bed and breakfast guest facility subject to the provisions of Section 17.88.270 of this title; 
D.  Day care center; 
E.  Retail sales conducted within a new or enlarged commercial building or a converted residence, such as a food, variety or drug store, convenience market, apparel store and gift or novelty stores; 
F.  Personal services conducted within a new or enlarged commercial building or a converted residence, such as a bank, insurance or real estate sales, laundromat or laundry business, barber or beauty shop, standard or fast food restaurant, repair shop for shoes, radios, television and other appliances; 
G.  Professional, business, administrative and medical offices; 
H.  Hotel, motel, recreational vehicle park, campground; 
I.  Auto or truck service station, auto or boat repair service, self-serve and non-self-serve auto wash; auto or truck parts or supplies; 
J.  Wholesale and retail sales of building, electrical or plumbing materials; furniture sales; farm or ranch supplies; 
K.  Sales of autos, boats, motorcycles, mobile homes, agricultural equipment; nursery or garden supplies and other outdoor sales and storage uses; 
L.  Bowling alley, theater, video game center, billiard parlor, fraternal organization; 
M.  Veterinarian, provided kennels are located within a building; 
N.  Contractor's yard, truck terminal, truck yard, truck repair and wash; 
O.  Warehouse and mini-storage; 
P.  Church; 
Q.  Light manufacturing activities that are at a scale commensurate with the size of the community, and do not cause odors, noise, visual or other adverse impacts; 
R.  Outdoor advertising signs and advertising structures other than those appurtenant to a permitted use, provided no use permit shall authorize the signs of a permittee to be less than one thousand (1,000) feet apart when erected on the same side of a public road or less than five hundred (500) feet apart when erected on the opposite side of a public road; 
S.  Commercial and light industrial condominiums. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.54.050 - Other permitted uses. 
Other uses permitted in the MU district are as follows: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 and, if accessory to a residence, Sections 17.88.130 through 17.88.150 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.54.020 and 17.54.040 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.54.060 - Site development standards. 
The development standards established by this section apply to all development in the MU district. However, due to the diversity of areas within which the mixed use district may be applied, exceptions to these standards may be allowed for nonresidential uses with an approved use permit. 
Additionally, alternate standards may be approved for a condominium project, as part of the use permit process, if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design, attractiveness and compatibility with its surroundings than would result if the routine development standards of this section were applied. 
A.  Minimum Building Site. The following minimum building site requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this title: 
1.  If within an area designated in the general plan as a rural community center or town center, one acre; 
2.  If outside an area designated in the general plan as a rural community center or town center, two acres. 
B.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, twenty (20) feet; 
2.  Side, fifteen (15) feet; 
3.  Rear, twenty (20) feet. 
C.  Maximum Structural Height. Maximum permitted structural height is thirty-five (35) feet, except within forty (40) feet of a residential district, it shall be one story not to exceed twenty (20) feet, and except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title. 
D.  Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.040 of this title. 
E.  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.050 of this title. 
F.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
G.  Signs (Appurtenant, Nonresidential). Requirements for appurtenant, nonresidential signs are as follows: 
1.  Building signs shall not exceed a combined total size of one square foot in area for each lineal foot of building frontage. 
2.  If there is one hundred (100) lineal feet or more of street frontage, one freestanding sign per lot, not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in size and twenty-five (25) feet in height shall be permitted. For a double-faced sign, each face shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. The sign shall be set back a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the front or street-side property line or road right-of-way, and shall be located in a landscaped island equal to a minimum of one-half the total sign area of the freestanding sign. A portion of the allowable sign area may be allocated to combined offsite signs identifying two or more establishments when all are located within this district and share adjoining lots for parking and access. 
3.  If there is less than one hundred (100) lineal feet of street frontage, one ground sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in size (twenty-five (25) square feet per face if double-faced) and forty-two (42) inches in height shall be permitted, except the sign height may be six feet if located thirty-five (35) feet or more from the center of a driveway or a curb return at a street intersection. 
4.  The general appurtenant sign standards shall apply, as specified in Section 17.84.060 of this title. 
H.  Screened Fencing. The requirement for screened fencing is as specified in Section 17.84.070 of this title. 
I.  Outdoor Trash Storage (Nonresidential Only). All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container. 
J.  On-Site Performance Standards. On-site performance standards are as follows: 
1.  Odors. No use shall create objectionable odors readily detectable beyond the property line. 
2.  Dust and Smoke. No use shall create dust or smoke that is readily detectable beyond the property line (in addition to meeting all air pollution requirements). 
3.  Vibration. No use shall create vibration detectable without instruments at the property line. 
4.  Electromagnetic Interference. No use shall produce electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television service beyond the property line. 
5.  Glare. No use shall create intense light or glare that causes a nuisance or hazard beyond the property line. 
6.  Applicable Standards. Noise, atmospheric emissions, toxic or noxious matter, radiation, heat and humidity, fire and explosive hazards, or liquid and solid wastes shall be regulated by applicable county, state, federal or local standards. 
K.  Development Plan. For nonresidential uses, an applicant for either a building permit or use permit shall submit a plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee. If only a building permit is required for the use, then the director's approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit. If a use permit is required, then the director's approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.56 - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (M-L) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.56.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the light industrial (M-L) district is to provide suitable areas for a variety of low-intensity manufacturing, processing, assembly and distribution uses which utilize materials that generally are already in a processed form and which do not emit unacceptable or harmful levels of noise, dust, odors, smoke, bright light, vibration or involve dangerous or explosive materials. This district also provides for a limited range of professional, business and administrative offices, commercial uses and other activities which are accessory to permitted industrial uses. This district is consistent with the industrial (I) general plan designation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.56.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the M-L district: 
A.  If conducted within a building: 
1.  Combining, assembly or packaging of the following: 
a.  Pharmaceuticals, drugs, toiletries and cosmetics, 
b.  Small equipment, instruments or appliances such as medical, dental and optical equipment; drafting instruments, watches, clocks, musical instruments, cameras, photographic equipment (except film); hair curling machines or electric razors, 
c.  Electronic and light electrical equipment, including radios, televisions and computers, 
d.  Food products, excluding those that may create obnoxious odors or smoke, 
e.  Products from the following previously prepared materials: bristles, bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horns, leather (excluding any melting or odorous process), rubber, shells, textiles, tobacco, wood or yarn, 
2.  Light manufacturing, including: manufacture of ceramic products, such as pottery, figurines, and small glazed tile, using only previously pulverized clay; hand tools, cutlery and kitchen utensils; electronic and light electrical equipment, including radios, televisions and computers, 
3.  Professional, business, research or administrative offices, when part of a permitted industrial use, 
4.  Trade school, 
5.  Research and development laboratories, 
6.  Printing, engraving, lithographing and publishing, 
7.  Data processing or computer services, not including retail sales or repair of equipment, 
8.  Wholesale businesses and sales, warehouses, mini and other storage buildings, and distribution facilities, except those storing or distributing flammable or explosive materials; 
B.  Wholesale nursery; 
C.  Agricultural uses; 
D.  Uses accessory to the primary use and contained within the same plant site, such as a cafeteria, blueprinting or printing (this does not include uses open to the general public); 
E.  Outdoor storage in conjunction with a permitted use, provided: 
1.  Storage is located on the rear portion of the lot, and 
2.  Storage is completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence (with necessary solid gates) not less than six feet in height, unless the storage area abuts a residential district, in which case the screening shall meet the criteria established in Section 17.56.050I of this chapter, 
3.  No material shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence enclosing the storage area; 
F.  Caretaker's or night watchman's quarters. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.56.030 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the M-L district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Businesses that provide support services to light industrial uses or that will be primarily used by employees of the industrial uses, including blueprinting, photocopying, coffee shop or standard restaurant; 
B.  Television or radio stations; 
C.  Sales, rental and repair of truck tractors and trailers, or other heavy equipment; 
D.  Machine shop, welding shop, plating business or cabinet and woodworking shops not included as part of the routine and customary operation of an approved industrial use; 
E.  Contractor's yards; outdoor storage when accessory to a permitted use that does not meet the criteria established in Section 17.56.020E of this title; 
F.  Commercial and industrial cleaning and dyeing plants, tire recapping; 
G.  Truck yard, truck service station, truck terminals, including accessory maintenance or repair activities; truck or heavy equipment wash facilities; 
H.  Collection and distribution functions for recycling businesses, excluding wrecking yards, metal salvage or storage yards and wet paper recycling activities; 
I.  Outdoor advertising signs and structures other than those appurtenant to any permitted use. Such signs and structures shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet apart when on the same side of a public road and at least five hundred (500) feet apart when on the opposite side of a public road; 
J.  Light industrial condominiums. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.56.040 - Other permitted uses. 
The following other uses are permitted in the M-L district: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 of this title; 
B.  Other uses determined to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.56.020 and 17.56.030 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.56.050 - Site development standards. 
The development standards for minimum building site area and yards established by this section apply to all development in the M-L district. However, alternate standards may be approved for a condominium project as part of the use permit process, if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design, attractiveness and compatibility with its surroundings than would result if the routine development standards of this section were applied. 
A.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site requirement is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.84 of this title. 
B.  Minimum Average Lot Width. The minimum average lot width requirement is eighty (80) feet. 
C.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, ten feet; 
2.  Interior side, none; except where the district abuts a residential district it shall be twenty (20) feet, or if it abuts a freeway right-of-way it shall be ten feet; 
3.  Street side, ten feet; 
4.  Rear, none; except where the district abuts a residential district it shall be twenty (20) feet or if it abuts a freeway right-of-way it shall be ten feet. 
D.  Maximum Structural Height. Maximum permitted structural height is forty-five (45) feet, except within forty (40) feet of a residential district it shall be one story not to exceed twenty (20) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title. 
E.  Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.040 of this title. 
F.  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.050 of this title. 
G.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
H.  Signs. Requirements for signs are as follows: 
1.  Building signs shall not exceed a combined total size of one square foot in area for each lineal foot of building frontage. 
2.  If there is one hundred (100) lineal feet or more of street frontage, one freestanding sign per building site, not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet in size and thirty (30) feet in height shall be permitted. For a double-faced sign, each face shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. The sign shall be set back a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the front or street-side property line or road right-of-way, and shall be located in a landscaped island equal to a minimum of one-half the total sign area of the freestanding sign. A portion of the allowable sign area may be allocated to combined off-site signs identifying two or more establishments when all are located within this district and they share adjoining lots for parking and access. An additional sign with similar height and size restrictions is permitted if there is over three hundred (300) feet of building frontage. 
3.  If there is less than one hundred (100) lineal feet of street frontage, one ground sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in size (twenty-five (25) square feet per face if double-faced) and forty-two (42) inches in height shall be permitted, except the sign height may be six feet if located thirty-five (35) feet or more from the center of a driveway or a curb return at a street intersection. 
4.  The general appurtenant sign standards shall apply, as specified in Section 17.84.060 of this title. 
I.  Zone Walls. The requirement for zone walls is as specified in Section 17.84.070 of this title. 
J.  Outdoor Trash Storage. All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container. 
K.  On-Site Performance Standards. On-site performance standards are as follows: 
1.  Odors. No use shall create annoying odors readily detectable beyond the property line. 
2.  Vibration. No use shall create vibration detectable without instruments at the property line. 
3.  Electromagnetic Interference. No use shall produce electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television reception in residential districts or with the function of electronic equipment beyond the property line. 
4.  Glare. No use shall create intense light or glare that causes a nuisance or hazard beyond the property line. 
5.  Applicable Standards. Noise, atmospheric emissions, toxic or noxious matter, radiation, heat and humidity, fire and explosive hazards, or liquid and solid wastes shall be regulated by applicable county, state, federal or local standards. 
L.  Development Plan. An applicant for either a building permit or use permit shall submit a site plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee. If only a building permit is required for the use, then the director's approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit. If a use permit is required, then the director's approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.58 - GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (M) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.58.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the general industrial (M) district is to provide areas for all types of industrial uses and uses that are accessory to industrial uses. This district is consistent with the industrial (I) general plan designation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.58.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the M district: 
A.  If conducted within a building: 
1.  Combining, assembly, packaging or manufacturing of materials that are generally in a processed form which do not emit dust, odors, smoke or unacceptable levels of noise, including: 
a.  Pharmaceuticals, drugs, toiletries or cosmetics, 
b.  Small equipment, such as medical, dental or optical equipment, watches, clocks, photographic equipment or drafting equipment, 
c.  Radios, televisions or computers, 
d.  Food products, excluding those that may create obnoxious odors or smoke, 
e.  Products from the following previously prepared materials: bristles, bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horns, leather (excluding any melting or odorous process), rubber, shells, textiles, tobacco, wood or yarn; 
2.  Professional business, research or administrative offices when part of a permitted use; 
3.  Trade school; 
4.  Research and development laboratory; 
5.  Printing, engraving, lithographing and publishing; 
6.  Wholesale businesses and sales, warehouses, mini and other storage buildings and distribution facilities, except those storing or distributing flammable or explosive materials. 
B.  Uses accessory to the primary use and contained within the same plant site, such as a cafeteria, blueprinting or printing. This does not include uses open to the general public; 
C.  Outdoor storage in conjunction with a permitted use, provided: 
1.  Storage is located on the rear portion of the lot, and 
2.  Storage is completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence (with necessary solid gates) not less than six feet in height, unless the storage area abuts a residential district, in which case the screening shall be eight feet high, 
3.  No material shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence enclosing the storage area; 
D.  Agricultural uses. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.58.030 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the M district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Businesses that provide support services to industrial uses or will be used primarily by employees of the industrial uses, including blueprinting, photocopying, coffee shop or restaurant; 
B.  Repair of truck tractors and trailers and other heavy equipment; 
C.  Machine shop, welding shop, plating business, cabinet shop, contractor's yard or outdoor storage that does not meet the criteria established in Section 17.58.020C of this title; 
D.  Commercial or industrial cleaning and dyeing plant; 
E.  Truck terminal, truck yard; 
F.  Automobile wrecking yard; 
G.  Caretaker's or night watchman's quarters; 
H.  Manufacture or assembly of aircraft, automobiles, boilers, engines, motors and generators, mobile homes, railroad equipment, trucks, trailers, recreational vehicles or other products which require use of heavy machinery; 
I.  Manufacture of acids, alcohol, ammonia, asphalt, cellulose, cement, dyes, fertilizer, film, fireworks, fuel briquettes, gelatin, glass, glue, tar, paint, plaster, plastics, rubber, soap, vinyl floor covering, hazardous chemical products, including acetylene, carbide, caustic soda, chlorine, cleaning and polishing preparations, creosote, exterminating agents, industrial gases or explosives; 
J.  Processing plants, including breweries, distillers, wineries; food processing plants and canneries not permitted in the M-L district; painting, sandblasting, incinerators, textile bleaching or dyeing; wood processing, including sawmills, planing mills, or pulp mills; metal smelting, alloying, foundries, drop forges, rolling or other types of ore reduction; rubber processing, power generation plants, petroleum refining, concrete or asphalt batch plants; 
K.  Storage of potentially objectionable materials, including explosives, fireworks, fuel, gas, manure, flammable liquids and gases, garbage, trash dumps and piles, junk or other salvage material, solid waste recycling and disposal facilities; 
L.  Animal keeping or processing, including dog kennels, stock yards, feeding pens, animal slaughter facilities, dead animal reduction, tannery or curing of raw hides, or bone distillation; 
M.  Race tracks for motorized and non-motorized vehicles, including bicycles, motorcycles, automobiles, or similar vehicles; 
N.  All other industrial uses not previously listed; 
O.  Outdoor advertising signs and structures other than those appurtenant to any permitted use. Such signs and structures shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet apart when on the same side of a public road and at least five hundred (500) feet apart when on the opposite side of a public road; 
P.  Industrial condominiums. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.58.040 - Other permitted uses. 
The following other uses are permitted in the M district: 
A.  The uses allowed by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.110 of this title; 
B.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.58.020 and 17.58.030 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.58.050 - Site development standards. 
The development standards for minimum building sites and yards established by this section apply to all development in the M district. However, alternate standards may be approved for a condominium project as part of the use permit process if the approving body finds that the proposed development will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design, attractiveness and compatibility with its surroundings than would result if the routine development standards of this section were applied. 
A.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site requirement is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.010 of this title. 
B.  Minimum Average Lot Width. The minimum average lot width requirement is eight feet. 
C.  Yards. The following yard requirements apply, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title: 
1.  Front, ten feet; 
2.  Interior side, none; except where the district abuts a residential district it shall be twenty (20) feet, or if it abuts a freeway right-of-way it shall be ten feet; 
3.  Street side, ten feet; 
4.  Rear, none; except where the district abuts a residential district it shall be twenty (20) feet or if it abuts a freeway right-of-way it shall be ten feet. 
D.  Maximum Structural Height. Maximum permitted structural height is forty-five (45) feet, except when within forty (40) feet of a residential district, it shall be one story not to exceed twenty (20) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title. 
E.  Landscaping. Landscaping requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.040 of this title. 
F.  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting requirements are as specified in Section 17.84.050 of this title. 
G.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
H.  Signs. Requirements for signs are as follows: 
1.  Building signs shall not exceed a combined total size of one square foot in area for each lineal foot of building frontage. 
2.  If there is one hundred (100) lineal feet or more of street frontage, one freestanding sign per building site, not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet in size and thirty (30) feet in height shall be permitted. For double-faced signs, each face shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. The sign shall be set back a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the front or street-side property or road right-of-way line and shall be located in a landscaped island equal to a minimum of one-half the total sign area of the free-standing sign. A portion of the allowable sign area may be allocated to combined off-site signs identifying two or more establishments when all are located within this district and they share adjoining lots for parking and access. An additional sign with similar height and size restrictions is permitted if there is over three hundred (300) feet of building frontage. 
3.  If there is less than one hundred (100) lineal feet of street frontage, one ground sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in size (twenty-five (25) square feet per face if double-faced) and forty-two (42) inches in height shall be permitted, except the sign height may be six feet if located thirty-five (35) feet or more from the center of a driveway or a curb return at a street intersection. 
4.  The general appurtenant sign standards shall apply, as specified in Section 17.84.060 of this title. 
I.  Zone Walls. The requirement for zone walls is as specified in Section 17.84.070 of this title. 
J.  Outdoor Trash Storage. All outside trash storage and collection facilities shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall or view-obscuring fence at least one foot higher than the trash container. 
K.  Development Plan. An applicant for either a building permit or use permit shall submit a site plan which indicates how the standards listed in this section will be met. This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee. If only a building permit is required for the use, then the director's approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit. If a use permit is required, then the director's approval shall occur as set forth by the terms and conditions of the use permit. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.60 - PUBLIC FACILITIES (PF) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.60.010 - Purpose. 
The public facilities (PF) district is intended to be applied to lands upon which public agencies operate public facilities. This district is consistent with all general plan land use designations. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.60.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the PF district: 
A.  Office; 
B.  Park and recreation area; 
C.  Public facilities not listed in Section 17.60.030 of this chapter that do not emit dust, odor, smoke, bright light, vibration or unacceptable levels of noise or which do not involve dangerous or hazardous materials; 
D.  School or college. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.60.030 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the PF district if operated as a public use and a use permit is issued: 
A.  Solid waste disposal facility; 
B.  Wastewater treatment facility; 
C.  Correctional institution; 
D.  Hospital, facilities for the care of mental patients; 
E.  Human cemetery; 
F.  Corporation yard; 
G.  Fairground; 
H.  Other public facilities that do not meet the criteria established in Section 17.60.020C of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.60.040 - Site development standards. 
The following site development standards apply in the PF district: 
A.  Minimum lot size, none. 
B.  Yards. The yard requirements are as follows, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.020 of this title; 
1.  Front, twenty (20) feet; 
2.  Street side, ten feet; 
3.  Interior side, none; except where the district abuts a residential district, it shall be ten feet; 
4.  Rear, none; except where the district abuts a residential district, it shall be ten feet. 
C.  Maximum structural height, thirty-five (35) feet, except as otherwise provided in Section 17.84.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.61 - SHASTA GATEWAY INDUSTRIAL PARK PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (SGIP-PD) 
Sections: 
 
17.61.010 - Applicability of regulations. 
The regulations in this chapter shall apply exclusively to the property defined within this district, identified as Shasta Gateway Industrial Park (SGIP), as depicted on Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
The SGIP planned development district shall be combined with the regulations of Title 17 of the city of Shasta Lake Municipal Code, the recorded Declaration of Protective Covenants, and adopted Architectural and Design Guidelines for Shasta Gateway Industrial Park. 
(Ord. 07-188 § 2 (part))  
17.61.020 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of the SGIP planned development zone district is to: 
1.  Promote and preserve the industrial park as a significant employment generator; 
2.  Minimize potential land use conflicts by limiting non-industrial uses while providing for consideration of miscellaneous commercial and office uses, including restaurants and accessory retail activities; 
3.  To implement the Shasta Gateway Industrial Park Architectural and Design Guidelines. 
This district is consistent with the industrial (I) general plan designation. 
(Ord. 07-188 § 2 (part))  
17.61.030 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the SGIP-PD district: 
A.  If conducted within a building: 
1.  Combining, assembly, packaging or manufacturing of materials and items that are generally in a processed form which do not emit dust, odors, smoke or unacceptable levels of noise, including: 
a.  Pharmaceuticals, drugs, toiletries or cosmetics, 
b.  Small equipment, such as medical, dental, or optical equipment, watches, clocks, photographic equipment, or drafting equipment, 
c.  Radios, televisions or computers, 
d.  Products from the following previously prepared materials: bristles, bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horns, leather (excluding any melting or odorous process), rubber, shells, textiles, tobacco, wood or yarn; 
2.  Research and development laboratory; 
3.  Wholesale businesses and sales, warehouses and distribution facilities, except those storing or distributing flammable or explosive materials. 
B.  Uses accessory to the primary use and contained within the same plant site, such as research or administrative offices, cafeteria, blueprinting or printing. This does not include uses open to the general public. 
C.  Outdoor storage in conjunction with a permitted use, provided: 
1.  Storage is located on the rear portion of the lot, and 
2.  Storage is completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence (with necessary solid gates) not less than six feet in height, and 
3.  No material shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence enclosing the storage area. 
D.  Retail sales of marketing materials associated with the permitted use, including but not limited to tee shirts, hats, cups, pens, pencils, etc., when contained within the site of the permitted use and conducted as an accessory use only. 
E.  Full-service retail sales or retail storefronts are not allowed within the SGIP-PD zone district. 
(Ord. 07-188 § 2 (part))  
17.61.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the SGIP-PD district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Trade school; 
B.  Businesses that provide support services to industrial uses or will be used primarily by employees of the industrial uses, but would be open to the general public, including blueprinting, printing photocopying, or sit-down coffee shop or restaurant. Drive-through restaurants are not allowed; 
C.  Machine shop, welding shop, plating business, cabinet shop; 
D.  Attached caretaker's or night watchman's quarters, no larger than five hundred (500) square feet; 
E.  Manufacture or assembly of aircraft, automobiles, mobile homes, houseboats, trucks, trailers, recreational vehicles, boilers, engines, motors and generators, or other products which require use of heavy machinery; 
F.  When incidental to a permitted use, storage of chemicals (e.g., acids, alcohol, ammonia, asphalt, cellulose, cement, dyes, fertilizer, film, fuel briquettes, gelatin, glass, glue, tar, paint, plaster, plastics, rubber, soap, vinyl floor covering); 
G.  Breweries, distillers, wineries including: 
1.  The on-site sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages to the general public as permitted by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (with or without incidental preparation and service of food) when contained within the same site at which the beverages are manufactured, 
2.  Retail sales of packaged alcoholic beverages manufactured at the facility; 
H.  Food processing plants and canneries, excluding those that may create obnoxious odors or smoke; 
I.  Stand-alone professional business or administrative offices; 
J.  Commercial, office or industrial condominiums. 
(Ord. 07-188 § 2 (part))  
17.61.050 - Other permitted uses. 
The following other uses are permitted in the SGIP-PD district: 
A.  Other uses found to be similar in character and impact to those listed in Sections 17.61.030 and 17.61.040 of this chapter, as determined in accordance with Section 17.94.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 07-188 § 2 (part))  
17.61.060 - Site development standards. 
A.  The development standards established pursuant to this section apply to all development in the SGIP-PD district. 
Limitations on improvements are regulated pursuant to Chapter 17.84 of this title; the recorded Declaration of Protective Covenants for Shasta Gateway Industrial Park; and the most recently adopted Architectural and Design Guidelines for Shasta Gateway Industrial Park. These limitations are supplemental to controls established by building, fire or other jurisdictional codes and regulations, and the most restrictive limitations shall apply. 
B.  Development Plan. An applicant for either a building permit or use permit shall submit a site development plan, which indicates how the site development standards will be met. 
This submittal shall be made on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee. Site development plans shall be approved by the SGIP architectural and development review committee and the development services director or his/her designee prior to issuance of any clearing, grading or building permit. 
(Ord. 07-188 § 2 (part))  
Chapter 17.62 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.62.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the planned development (PD) district is to provide for developments that, because of a mix of building types, land uses or residential lot sizes, do not fit within the parameter of standard zone districts. Planned developments are under unified control, comprehensively planned and can provide a mix of uses that could otherwise create land use conflicts. Planned developments often provide common areas and other amenities not normally found in standard types of development. This district is consistent with all general plan designations that provide for substantial residential, commercial or industrial development, provided the proposed uses are consistent with the general plan designation(s) within which the project is located. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.62.020 - Permitted uses. 
Any use or combination of uses which are arranged and designed in such a manner as to result in a development which is internally compatible, compatible with surrounding uses and consistent with the general plan are permitted outright in the PD district. In cases involving areas designated by the general plan as suburban residential (SR), multiple-family residential uses may be permitted only as a part of a mix of housing types. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.62.030 - Density bonus. 
If a proposed residential project is located in an area designated by the general plan as urban residential (UR) or suburban residential (SR), and meets the planned development concept described in the general plan, including a mix of housing types, up to a twenty-five (25) percent residential density bonus over that permitted by the general plan designation(s) may be permitted. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.62.040 - Application. 
Applications for a PD district shall contain a conceptual development plan for the project site showing the approximate locations of buildings, building elevations, roads, walkways, parking and landscaping, the proposed uses of the buildings and grounds, staging of the development and other information which the development services director or his or her designee may require to properly evaluate and process the application. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.62.050 - Site development. 
Prior to construction of site improvements and structures in a PD district, detailed plans shall be submitted to the development services director or his or her designee for checking and approval to ensure reasonably close conformity with the approved conceptual development plans and with the intent of this section. The decision of the development services director or his or her designee may be appealed to the planning commission, as specified in Section 17.94.060 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.62.060 - Modifications. 
Modifications to approved plans and statements of detailed plans may be permitted in a PD district if a use permit is issued. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.63 - MOUNTAIN GATE AT SHASTA PLANNED DEVELOPMENT 
Sections: 
 
17.63.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to guide and regulate the land use and development of the Mountain Gate at Shasta Area Plan (area plan). 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.020 - Objectives. 
The area plan has been designed to ensure the project will have positive benefits for the community. Objectives of the area plan are to: 
A.  Provide a comprehensively planned project that is sensitive to environmental issues including wetlands, flood protection, the city's hillside grading concerns, and tree preservation. 
B.  Protect the highest quality natural features and resources of the site. 
C.  Conform to general plan policies that designate the project site for urban development through implementation of an area plan. 
D.  Promote compact mixed-use development that strives to provide a balance of uses, diverse housing and transportation choices, and contributes to a jobs-to-housing balance within the region. 
E.  Provide a balanced mix of land uses that will allow a self-sufficient community, thereby reducing demands on regional roadways and services. 
F.  Provide for a full range of housing densities and product choices affordable to a broad spectrum of income levels. 
G.  Provide a master-planned community on a suitable site of sufficient size in proximity to an existing freeway, with access from existing interchange facilities. 
H.  Establish a circulation system that meets local and regional transportation needs and accommodates a variety of transportation modes, including off-street trail systems and on-street bicycle lanes. 
I.  Establish a pedestrian-friendly community that provides a continuous system of trails to link neighborhoods together and provide safe routes to parks and community-serving areas. 
J.  Provide required park facilities sized to meet the needs of residents in the area plan and located as neighborhood focal elements. 
K.  Provide a comprehensively planned infrastructure system (e.g., water treatment and distribution systems, sewer treatment and collection systems, electrical distribution systems, fire suppression facilities, general government facilities) to serve the needs of future residents of the development area. 
L.  Provide adequate infrastructure improvements without adversely affecting existing levels of service. 
M.  Phase development and infrastructure to respond to market demand while requiring new development to provide the infrastructure and public facilities necessary to serve the developing area. 
N.  Establish financial mechanisms to ensure that the full range of services needed to serve the Area Plan are funded by the community and not by existing city residents. 
O.  Provide revenue for the maintenance of public open space areas and park facilities, infrastructure, and public services within the development area. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.030 - Applicability of regulations. 
The regulations of this chapter shall apply exclusively to the property defined within this planned development district known as the Mountain Gate at Shasta Area Plan. The planned development zone district shall be combined with the regulations of Title 17 (Zoning) of the City of Shasta Lake Municipal Code (SLMC). 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.040 - Allowable density and density transfer. 
A.  Allowable Density. Table 2-1 of the area plan identifies proposed densities for each sub-area of the area plan. An estimated unit yield and probable maximum units for each area has been identified and is based on factors such as site location, topography, sensitive biological habitat, and anticipated market demand for a variety of housing products. 
It is anticipated that some development may be clustered and designed to ensure density that might be reduced due to topography or to avoid sensitive biological habitat. As these areas develop, a more detailed assessment of the area plan may result in the need to adjust (reduce or increase) the site and building development standards and/or number of units assigned to a particular area within the area plan. 
B.  Density Transfer. It is the intent of the area plan to permit flexibility in adjusting the number of residential units assigned to each sub-area. To further this intent, units assigned to specific land use classifications or parcels may be transferred within the area plan boundaries, provided that all the following criteria are met: 
1.  The transferring and receiving parcels are within the area plan boundaries and the total maximum number of approved units is not increased (unless an increase is separately approved by the planning commission and city council). 
2.  The cumulative increase or decrease in units resulting from the minor density adjustment does not change the number of pre-transfer units allocated to any one of the parcels receiving or transferring the units by more than twenty (20) percent, based on the density ranges shown in Table 2-1 of the area plan. 
3.  The adjustments in density do not have a significant adverse effect on planned infrastructure, roadways, schools, other public facilities or sensitive biological habitat. 
To request a minor density adjustment, the owners of both the transferring and receiving parcels shall submit to the development services director or his/her designee (director) an application on a form prescribed by the director and all information needed to determine compliance with the above unit-transfer criteria. This submittal shall include information identifying the impacted parcels and designating the number of units being transferred, site plans and maps, and any other necessary documentation requested by the director. 
Upon approval of any density transfer, the director shall prepare an updated area plan density table reflecting the adjusted unit counts and densities for all sub-areas of the area plan. The revised table will allow the director to track total residential units within the area plan. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.050 - Permitted and conditionally permitted uses. 
A.  Table 17.63.050a identifies uses permitted outright; uses permitted pursuant to issuance of a use permit or administrative permit; and uses permitted after review and approval of a zoning/site development permit pursuant to Section 17.63.080 of this chapter. Land use areas identified in Table 17.63.050a are those referenced in Table 2-1 of the area plan. 
B.  Housing types may vary in each of the residential sub-areas as project designs incorporate the project site topography and site amenities. Housing types for each of the sub-areas will be determined at the time of submittal of subsequent tentative subdivision maps. 
C.  Several identified public uses (i.e., parks, fire station, electric substation) are likely to occur as indicated in Table 2-1 of the Area Plan; however, it is possible that public uses will be located in other development areas as reviewed and approved by the Development Services Director or his/her designee if found to be consistent with the intent of the area plan. 
Table 17.63.050a
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES 
P 	Uses Permitted Outright 
AD 	Uses permitted after review and approval of an administrative permit by the development services director or his/her designee 
UP 	Uses permitted after review and approval of a use permit by the planning commission 
Z 	Uses permitted after review and approval of a zoning/site development permit by the development services director or his/her designee 
— 	Use not permitted 
 
  
AREA: 	A 	F, Q, S 	L, M, N, 
O, P 	D, E, G, I 	R 	H 	C, J, K 
	Commercial 	Very-Low 
Density 	Low Density 	Medium 
Density 	High Density 	Mixed Use 	Parks 
LAND USE 							
RESIDENTIAL 
Single-Family. 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 
Two-Family. 	— 	— 	— 	— 	AD 	Z 	— 
Multiple-Family (apartments). 	— 	— 	— 	— 	AD 	AD 	— 
Condominiums. 	— 	— 	— 	— 	AD 	AD 	— 
Live-Work Units. 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Z 	— 
Non-dwelling accessory structures appurtenant to the permitted use. 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Small Family Daycare Home (six or fewer). 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 
Large Family Daycare Home (seven or more). 	— 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	— 
Bed and Breakfast Guest Facility. 	— 	AD 	AD 	AD 	— 	AD 	— 
Home occupation business per SLMC 17.88.220. 	— 	Z 	Z 	Z 	Z 	Z 	— 
Accessory dwelling units (second units): Allowed pursuant to SLMC Chapter 17.81, Affordable Housing. 
COMMERCIAL 
Automobile/Vehicle Service and Repair: 
  
Gasoline, diesel, propane, butane, fuel oil dealers/stations; 
  
Gasoline station convenience mini-marts; 
  
Oil, tune-up, brake and muffler shops; 
  
Tire sales and installation; 
  
Self-serve and non-self-serve auto wash; 
  
Small engine repair (excludes body and fender work, vehicle painting, towing, vehicle dismantling, or repair of heavy trucks or construction vehicles). 	UP 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Automobile sales and leasing: automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, lawn and garden-type tractors. 	AD 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Bars, nightclubs, wine tasting, brewery. 	UP 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Eating and Drinking Establishment (no drive-thru). 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	AD 	— 
Eating and Drinking Establishment (with drive-thru). 	AD 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Outdoor dining in conjunction with an approved Eating and Drinking Establishment. 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 
Hotel/Motel. 	AD 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Instructional services or facilities: Health/fitness club, dance or music studio, driving school, photography, arts and crafts. 	Z 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Z 	— 
Offices: Administrative, executive, insurance, legal, medical, professional, real estate, travel agency, etc. 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 
Personal Service Uses: Barber, beauty salon, day spa, tattoo parlor, locksmith, shoe repair, computer repair, print shop, Laundromat (no on-site dry cleaning). 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 
Recreation/Entertainment: Movie theater, miniature golf, bowling alley, ice/roller skating rink, tennis/racquetball courts, pinball arcades/electronic games centers, pool/card rooms. 	AD 	— 	— 	— 	— 	UP 	— 
Small Retail Sales (under 15,000 square feet for single tenant): 
  
Grocery/ food/ beverage market, florist, bookstore, drug store, pet store, hardware store, furniture, appliances, electronics, variety store. 	Z 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Z 	— 
Large Retail Sales (over 15,000 square feet for single or multi-tenant): 
  
Grocery store, home improvement center, discount or wholesale retail sales. 	AD 	— 	— 	— 	— 	UP 	— 
Temporary Uses: Farmer's Markets; produce sales; carnivals; Christmas tree or pumpkin sales. 	Z 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Z 	AD 
Veterinarian/Animal Hospital (no outdoor kennels). 	Z 	— 	— 	— 	— 	UP 	— 
PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC FACILITIES 
Public Government Offices. 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 
Fire Station. 	AD 	— 	— 	AD 	— 	AD 	— 
Law Enforcement Substation (no jail). 	AD 	— 	— 	— 	— 	AD 	— 
Public utility substations, structures, facilities, water tanks, etc. 	Z 	Z 	Z 	Z 	Z 	Z 	— 
Park and Recreation Facilities: Public park, playground, sports fields, gymnasiums, swimming pools, picnic facilities, including related food concessions. 	AD 	— 	— 	AD 	Z 	AD 	P 
College and Trade School, public or private. 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 
Schools, K-12, public or private. 	AD 	— 	— 	AD 	— 	AD 	— 
Nursery School, Pre-School (licensed or certified by the state). 	P 	— 	— 	— 	AD 	P 	— 
Day Care Center (licensed or certified by the state for 14 or more) for children or adults. 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 
Clubs and Lodges. 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	— 
Conference Center, Meeting Hall. 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	— 
Community Center, Youth Center, Senior Center. 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	— 
Religious Facilities (church, temple, synagogue, shrine, mosque, etc.) used exclusively for religious worship and incidental accessory uses. 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	AD 	— 
Cultural Institution: Library, museum, art gallery, performance art center, amphitheater. 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 
Amphitheater/Performance Center—Outdoor. 	AD 	— 	— 	— 	— 	AD 	AD 
Commuter Parking Lot. 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 
Electric Charging Station. 	P 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	Z 
 
  
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.060 - Other permitted uses. 
A.  Table 17.63.050.a identifies representative land uses for each sub-area of the area plan. During implementation of the area plan, other land uses may be proposed that are not specifically listed, but are consistent with the intent of the area plan and this chapter. 
The director may make a determination that a requested use is similar to those uses listed as permitted uses or uses subject to issuance of a use permit, administrative permit, or zoning/site development permit if the following findings are made: 
1.  The proposed unlisted use is similar in character and impact to a listed use; and 
2.  The proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use including determining where it is allowed, what permits are required, and what standards affect its establishment. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.070 - Live-work units. 
A.  A live-work unit means a structure or portion of a structure: 
1.  That combines a commercial activity allowed in the zone with a residential living space for the owner of the business and that person's household, or the owner's employee; and 
2.  Where the resident owner or employee of the business is responsible for the commercial activity performed; and 
3.  Where the live-work unit complies with all applicable state and local building and fire-life safety codes. 
B.  Allowable commercial uses in live-work units: 
1.  Art and craft work such as ceramics, painting, photography, sculpture, and similar cottage industries; 
2.  Office uses by architects, attorneys, consultants, writers, owners of e-commerce businesses; 
3.  One-on-one services and lessons such as music, art, dance, tutoring, licensed counseling; 
4.  Tailoring and sewing; 
5.  Limited, brief, pet care services such as grooming; 
6.  Hair stylists; 
7.  Catering preparation for off-site events; 
8.  Cottage food businesses; 
9.  Other occupations determined by the Director to be similar and compatible in nature to the uses listed above. 
C.  Prohibited commercial uses in live-work units: 
1.  Adult entertainment activities/businesses; 
2.  The retail sale of food and/or beverages with customers arriving on-site; 
3.  Entertainment, drinking, and public eating establishments; 
4.  Animal hospitals and clinics; 
5.  The boarding or breeding of animals; 
6.  Sales, repair or maintenance of vehicles, including automobiles, boats, motorcycles, aircraft, trucks, or recreational vehicles; 
7.  Commercial cabinet or furniture making; 
8.  Mobile food vendors; 
9.  Uses which involve medical procedures; 
10.  Uses that require explosives or highly combustible materials; 
11.  Welding, machine shop operations, or metal fabricating (except for artisan metal sculpture); and 
12.  Other uses that the director determines to be similar in character to those listed above. 
D.  A valid city business license and zoning/site development permit for the commercial use shall be maintained at all times. 
E.  Only one business per live-work unit is allowed. 
F.  No more than two employees (excluding residents of the dwelling unit) may be employed, unless otherwise provided pursuant to issuance of a use permit by the planning commission. 
G.  Residential areas are permitted above or below the commercial component, or in a portion of a single-story structure, provided there is internal access between the residential and commercial space. 
H.  At least ten percent but no more than thirty-five (35) percent of the total floor area of the live-work unit shall be working space. 
I.  The commercial component shall be restricted to the unit and shall not be conducted in the yard, garage or any accessory structure. 
J.  No portion of a Live-Work unit may be separately rented or sold as a commercial space for a person or persons not living on the premises, or as a residential space for a person or persons not working on the premises. 
K.  Access to the commercial component shall be oriented to the street and shall have at least one access separate from the living space. 
L.  Signage intended to promote on-site commercial uses shall be restricted to two 1½ square-foot signs permanently affixed to the door or wall of the business component. 
M.  Customer vehicle trips and business-related deliveries shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday. 
N.  Customer vehicle trips are limited to no more than eight per day, and no more than two customers shall be on-site at any given time. Business-related deliveries are limited to no more than one per day. The commercial use shall not generate vehicular traffic that will interfere with residential traffic circulation. 
O.  The Live-Work unit shall be required to provide two-car covered parking in an attached or detached garage, plus two additional off-street parking spaces unless the property is part of a shared parking arrangement pursuant to Section 17.63.130. 
P.  No outdoor storage of materials or equipment related to the business shall be permitted. 
Q.  No outdoor activity related to the business shall be permitted. 
R.  The commercial component shall not detract from, or otherwise be a nuisance to, the residential character or appearance of the dwelling unit or neighborhood and shall not generate external noise, odor, glare, vibration or electrical interference detectable to the normal sensory perception by adjacent neighbors; 
S.  No explosive, toxic, combustible or flammable materials in excess of what would be allowed incidental to normal residential uses shall be stored or used on the premises. 
T.  After approval, a live-work unit shall not be converted to either entirely residential use or entirely business use unless authorized by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.080 - Development permit procedures. 
A.  Use Permits: The process for reviewing and approving use permits shall be the procedure outlined in SLMC Section 17.92.020.;ol0; 
B.  Administrative Permits: The process for reviewing and approving administrative permits shall be the process outlined in SLMC Section 17.92.050. 
C.  Zoning/Site Development Permits: The process for reviewing and approving zoning/site development permits shall be as follows: 
1.  An application for an zoning/site development permit shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the director, and shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  A clear and concise description of the use and accompanying activities; 
b.  Site plans, maps or other documents showing the details of the proposed use, building or facilities, including how the applicable design standards of this chapter will be satisfied; and 
c.  Information demonstrating compliance with the criteria applicable to the proposed use. 
2.  No application shall be accepted as complete unless and until all fees, the application form and related information are filed with and accepted by the director. Failure of any applicant to respond, within thirty (30) days of mailing, to any notice that the application is incomplete or to any request to clarify, amplify, correct or otherwise supplement the application may be deemed, at the discretion of the director, an abandonment of the zoning/site development permit application, in which case no further action shall be taken upon it. 
3.  The director shall consider approval of the application after the application is deemed complete. 
4.  If the director determines that the proposed use meets all criteria applicable to the proposed use, the director will approve or conditionally approve the proposal. 
5.  If the director determines that the proposed use does not meet all criteria applicable to the proposed use, the director shall deny the application. 
6.  The director may refer any zoning/site development permit proposal to the planning commission for a decision when it is determined that the nature of the project, or the existence of a policy question, requires such referral. 
7.  The granting of any zoning/site development permit may be conditioned upon the dedication of land or the posting of a bond to guarantee the installation of public improvements, provided the dedication or public improvements are reasonably related to the use for which the zoning/site development permit is granted. 
8.  Any zoning/site development permit granted under this section may be limited to a term set when the permit is granted. The establishment, maintenance or operation of any use under this section shall cease at the end of the term established by the permit, if any. The term limit on the permit may be extended by the director upon written request by the applicant prior to expiration of the term based on conditions appropriate at the time of such time extension. 
9.  Every zoning/site development permit issued under this section is revocable. Whenever the director determines that one or more grounds exist for revocation, the applicant shall be notified in writing by the director of the date of revocation as set forth in SLMC 17.92.040. 
10.  Every zoning/site development permit expires and is automatically null and void without further action by the city if the activity or use for which the zoning/site development permit was granted has not been actively and substantially commenced within two years of the date of its approval. 
11.  The director may extend the time for commencement of the use or activity during the two years following approval of the zoning/site development permit, if an application for an extension of time is made prior to expiration of the zoning/site development permit. An extension of time shall be approved if the applicant shows reasonable cause for the extension. Reasonable cause exists if the applicant shows that circumstances beyond his/her control have prevented him/her from taking sufficient action. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.090 - Site and building development plans. 
A.  All applicants shall submit a conceptual development plan of the project showing the location of buildings, building elevations, streets, walkways, parking and landscaping, the proposed uses of the buildings and grounds, staging of the development and other information which the director may require in order for the city to properly evaluate the application. 
B.  Prior to issuance of a building permit, detailed development plans, drawn to scale, shall be submitted to the director for plan check and approval to ensure conformity with the approved conceptual development plans and with the intent of the area plan. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.100 - Site and building development standards. 
Site and building development standards are as shown in Table 17.63.100.a. Specific requirements shall be identified during preparation and review of conceptual development plans for each subsequent development project and may vary from the standards identified in Table 17.63.100a based on topography, surrounding uses, sensitive biological habitat, density transfers and other development constraints. Minor modifications may be approved by the director pursuant to Section 17.63.150 of this chapter. 
TABLE 17.63.100a 
Minimum Site and Building Development Standards 
AREA PLAN SUB-AREA: 	Area 
A 	Areas 
F, Q, S 	Areas 
L, M, N, O, P 	Areas 
>D, E, G, I 	Area 
H 	Area 
R 
Land Use Description: 	Commercial 	Very-Low
Density 
1—2 du/ac 	Low Density 
2—4 du/ac 	Medium Density 
4—7 du/ac 	High Density 
11—20 du/ac 	High Density 
11—30 du/ac 
		Large Lot 	Medium and 
Large Lot 	Small and 
Medium Lot 	Mixed Use 	Multi-Family 
Allowed Housing Types: 	N/A 	Single-Family Detached 	Single-Family 
Detached; 
Duplexes 	Single-Family Detached or Attached; Duplex; Townhomes; Alley-Loaded; Green Court 	Apartments; Townhomes; Live-Work Units; Alley Loaded; Green Court 	Apartments; 
Duplexes; 
Townhomes 
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) (commercial);
Maximum building coverage (residential) 	0.25 	0.5 	0.5 	0.7 	Residential:       0.7 
Non-Residential:       0.1 	0.7 
Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet) 1 	10,000 	15,000 	6,000 	4,000 	3,000 	10,000 
Minimum Lot Width (feet) 	80 	100 	60 	50 	Residential:       30 
Non-Residential:       30 	80 
Minimum Lot Depth (feet) 	110 	150 	100 	80 	Residential:       70 
Non-Residential:       70 	100 
Setbacks (feet) 2 
 Front Yard to Dwelling/ 
Commercial Building 	10 	15 	15 	10 	Residential:       10 
Non-Residential:       10 	10 
 Front Yard to Garage 	N/A 	20 	20 	20 	Residential:       N/A 
Non-Residential:       N/A 	20 
 Side Yards 3 	0 	5 and 10 	5 and 10 	5 and 5 	Residential:       0 and 5 
Non-Residential:       0 	5 and 15 
 Side Yard adjacent to street 	10 	10 	10 	10 	Residential:       10 
>Non-Residential:       10 	15 
 Rear Yard 4 	0 	15 	15 	10 	Residential:       10 
Non-Residential:       10 	10 
 Rear Yard with Alley Access 	N/A 	5 	5 	5 	Residential:       5 
Non-Residential:       N/A 	5 
Maximum Building Height - 
Dwelling/Commercial Building 5 	40 	30 	30 	30 	Residential:       45 
Non-Residential:       40 	45 
Maximum Building Height - 
Accessory Buildings 	18 	18 	18 	18 	Residential:       18 
Non-Residential:       18 	18 
Parking 	Refer to Area Plan 
Landscaping 	
Outdoor Lighting 	
Signage 	
Fencing 	
Outdoor Trash Receptacles 	
 
  
1  Lots developed through clustering may be smaller in size than indicated in Table 17.63.100a, provided the smallest proposed lot is not less than ¾ of the minimum required lot size for the sub-area of the area plan. Building sites of less than two acres shall be determined by reference to net acreage as defined by SLMC Section 17.02.050. 
2  - Lots over one acre require 30-foot setbacks unless waived by the Shasta Lake Fire Protection District. 
 - When a commercial use abuts a residential use, the front yard shall be the same as the residential within twenty-five (25) feet of the residential use. 
 - When a commercial use abuts a residential use, the side yard shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
3  Side yard setbacks for attached residential uses are 0 and 0 
4  When the commercial use abuts a residential sub-area, the rear yard shall be 15 feet. If it abuts a public street, the rear yard shall be ten feet. 
5  When the commercial use abuts a residential sub-area, the height limit is 20 feet, single-story. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.110 - Architectural and site design standards. 
A.  Architectural and site design shall be governed by Area Plan Section 7.0 (Design Guidelines). These guidelines shall be considered during the design and review of all future development proposals, and are to be used in conjunction with other applicable zoning development standards, ordinances and/or special development requirements. 
B.  The city's design criteria are not intended to be rigid or restrict creative solutions. For uses that require a use permit, the planning commission, at its discretion, shall have the authority to consider and accept alternative site and/or building designs that are determined to meet the general intent of the adopted design guidelines. For uses that require an administrative permit or zoning/site development permit, this authority shall extend to the director pursuant to the authority granted by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.120 - Parking. 
A.  Off street parking shall be consistent with the provisions of SLMC Chapter 17.86. 
B.  Development in mixed-use areas shall require review and approval of a master parking plan by the director prior to issuance of a building permit. 
C.  Development proposed in mixed-use areas may include a shared parking arrangement as part of the master parking plan. The director may approve the request based on factors such as anticipated parking demands and the days and hours of operation for each use. 
D.  Where a proposed use is not specifically listed in SLMC Chapter 17.86, the director has the authority to determine the required number of parking spaces based on similarity of the proposed use to other listed uses. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.130 - Streets. 
A.  Except as modified by the city engineer as needed to ensure safe and efficient traffic (e.g., in the vicinity of fire hydrants, public utility facilities, public transit stops, school bus stops, etc.) the requirements for minimum right-of-way widths shall be as indicated in the area plan and on any subsequent tentative subdivision map or improvement plans. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.140 - Administrative modifications. 
A.  The director may determine through the plan review and permitting process that a particular request for approval is in substantial conformity with the provisions and intent of the area plan. "Substantial conformity" may include requests for a fifteen (15) percent or less adjustment to quantifiable or measurable standards contained in the area plan or development standards and requests that are not readily quantifiable or measurable, which the director determines are minor in nature. All other requests for variations shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and consideration. 
B.  Administrative modifications are appropriate for requests that conform to one or more of the following criteria or circumstances: 
1.  The director determines that the proposed adjustments are off-set by the merits of the proposed design and do not significantly change the anticipated physical characteristics, goals, and intent of the area plan. 
2.  Granting of the administrative modification will result in design improvements, where there are space or other restrictions on the site which preclude literal compliance with the development standards without hardship. 
3.  Granting of the administrative modification, with any conditions imposed, will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements. 
4.  Proposed changes to land use diagram shapes or to the alignment of streets maintain the general land use pattern and/or provide an improved circulation system consistent with the intent and direction of the vision, goals, and policies of the area plan. 
5.  The proposed change is not expected to significantly increase environmental impacts beyond the levels identified in the final EIR pursuant to Section 17.63.160 of this chapter. 
6.  An administrative modification may be reviewed and acted upon by the director. In granting an administrative modification, the director may impose conditions to safeguard public health and safety, and to ensure that development so authorized is consistent with the objectives and intent of the area plan. No planning commission or city council review is required, unless the administrative modification is appealed pursuant to Section 17.63.170 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.150 - Environmental review. 
All applications for a development entitlement shall be reviewed for conformity with the area plan and for compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. The certified environmental impact report (EIR) for the area plan shall serve as the base environmental document for subsequent entitlement approvals within the area plan. The director will determine the appropriate level of environmental review for subsequent projects. 
The rules governing the extent of any future environmental review are set forth in Sections 15183 and 15183.5 of the State CEQA Guidelines. Under this section of the State CEQA Guidelines, projects that are consistent with the development density established by existing zoning, community plan or general plan policies for which an EIR was certified shall not require additional environmental review, except as might be necessary to examine whether there are project-specific significant effects which are peculiar to the project or its site. 
The director will consider environmental effects that were not analyzed as significant effects in the certified EIR for the project, or if there are potentially significant off-site impacts and cumulative impacts which were not discussed in the prior EIR prepared for the project. In addition, the city will consider whether there are previously identified significant effects which, as a result of substantial new information which was not known at the time the EIR was certified, are determined to have a more severe adverse impact than discussed in the prior EIR. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.160 - Appeals. 
An applicant or any interested party who disagrees with the director's decision to issue, issue with conditions, or to deny a permit or time extension may appeal such decision to the Shasta Lake Planning Commission by submitting a written appeal within five calendar days of the decision pursuant to the requirements of SLMC Section 17.92.050(G). A decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council if the appeal is submitted in writing to the city clerk within five calendar days following the planning commission's action. The fee for filing an appeal shall be the same as that required for appeals of actions related to a use permit. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
17.63.170 - Administrative enforcement. 
The provisions of SLMC Section 17.94.060 for administrative enforcement shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 16-245, § 4(Exh. B), 1-5-2016)  
Chapter 17.64 - UNCLASSIFIED (U) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.64.010 - Purpose. 
The unclassified (U) district is intended to be applied as a holding district until a precise principal zone district has been adopted for the property. All new uses in this district shall be consistent with all applicable policies of the general plan. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.64.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the U district: 
A.  One-family residence, except in areas designated by the general plan as commercial (C), industrial (I) or mineral resource (M); 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 17.90 of this title and Section 17.64.040 of this chapter, any mobile home lawfully installed without a foundation system prior to July 1, 1982, may be replaced within six months of its removal with another mobile home without a foundation system if all other requirements of law relating to the installation of mobile homes without a foundation system have been met; 
C.  Agricultural uses, provided: 
1.  Animal husbandry provided the minimum parcel size for livestock (farm animals) listed is one acre and the total number of animals shall not exceed the numbers listed per acre: 
a.  One horse, pony, mule, burro, cow, llama, camel or similar sized animal per one-half acre; 
b.  Three goats, sheep, or similar sized animal per one-half acre; 
c.  Two swine per one acre; 
d.  Two adult emus, rheas, ostriches or similar sized birds per one acre subject to a use permit, the total number of chicks permitted shall be determined by the use permit; 
2.  No minimum parcel size is required for the following animals but the total number permitted shall not exceed the number listed per acre: 
a.  Twenty-five (25) turkeys, chickens, ducks, geese, rabbits, or similar sized animals per one-half acre; 
b.  Unlimited fish, frogs, worms, or similar sized animals. 
D.  Accessory Dwelling Units which meet the requirements of Chapter 17.81. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.64.030 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the U district if an administrative permit is issued and subject to the provisions of Section 17.88.220 and 17.88.230 of this title; 
A.  Mobile home, in lieu of a permitted one-family residence; 
B.  The following uses, if they are accessory to a permitted one-family residence or mobile home, and the mobile home has an approved administrative permit, unless the mobile home was legally installed before an administrative permit was required: 
1.  Home occupation; 
2.  Large day care home. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.64.040 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the U district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  Outdoor advertising signs and structures other than those appurtenant to any permitted use. Such signs and structures shall be located in areas designated by the general plan as commercial (C) or industrial (I), shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet apart when on the same side of a public road and at least five hundred (500) feet apart when on the opposite side of a public road; 
B.  All other uses not otherwise prohibited by law and not inconsistent with any portion of the general plan. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.64.050 - Site development standards. 
The following site development standards apply in the U district: 
A.  Minimum Building Site. The minimum building site requirement is the same as the minimum building site required by the appropriate zone district that would be used to implement the general plan designation applied to the lot; provided, in any case, no lot shall be less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet. 
B.  Yards. The yard requirements are the same as the yard requirements established by the appropriate zone district that would be used to implement the general plan designation applied to the lot. 
C.  Maximum Structural Height. The maximum structural height requirements are the same as the height requirements established by the appropriate zone district that would be used to implement the general plan designation applied to the lot. 
D.  Parking. Parking requirements are as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.68 - BUILDING SITE (B) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.68.010 - Purpose. 
The building site (B) district is intended to be combined with any principal district to modify the minimum building site standard otherwise applicable in the principal district. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.68.020 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the B district are all uses permitted in the principal district with which the B district is combined, provided the administrative and use permit requirements of the principal district shall apply. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.68.030 - Site development standards. 
A.  The following minimum building site standards shall apply to all principal districts with which the following districts are combined: 
1.  B: The minimum building site expressed in thousands of square feet, as indicated by a number following the hyphen (e.g., B-8 means eight thousand (8,000) square foot minimum building site); 
2.  BA: The minimum building site expressed in acres, as indicated by a number following the hyphen (e.g., BA-5 means five acre minimum building site); 
3.  BSM: The minimum building site is the area of the individual lot, as shown on a recorded parcel or final map. If no map has been recorded, the lot that was to be divided shall be subject to the regulations of the principal district, but only to the extent that the regulations do not conflict with the approved tentative map or its conditions of approval, until the map approval expires or is relinquished by the property owner. Intended to be applied only where no further land divisions are expected. 
B.  The following building site limitations shall apply to all principal districts with which the following districts are combined: 
1.  BL: The number of building sites existing and allowed to be created is limited to a maximum of the number following the hyphen (e.g., BL-3 means a maximum of three building sites are allowed). This is intended to be applied to lots that qualify for more than one building site, based on allowed general plan densities, but are limited in the number of building sites allowed because a portion of the residential density applicable to the lot has been utilized to create other lots in the vicinity (density averaging). The minimum building site shall be determined by the principal district; 
2.  BP: Further division of the lot cannot occur until the access road is constructed to city development standards, including paving. 
C.  All other site development standards of the principal district must be met in order to qualify for the minimum building site or number of buildings allowed by the B district. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.70 - RESTRICTIVE FLOOD (F-2) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.70.010 - Purpose. 
The restrictive flood (F-2) district is intended to be combined with any principal district to minimize or avoid hazards to life and property from flooding in the regulatory flood zone established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, pursuant to the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, and in other areas of significant flood hazard. These regulations apply in all districts combined with this district, provided that in case of conflict between the regulations of the principal district and this district, the more restrictive regulations control. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.70.020 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the F-2 district are all uses permitted in the principal district with which the F-2 district is combined, provided the administrative permit and use permit requirements of the principal district shall apply. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.70.030 - Land divisions. 
Applications for all land divisions in the F-2 district shall include current regulatory flood elevation data. Such data shall be shown on the recorded map. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.70.040 - Building permit site plans— Findings. 
A.  Every building permit application shall include plans and specifications for all proposed construction; elevations in relation to mean sea level of the lowest habitable floor of residential structures, including basements or, for nonresidential structures, elevations to which it has been floodproofed; and such other information as the development services director or his or her designee or chief engineer of the county water agency may require. 
B.  No building permit shall be granted unless the building official makes the following findings; if a use permit is required, the findings shall be made before the use permit is approved: 
1.  The design and construction of all proposed improvements, including any manmade change or unimproved real property, are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; and 
2.  Drainage is designed to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
C.  Base flood elevation data will be provided by or approved by the chief engineer of the water agency. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the chief engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize the best existing base flood data available from any source, including high water marks, floods of record and private engineering reports. 
D.  The building official shall obtain and maintain elevation certifications necessary to confirm that the elevation requirements of Section 17.70.050 of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.70.050 - Site development standards. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 17.70.020, 17.70.030, and 17.70.040 of this chapter, all uses are subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
A.  Every structure shall be designed or anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, or portions of it, due to flooding. 
B.  All construction materials shall be resistant to flood damage, construction methods and practices which will minimize flood damage shall be used and all public utilities shall be located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
C.  New or replacement domestic water supply systems and sewage disposal systems shall be designed and installed to prevent infiltration and discharges into floodwaters. 
D.  The lowest floor, including the basement, of all residential structures or substantial improvements to existing residential structures shall be constructed at least one foot above the base flood level. 
E.  The lowest floor, including the basement, of all nonresidential structures, or substantial improvements to existing nonresidential structures may be below the base flood level, provided the structure, utilities and water and sewage disposal facilities are floodproofed to a point at least one foot above the base flood level. When floodproofing is required, a registered civil engineer or licensed architect shall certify that the floodproofing methods are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with the base flood level. 
F.  All permits from governmental agencies whose approval of development in the restrictive flood zone is required by federal or state law, shall be obtained prior to commencement of construction or installation of any structure, mobile home or water supply or sewage disposal system. 
G.  No work that alters or relocates any portion of a watercourse shall diminish the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse within the area of alteration or relocation. 
H.  The chief engineer of the water agency shall notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Water Resources prior to any permitted alteration or relocation of any watercourse within this zone district. 
I.  All mobile homes to be placed or substantially improved under city permit within this zone district shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the mobile home is at or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system. The mobile home shall be certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 85401 et seq.). 
J.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
K.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.70.060 - Exemptions. 
Exemptions to the provisions of this chapter may be made if a variance is obtained, as provided in Section 17.92.010 of this title. Such exemptions are subject to the provisions of Section 60.6 of Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.72 - MOBILE HOME (T) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.72.010 - Purpose. 
The mobile home (T) district is intended to be combined with selected principal districts to provide areas where mobile homes may be located in addition to uses otherwise permitted by the principal district. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.72.020 - Districts with which the T district may be combined. 
The T district may be combined with the following primary districts: 
A.  Habitat protection (HP); 
B.  Rural residential (R-R); 
C.  Interim rural (I-R). 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.72.030 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted outright in the T district: 
A.  Mobile home, in lieu of a permitted one-family residence; 
B.  All uses permitted without an administrative or use permit in the principal district. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.72.040 - Uses requiring administrative permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the T district if an administrative permit is issued: 
A.  Family care residence, subject to the provisions of Section 17.88.180 of this title; 
B.  All uses permitted with an administrative permit in the principal district. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.72.050 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The following uses are permitted in the T district if a use permit is issued: 
A.  All uses permitted with a use permit in the principal district; 
B.  Mobile home, in lieu of a one-family residence, when the regulations of the principal zone district require a use permit for a one-family residence; 
C.  Second mobile home, in lieu of a second one-family residence, when the regulations of the principal district require a use permit for a second one-family residence. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.72.060 - Compatibility finding. 
In any hearing before the planning commission or city council to consider reclassifying land to include the T district, the use of the land for a mobile home shall first be found to be compatible with the use of the land for a one-family residence. In determining compatibility, the character of existing residential and other uses in the vicinity, the effect of topographic and other natural features on the visibility of the mobile home from these existing uses, and the distances between the mobile home and each of these uses shall be considered. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.74 - SCENIC HIGHWAY (SH) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.74.010 - Purpose. 
The scenic highway (SH) district is intended to be combined with any principal district to protect the visual qualities of scenic corridors along official scenic highways, by maintaining the corridor in as natural a state as is feasible while allowing development consistent with applicable general plan policies. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.74.020 - Uses requiring use permit. 
The uses permitted and uses requiring an administrative or use permit in the principal district are permitted in the SH district if the development standards contained in Section 17.74.030 of this chapter are met. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.74.030 - Site development standards. 
A.  The development standards of this district shall prevail over any conflicting regulation of any principal district with which this district is combined. 
B.  New structures shall be situated on the property where, to the extent feasible, they will be the least visible from the scenic highway. Structures shall be clustered where possible, leaving remaining areas in a natural state, or landscaped to be compatible with the scenic quality of the area. 
C.  Structures shall blend into the surrounding environment by location, design, use of building materials and neutral colors. 
D.  For commercial and industrial developments or mining operations, vegetation shall be planted and maintained according to an approved landscape plan or reclamation plan. Natural vegetation shall be retained where it enhanced the scenic quality of the area. 
E.  Grading shall be minimized and the property revegetated upon completion of construction. 
F.  New utilities shall be underground where feasible. 
G.  New transmission towers shall be diverted from scenic corridors, if possible; otherwise, they shall be located in inconspicuous areas. 
H.  Appurtenance signs shall be permitted as allowed by the principal district with which it is combined, except a permitted freestanding sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet (twenty-five (25) square feet per side for double-faced signs) and twenty (20) feet in height. No outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted. 
I.  The site development standards of this district may be modified with a use permit, provided the proposal will be of equal or greater excellence in arrangement, design or attractiveness than would occur if the routine standards of this section were applied. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.76 - SPECIFIC PLAN (SP) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.76.010 - Purpose. 
The specific plan (SP) district is intended to be combined with any principal district to identify areas where specific plans are adopted. A specific plan shall be prepared in conformance with Article 8, Section 65450 et seq. of the California Government Code, and as may be further implemented by applicable city guidelines. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.76.020 - Uses permitted. 
All uses permitted in the principal district are permitted in the SP district; provided, the administrative and use permit requirements of the principal district shall apply; and further provided, the uses are consistent with the provisions of the applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.76.030 - Site development standards. 
The site development standards of the principal district and the provisions of the specific plan shall apply; provided, in the case of conflict between the two, the more restrictive regulation shall prevail, unless otherwise provided. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.78 - DESIGN REVIEW (DR) DISTRICT* 
Sections: 
 
17.78.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The design review (DR) district is intended to be combined with any principal district for one or more of the following purposes: 
1.  To protect areas having unique environmental, physical, historical or scenic features; 
2.  To promote development which features a variety of amenities and design features; 
3.  To encourage creative approaches to use of land and related physical development; 
4.  To obtain the advantages of coordinated, flexible, comprehensive, long-range planning; 
5.  To ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses through suitable project design; 
6.  To protect the public's health and safety; 
7.  To ensure consistency as deemed appropriate with adopted redevelopment plans, conceptual plans, architectural guidelines, and/or special development standards; 
8.  To ensure that necessary on-site and off-site improvements are provided to support the proposed use, especially in areas of the city that have minimal public improvements. 
B.  The requirements of this district prevail over any conflicting regulation of any principal district with which this district is combined. 
(Ord. 98-104 § 1 (part))  
17.78.015 - Uses allowed. 
The uses permitted outright in the principal district are allowed when conducted within an existing building and on property that conform with zoning, building and fire code development standards, or that will require only minor improvements to accomplish conformance with such standards. 
(Ord. 98-104 § 1 (part))  
17.78.020 - Uses requiring a use permit. 
With the exception of sues allowable under Section 17.78.015, the uses permitted outright and those permitted with an administrative permit or a use permit in the principal district are permitted in the DR district if a use permit is first issued in accordance with Section 17.92.020. 
(Ord. 98-104 § 1 (part))  
17.78.030 - Site development standards. 
Site development standards in the DR district shall, in the aggregate, meet or exceed the applicable standards prescribed by the regulations for the principal district and those required by Chapter 17.84 (General Development Standards). 
(Ord. 98-104 § 1 (part))  
17.78.040 - Findings required for issuance of use permits in the DR district. 
In addition to the findings required by Section 17.92.020E for issuance of a use permit, the planning commission shall also find the proposed use to be compatible with the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 98-104 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.80 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
17.80.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the development, siting, installation, and operation of wireless telecommunications antennas and related facilities ("wireless telecommunications facilities") for personal wireless services. These regulations are designed to protect and promote public safety, community welfare and the aesthetic quality of the city consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the Shasta Lake general plan and design and architectural standards while at the same time providing for managed development of wireless telecommunications infrastructure in accordance with the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
B.  The city intends to apply these regulations to accomplish objectives including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Foster an aesthetically pleasing urban environment, prevent visual blight, protect and preserve public safety and general welfare, and maintain the character of residential and adjacent neighborhood commercial areas consistent with the adopted general plan and area plans and in compliance with applicable and federal legislation; 
2.  Because wireless telecommunications antennas and related facilities for cellular and mobile phones and personal communications systems are a commercial use that is rarely accessory or merely incidental to the primary use of a parcel, to prevent the location of such facilities in residentially zoned districts unless: 
a.  Such location is necessary to provide personal wireless services to residents and businesses in the city of Shasta Lake, or their owners, customers, guests, or invitees, or other persons traveling in or about the city of Shasta Lake and 
b.  Placement, construction, and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities at such location can be made consistent with the character of the neighborhood and will not impose visual blight or harm environmental resources; 
3.  Provide universal access to wireless telecommunications services; 
4.  Support use of wireless telecommunications to maintain and enhance information resources and services; 
5.  Permit the use of wireless telecommunications technology, where appropriate and within the scope of available resources, to enhance the economic vitality of Shasta Lake; 
6.  Facilitate the creation of an advanced wireless telecommunications infrastructure for citizens, businesses, industries and schools; 
7.  Establish and maintain telecommunications facilities that are components of a wireless telecommunications infrastructure designed to enhance the city's emergency response network and do not interfere with such emergency systems in violation of applicable federal or state regulations; 
8.  Establish a process for obtaining necessary permits for wireless telecommunication facilities that provides greater certainty to both applicants and interested members of the public while ensuring compliance with all applicable zoning requirements; 
9.  Provide opportunities for further reduction in potential aesthetic or land use impacts of wireless telecommunications facilities as changes in technology occur; and 
10.  Support the use of personal wireless services to enhance personal and public health and safety as well as the public welfare of the city of Shasta Lake. 
(Ord. 02-142 § 1 (part))  
17.80.020 - Applicability of regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all communications facilities for the transmission and/or reception of wireless radio, television, and other communication signals, including, but not limited to, commercial wireless communications services (personal communication, cellular and paging) including, without limitation, antennae, masts, poles, towers, structures, buildings, additions to existing antennae, masts, poles, towers, structures, or buildings. 
(Ord. 02-142 § 1 (part))  
17.80.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section, the following terms and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this subsection. 
"Antenna" means any system of wires, poles, rods, panels, whips, cylinders, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for transmitting or receiving electromagnetic waves when such system is either external to or attached to the exterior of a structure, or is portable or movable. "Antenna" includes devices having active elements extending in any direction, and directional beam-type arrays having elements carried by and disposed from a generally horizontal boom that may be mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the boom and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the antenna. 
"Antenna-Facade mounted" (also know as Building Mounted) means any antenna, directly attached or affixed to the elevation of a building, tank, tower, or other structure. 
"Antenna-Ground mounted" means any antenna with its base, whether consisting of single or multiple posts, placed directly on the ground or a single mast less than fifteen (15) feet tall and six inches in diameter. 
"Antenna-Parabolic" (also known as Satellite Dish Antenna) means any device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured that is shallow, dish, cone, horn, bowl or cornucopia shaped and is used to transmit or receive electromagnetic or radio frequency communication/signals in a specific directional pattern. 
"Approved engineer" means a radio frequency engineer or licensed electrical engineer specializing in EMF or RFR studies approved by the development services director to conduct analysis required pursuant to this chapter. 
"Co-location" means the location of two or more wireless communication facilities on a single support structure or otherwise sharing a common location. Co-location shall also include the location of wireless communication facilities with other facilities such as water tanks, light standards, and other utility facilities and structures. 
"Lattice tower" means a support structure, erected on the ground that consists of metal crossed strips or bars to support antennas and related equipment. 
"Monopole" means a single pole support structure greater than fifteen (15) feet in height erected on the ground or on a structure to support antennas and related communications equipment. 
"Owner or operator" (also provider or service provider) means the person, entity or agency primarily responsible for installation and maintenance of the facility, which may or may not be the same person or entity which is the owner of the property on which the facility is located. 
"Personal wireless services" means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
"Public property" means all real property owned, operated or controlled by the city, other than public right-of-way and any privately-owned area within the city's jurisdiction which is not yet, but is designated as a proposed public place on a tentative subdivision map or other plan approved by city. 
"Public right-of-way" means any public street, public way, public place or rights-of-way, now laid out or dedicated, and the space on, above or below it, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, owned, operated and/or controlled by the city or subject to an easement owned by city and any privately-owned area within city's jurisdiction which is not yet, but is designated as a proposed public place on a tentative subdivision map approved by city. 
"Readily visible" means an object is readily visible if it can be seen from street level by a person with normal vision, and distinguished as an antenna or other component of a wireless telecommunications facility, due to the fact that it stands out as a prominent feature of the landscape, protrudes above or out from the building or structure ridgeline, or is otherwise not sufficiently camouflaged or designed to be compatible with the appurtenant architecture or building materials. A stealth facility is one that is not readily visible. 
"Related equipment" means all equipment necessary for or related to the provision of personal wireless services. Such equipment may include, but is not limited to, cable, conduit and connectors, equipment pads, equipment shelters, cabinets, buildings and access ladders. 
"Stealth facility" means any wireless telecommunications facility that is not readily visible because it has been designed to blend into the surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive. Examples may include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas that are painted and treated as architectural element to blend with the existing building, monopoles that are disguised as flag poles or public art, or camouflaged using existing vegetation. A pole or tower with antennas that are flush with or do not protrude above or out from the pole or antenna is not considered to be a stealth facility unless the pole or tower is an existing pole or tower, existing utility pole or tower, or existing light standard or street light, or replacement thereof. 
"Structure ridgeline" means the line along the top of an existing roof or top of a structure, including existing parapets or mechanical equipment screens. 
"Telecommunications" means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the content of the information as sent and received as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
"Telecommunications equipment" means equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications carrier to provide telecommunications services, and includes software integral to such equipment (including upgrades) that is not located, in whole or in part, in, above, or below streets, public rights-of-way or other public property. 
"Telecommunications service" means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly or indirectly to any person as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
"Telecommunications tower" means any mast, pole, monopole, lattice tower, or other structure designed and primarily used to support antennas. A ground or building mounted mast greater than fifteen (15) feet tall and six inches in diameter supporting one or more antennas, dishes, arrays, etc. shall be considered a telecommunication tower. 
"View corridor" means any significant vista that substantially enhances the value and enjoyment of real property. 
"Wireless telecommunications facilities" means personal wireless service facilities as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, including, but not limited to, facilities that transmit and/or receive electromagnetic signals for cellular radiotelephone service, personal communications services, enhanced specialized mobile services, paging systems, and related technologies. Such facilities include antennas, microwave dishes, parabolic antennas, and all other types of equipment used in the transmission or reception of such signals; telecommunication towers or similar structures supporting said equipment; associated equipment cabinets and/or buildings; and all other accessory development used for the provision of personal wireless services. These facilities do not include radio towers, television towers, and government-operated public safety networks. 
(Ord. 02-142 § 1 (part))  
17.80.040 - General requirements. 
In addition to any other requirements imposed by this chapter, all wireless telecommunications facilities on property other than the public right of way in the city of Shasta Lake shall be consistent with: 
A.  The Shasta Lake general plan, adopted area plans, and other adopted policies and guidelines, and all other applicable provisions of the zoning code; 
B.  Applicable regulations and standards of any other governmental agency with jurisdiction over the installation or operation of wireless telecommunications facilities including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, and the California Public Utilities Commission; 
C.  Any applicable discretionary permits affecting the subject property except to the extent the planning commission may modify such requirements. 
(Ord. 02-142 § 1 (part))  
17.80.050 - Minimum application requirements. 
Applications for wireless telecommunication facilities pursuant to this chapter, shall include: 
A.  A narrative description and map showing the coverage area of the provider's existing facilities and the specific site that is the subject of the application. 
The narrative shall include information regarding the reasons why a permit is being sought (for example, whether a new antenna is necessary to accommodate increased demand or to fill a "dead zone" in the provider's coverage area), why the subject site is considered necessary to accomplish the provider's coverage objectives, and why the proposed site is the most appropriate location under existing circumstances. 
The application shall include a statement offering to provide, if requested by the city, sufficient information for an approved radio frequency engineer or licensed electrical engineer specializing in EMF or RFR studies (hereinafter, "an approved engineer") retained by the city at the provider's expense to verify that the site is necessary for the purpose stated in the provider's narrative. 
The application shall also include a statement that the provider, upon request by the city will provide a summary of the alternatives considered and the reasons why the provider did not consider such alternatives feasible. 
B.  An area plan indicating the location of existing cellular tower facilities within a two-mile radius of the proposed site. 
C.  A statement agreeing to allow future co-location on the subject property subject to a determination of feasibility and approval of all necessary permits under this chapter. As used in this chapter, the term "feasibility" or "feasible" shall take into account technical feasibility, radio signal transmitting and receiving requirements, aesthetics, electromagnetic fields, costs, landowner permission, facility owner permission, and all necessary approvals under this chapter and the Uniform Building Code, as well as the common meaning of the term. 
If the owner of a building or structure will not consent to placement of wireless telecommunications facilities on the building or structure, then placement or co-location of wireless telecommunications facilities on the building or structure shall be deemed to be not feasible. If it is not reasonably practical to place or co-locate wireless telecommunications facilities on a building or structure, then placement or co-location of wireless telecommunications facilities on the building or structure shall be deemed to be not feasible. 
D.  If the proposed facility will not be co-located, an explanation of the reasons why co-location is not feasible. 
E.  A description of the services that the applicant proposes to offer or provide in conjunction with the proposed sites. 
F.  Copies of all applicable licenses or other approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the California Public Utilities Commission (PUC), and any other agency of the federal or state government with authority to regulate telecommunications facilities including documentation of compliance with all conditions imposed in conjunction with such licenses or approvals. 
G.  Engineering calculations demonstrating that the proposed facility will comply with all applicable FCC requirements and standards. 
H.  Site plan and elevations drawn to scale. Elevations shall include all structures on which facilities are proposed to be located. 
I.  Description of proposed approach for screening all facilities from public view including plans for installation and maintenance of landscaping, sample exterior materials, colors, stealthing techniques, etc. 
J.  Where applicable, a plan showing existing surrounding landscaping, proposed landscaping, a landscape protection plan for construction, and a maintenance plan including an irrigation plan. 
K.  Plans and elevations, drawn to scale, for facade- or roof-mounted antennas. 
L.  A visual impact analysis including scaled elevation diagrams with the context of the building, before and after-photo simulations, and a map depicting where the photos were taken. Where the installation would be readily visible from the public right-of-way or from surrounding properties, the application shall include an explanation as to why, if screening or other techniques to minimize visibility are not proposed, such approaches to reduce the visibility of the installation would not be effective. The development services director may require the submission of photo overlays, scaled models, renderings, or mockups to document the effectiveness of techniques proposed to minimize visibility. 
M.  Description of the number, type, power rating, frequency range, and dimensions of antennas, equipment cabinets, and related wireless telecommunications facilities proposed to be installed. 
N.  A statement that, at the discretion of the development services director, the applicant will pay the reasonable actual cost and a reasonable administrative fee for hiring an independent qualified radio frequency or electrical engineer to evaluate any technical aspect of the proposed telecommunication facility, including, but not limited to, compliance with applicable federal emission standards, feasibility of co-location, need for proposed location and suitability of alternate sites, potential for interference with existing or planned public safety emergency response telecommunication facilities, or analysis of feasibility of alternate screening methods or devices. 
Any proprietary information disclosed to the city or the consultant in confidence shall not be a public record and shall remain confidential and not be disclosed to any third party without the express consent of the applicant. The city shall return all proprietary information to the applicant and not retain any copies of such information once its decision is final. 
O.  A statement that prior to obtaining a building permit to erect or install the proposed facility, the applicant shall either secure a bond or provide financial assurances, in a form acceptable to the development services director, for the removal of the facility in the event that is use is abandoned or the approval is otherwise terminated. 
P.  The development services director may require any other information deemed necessary in order to process the application in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 02-142 § 1 (part))  
17.80.060 - Locational requirements. 
A.  Wireless telecommunications facilities may be allowed in any zoning district pursuant to approval of a use permit by the planning commission pursuant to zoning code Section 17.92.020. 
B.  Any expansion of an existing wireless telecommunications facility over and above the limitations established by the original use permit shall require the approval of a subsequent use permit by the planning commission pursuant to zoning code Section 17.92.020 to determine whether additional mitigation measures, including additional stealthing techniques or conditions of approval are required. 
C.  No wireless telecommunications facilities shall be located in any residential (R) zoning district unless the planning commission makes the applicable findings required in Section 17.80.110. 
D.  No wireless communications facilities shall be sited on or above a ridgeline or at any other location readily visible from a public park, unless the planning commission makes the applicable findings required in Section 17.80.110. 
E.  When feasible and consistent with other requirements of this chapter, providers of personal wireless services shall co-locate facilities in order to reduce adverse visual impacts. The planning commission may require co-location or multiple-user wireless telecommunication facilities based on a determination that it is feasible and consistent with the purposes and requirements of this chapter. 
F.  No new freestanding facility, including towers, lattice towers and monopoles, shall be located within five thousand (5,000) feet of another freestanding facility, unless appropriate stealth techniques have been used to minimize the visual impact of the facility to the extent feasible, and mounting on a building or co-location on an existing pole or tower is not feasible. 
G.  When determined to be feasible and consistent with the purposes and requirements of this chapter, the planning commission shall require the applicant to make unused space available for future co-location of other wireless telecommunication facilities, including space for different operators providing similar, competing services. 
H.  The development services director may approve minor modifications and aesthetic upgrades that employ stealthing techniques and reduce the size or visibility of any legally established wireless telecommunication facilities without notice or hearing subject to compliance with all existing conditions of approval. 
(Ord. 02-142 § 1 (part))  
17.80.070 - Height requirements. 
A.  The height of a telecommunications tower shall be measured from existing grade below the center of the base of the tower to the top of the tower itself or, if higher, to the tip of the highest antenna or piece of equipment attached thereto. The height of building-mounted antennas shall include the height of that portion of the building on which the antenna is mounted. In the case of "crank-up" or similar towers whose height is adjustable, the height of the tower shall be the maximum height to which it is capable of being raised. 
B.  No antenna telecommunications tower or facade-mounted antenna shall exceed or project above the height limits specified for the district in which the antenna is located unless the planning commission approves a use permit based on the applicable findings required in Section 17.80.110. 
C.  Roof-mounted antennas affixed to an existing or proposed tower or pole shall not extend or project more than fifteen (15) feet above the height limit of the district unless the planning commission approves an exception based on the applicable findings required in Section 17.80.110. So long as the height of the antenna does not exceed the height limit permitted in the district, an additional foot of height will be permitted for every ten feet the antenna is set back from the building parapet, to a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet above the roof surface. 
D.  Roof-mounted or facade-mounted antennas proposed on an existing building, tower, or pole that is legal non-conforming in terms of height shall not extend or project more than fifteen (15) feet above the existing height of the building or structure unless the planning commission approves an exception based on the applicable findings required in Section 17.80.110. 
(Ord. 02-142 § 1 (part))  
17.80.080 - Design requirements. 
In addition to all other requirements set forth in this chapter, all wireless telecommunication facilities shall meet the following design requirements: 
A.  Based on potential aesthetic impact, the order of preference for facility type is: facade mounted, roof mounted, ground mounted, and freestanding tower. If a ground-mounted or freestanding tower is proposed, the application must include an explanation as to why other facility types are not feasible. 
B.  All facilities shall be designed and located to minimize their visibility to the greatest extent feasible, considering technological requirements, by means of placement, screening, stealthing techniques, and camouflage. The applicant shall use the smallest and least visible antennas feasible to accomplish the owner/operator's coverage objectives. All wireless telecommunications facilities proposed for locations where they would be readily visible from the public right-of-way or from the habitable living areas of surrounding residential units shall incorporate appropriate techniques to camouflage or disguise the facility, and/or blend it into the surrounding environment. Facilities shall be compatible in scale and integrated architecturally with the design of surrounding buildings or the natural setting. 
C.  No readily visible antenna shall be placed at a location where it will be in a direct line of sight of a significant or sensitive view corridor, where it would adversely affect a scenic vista, or where it would materially impair the significance of an historical resource or unique archeological resource. 
D.  Colors and materials for facilities shall be chosen to minimize visibility. All visible exterior surfaces shall be construed of non-reflective materials. Facilities shall be painted or textured using colors to match or blend with the primary background. 
E.  Facility lighting shall be designed to meet but not exceed minimum requirements for security, safety or FAA regulations, and in all instances shall be designed to avoid glare and minimize illumination on adjacent properties. Lightning arresters and beacon lights shall not be included in the design of facilities unless required by the FAA. Lightning arresters and beacons shall be included when calculating the height of facilities such as towers, lattice towers and monopoles. 
F.  No advertising shall be placed on telecommunications antennas or other equipment. 
G.  All facilities shall be designed to be resistant to and minimize opportunities for unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti, and other conditions that would result in hazardous conditions, visual blight, or attractive nuisances. The planning commission may require the provision of warning signs, fencing, anti-climbing devices, or other techniques to prevent unauthorized access and vandalism when, because of their location and/or accessibility, antenna facilities have the potential to become an attractive nuisance. The design of the fencing and other access control devices shall be subject to design review. 
H.  Where appropriate and directly related to the applicant's placement, construction, or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities the applicant shall maintain and enhance existing landscaping on the site, including trees, foliage and shrubs, when used for screening unless the planning commission approves appropriate replacement landscaping. Additional landscaping shall be planted as needed to minimize the visual impact of the facility and, when feasible, to block the line of sight between facilities and adjacent residential uses and residentially zoned properties. The planning commission shall determine the appropriate minimum size of new trees and shrubs. 
I.  Facade-mounted equipment shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches from the face of the building or other support structure unless specifically authorized by the planning commission. 
J.  Roof-mounted antennas shall be located in an area of the roof where the visual impact is minimized. Roof-mounted and ground-mounted antennas shall not be placed in direct line of sight of significant or sensitive view corridors or where they adversely affect scenic vistas unless the planning commission finds that the facility incorporates appropriate, creative stealth techniques to camouflage, disguise, and/or blend into the surrounding environment to the extent possible. Roof mounted antennas shall be designed and sited to minimize their visibility and shall be no taller than necessary to meet the operator's service requirements, based on independent analysis by an approved engineer. 
K.  Satellite dish or parabolic antennas shall be situated as close to the ground as possible to reduce visual impact without compromising their function. When screened from pedestrian-level view from the public right-of-way and not readily visible from any property that contains a legally-established residential use, such antennas may be located in any required yard subject to the approval by the planning commission. No such antenna may exceed thirty-nine (39) inches in diameter unless the planning commission finds that a smaller antenna can not feasibly accomplish the provider's technical objectives. The planning commission may require that this determination be based on independent technical analysis by an approved engineer. 
L.  All monopoles and lattice towers shall be designed to be the minimum functional height and width required to support the proposed antenna installation unless a higher monopole or lattice tower will facilitate co-location or other objectives of this chapter. 
M.  In order of preference, ancillary support equipment for facilities shall be located either within a building or structure, on a screened roof top area or structure, or in a rear yard if not readily visible from surrounding properties and the public right of way, unless the planning commission finds that another location is preferable under the circumstances of the application. 
N.  Aboveground and partially buried ancillary equipment including support pads, cabinets, shelters, and buildings shall be located where they will be least visible from surrounding properties and the public right of way and shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with surrounding structures and/or screened using appropriate techniques to camouflage, disguise, and/or blend into the environment including landscaping, color, and other stealthing techniques to minimize their visual impact. 
If the planning commission determines than an equipment cabinet is not or can not be adequately screened from surrounding properties or from public view or architecturally treated to blend in with the environment, the equipment cabinet shall be placed underground or inside the existing building where the antenna is located unless the planning commission finds that such placement is not feasible or consistent with the objectives of this chapter and other applicable requirements. 
O.  No telecommunications antenna or ancillary support equipment shall be located within any setback or between the face of a building and a public right of way without approval by the planning commission except for facilities that are completely subterranean. 
P.  When antennas are co-located, the city may limit the number of antennas with related equipment and providers to be located at any site and adjacent sites in order to prevent negative visual impacts associated with multiple facilities. Architectural and other camouflaging treatment shall be coordinated between all users on each site. 
Q.  At the time of modification or upgrade of facilities, existing equipment shall, to the extent feasible, be replaced with equipment of equal or greater technical capacity and reduced size so as to reduce visual and noise impacts. 
R.  Proposed facilities shall not reduce the number of available parking spaces below the amount required pursuant to the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 02-142 § 1 (part))  
17.80.090 - Operation and maintenance standards. 
All wireless telecommunication facilities shall at all times comply with the following operation and maintenance standards. Failure to comply shall be considered a violation of conditions of approval subject to enforcement pursuant to provisions of this chapter. 
A.  Each owner or operator of a wireless telecommunications facility shall provide signage identifying the name and phone number of a party to contact in event of an emergency. The design, materials, colors, and location of signs shall be subject to design review. The signage shall be attached to the base of any utility pole or light standard to which microcells are affixed. 
B.  Wireless telecommunications facilities and related equipment, including lighting, fences, shields, cabinets, and poles, shall be maintained in good repair, free from trash, debris, litter and graffiti and other forms of vandalism, and any damage from any cause shall be repaired as soon as reasonably possible so as to minimize occurrences of dangerous conditions or visual blight. Graffiti shall be removed from any facility or equipment as soon as practicable, and in no instance more than forty-eight (48) hours from the time of notification by the city. 
C.  The owner or operator of a wireless telecommunications facility shall be responsible for maintaining landscaping in accordance with the approved landscape plan and for replacing any damaged or dead trees, foliage, or other landscaping elements shown on the approved plan. Amendments or modifications to the landscape plan shall be submitted to the development services director for approval. 
D.  Each wireless telecommunications facility shall be operated in a manner that will minimize noise impacts to surrounding residents and persons using nearby parks, trails, and similar recreation areas. Except for emergency repairs, testing and maintenance activities that will be audible beyond the property line shall only occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. All air conditioning units and any other equipment that may emit noise that would be audible from beyond the property line shall be enclosed or equipped with noise attenuation devices. Backup generators shall only be operated during periods of power outages or for testing. At no time shall equipment noise from any source exceed the standards specified in the Shasta Lake general plan. 
E.  All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be designed to meet the following requirements: 
1.  The exterior walls and roof covering of all aboveground equipment shelters and cabinets shall be constructed of materials rated as nonflammable in the Uniform Building Code. 
2.  Openings in all aboveground equipment shelters and cabinets shall be protected against penetration by fire and windblown embers to the extent feasible. 
3.  Material used as supports for antennas shall be fire resistant, termite proof, and subject to all applicable requirements of the Uniform Building Code. 
4.  Telecommunications antenna towers shall be designed to withstand forces expected during earthquakes to the extent feasible building-mounted facilities shall be anchored so that a quake does not dislodge them or tip them over. All equipment mounting racks and attached equipment shall be anchored so that a quake would not tip them over, throw equipment off its shelves, or otherwise damage equipment. 
5.  All connections between various components of the wireless telecommunications facility and necessary power and telephone lines shall, to the extent feasible, be protected against damage by fire, flooding, and earthquake. Reasonable measures shall be taken to keep wireless telecommunication facilities in operation in the event of a natural disaster. 
F.  Routine maintenance and repairs shall be limited between the hours of 8 a.m. to 7 p.m. Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. 
G.  Vehicle and personnel access to sites for maintenance and repairs shall not be from residential streets or adjacent residential properties to the maximum extent possible. 
(Ord. 02-142 § 1 (part))  
17.80.100 - Requirement for certification of facilities. 
A.  No wireless telecommunications facility or combination of facilities shall at any time produce power densities that exceed the Federal Communications Commission's (FCC) limits for electric and magnetic field strength and power density for transmitters. In order to ensure continuing compliance with all applicable emission standards, all wireless telecommunications facilities shall be reviewed by an approved engineer in accordance with the schedule and procedures set forth below. 
All reasonable costs of such inspections shall be born by the owner or operator of the facility. The city may require, at the operator's expense, independent verification of the results of any analysis. If an operator of a telecommunications facility fails to supply the required reports or fails to correct a violation of the FCC standard following notification, the use permit is subject to modification or revocation by the planning commission following a public hearing. 
1.  Within forty-five (45) days of initial operation or modification of a telecommunications facility, the operator of each telecommunications antenna shall submit to the development services director written certification by an approved engineer that the facility's radio frequency emissions are in compliance with the approved application and any required conditions. The engineer shall measure the radio frequency radiation of the approved facility and determine if it meets the FCC requirements of the report of these measurements, and the engineer's findings with respect to compliance with the FCC's MPE limits shall be submitted to the development services director. 
If the report shows that the facility does not comply with applicable FCC requirements, the owner or operator shall cease operation of the facility until the facility complies with, or has been modified to comply with, this standard. Proof of compliance shall be a certification provided by the engineer who prepared the original report. In order to assure the objectivity of the analysis, the development services director may require, at the applicant's expense, independent verification of the results of the analysis. 
2.  Within two years of approval and once every two years thereafter for a period of four years, and at any time within such six-year period within ninety (90) days of any change in applicable FCC radio frequency standards or of any modification of wireless telecommunications facilities, the operator of each wireless telecommunications antenna shall submit to the development services director written certification by an approved engineer demonstrating continued compliance with all applicable FCC radio frequency standards. The engineer shall measure the radio frequency radiation of the approved facility and determine if it meets FCC requirements. 
3.  After the initial six-year period following approval has elapsed, the operator of each wireless telecommunications facility shall only be required to submit to the development services director written certification by an approved engineer of compliance with applicable FCC radio frequency standards within ninety (90) days of any change in applicable FCC radio frequency standards or of any modification of the facility requiring a new submission to the FCC to determine compliance with emission standards. 
If calculated levels exceed eighty (80) percent of the FCC's MPE limits, the operator of the facility shall hire an approved engineer to measure the actual exposure levels. If calculated levels are not in compliance with the FCC's MPE limit, the operator shall cease operation of the facility until the facility is brought into compliance with the FCC's standards and all other applicable requirements. A report of these calculations, required measurements, if any, and the engineer's findings with respect to compliance with the current MPE limits shall be submitted to the development services director. 
4.  If the development services director at any time finds that there is good cause to believe that a telecommunications antenna is not in compliance with applicable FCC radio frequency standards, he or she may require the operator to submit written certification that the facility is in compliance with such FCC standards. 
B.  The owner or operator of any wireless telecommunications facility that was approved by the city before the effective date of this chapter, shall submit the following to the development services director within six months from the date of notification: 
1.  A written summary certifying the commencement date and expiration date of any lease, license, property right, or other use agreement for the facility, including any options or renewal terms specified therein. The information disclosed in this summary is, and shall remain, confidential, shall not be made a matter of public record, and shall not be disclosed to any third party without the express written consent of the applicant; 
2.  Written certification by approved engineer that the facility's radio frequency emissions are in compliance with the approved application and any required conditions. The engineer shall measure the radio frequency radiation of the approved facility and determine if it meets the FCC requirements. If the report shows that the facility does not comply with applicable FCC requirements, the owner or operator shall cease operation of the facility until the facility is brought into compliance. In order to assure the objectivity of the analysis, the city may require, at the applicant's expense, independent verification of the results of the analysis. 
C.  Any facility that was approved by the city prior to the effective date of this chapter and which does not comply with this chapter on the date of its adoption shall be considered a lawful nonconforming use provided that the owner or operator submits the information required in subsection B of this section. 
D.  Failure to submit the information required in this section will be considered a violation of the zoning ordinance. Any facility found in violation may be ordered to terminate operations by planning commission following a duly noticed public hearing. 
(Ord. 02-142 § 1 (part))  
17.80.110 - Findings required for approval. 
In order to approve any use permit under this chapter, the planning commission must find that the proposed project is consistent with the general requirements of this chapter and any specific requirements applicable to the proposed facility. Additionally, the planning commission must make the finding required in subsection B and any other applicable finding required by this section. 
A.  All findings must be based on substantial information in the record such as, where required, technical analysis by an approved radio frequency engineer, letters from telecommunications operators with existing facilities stating reasons for not permitting co-location, calculations by a state-licensed structural engineer, or other evidence. The planning commission may require that any determination required by this chapter be supported by independent analysis by an approved engineer retained by the city. 
B.  In order to approve a use permit for any wireless telecommunications antenna, the planning commission must find that the proposed antenna or related facility, operating alone or in conjunction with other telecommunications facilities: 
1.  Will comply with all applicable state and federal standards and requirements; and 
2.  Appropriate stealth techniques have been used to minimize the visual impact of the facility. 
C.  The planning commission must also make one or more of the following findings to the extent they are applicable: 
1.  To establish a wireless telecommunications antenna that is not co-located with other existing or proposed facilities or a new, free-standing pole or tower, the planning commission must find that co-location is not feasible, would have more significant adverse effects on views or other environmental considerations, is not permitted by the property owner, would impair the quality of service to the existing facility, or would require existing facilities at the same location to go off-line for a significant period of time. 
2.  To establish a wireless telecommunications antenna that would exceed the height limits allowed under Section 17.80.070 and would be readily visible from the public right-of-way, from the habitable living areas of surrounding residential units, or from a public park, the planning commission must find that appropriate stealth techniques have been used to minimized the visual impact of the facility, that it is not technically feasible to incorporate additional measures to minimize the visibility of the installation, and that it is not feasible to accomplish the applicant's service objectives from a different location. 
3.  To approve a use permit to allow establishment of a satellite dish or parabolic antenna exceeding thirty-nine (39) inches in diameter, the planning commission must find that a smaller or different antenna can not feasibly accomplish the provider's technical objectives and that the facility will not be readily visible from the public right-of-way, from the habitable living areas of residential units, or from a public park. 
4.  To approve a use permit to allow establishment of a wireless telecommunication antenna or related facility in any residential (R) zoning district or at any location at which it would be readily visible from any residentially-zone property within three hundred (300) feet that contains a legally established residential use, from the habitable living areas of surrounding residential units, the planning commission must find that the placement, construction, or modification of wireless telecommunications facility in such location is necessary for the provision of personal wireless services to Shasta Lake residents and businesses, or their owners, customers, guests, or invitees, or other persons traveling in or about the city. 
The planning commission shall base such finding of necessity on substantial evidence that: 
a.  Without such antenna or facility, the operator will be unable to provide personal wireless services to its customers in the proposed coverage area or its existing coverage in the proposed coverage area will remain substantially inferior to its coverage in other areas of the city or; 
b.  Denial of the application would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of telecommunications services, unreasonably discriminating among service providers, or constituting any other violation of state or federal law. The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the denial would result in such a violation. 
(Ord. 02-142 § 1 (part))  
17.80.120 - Cessation of operations. 
A.  Within thirty (30) days of cessation of operations of any wireless telecommunications facility approved pursuant to this chapter, the operator shall notify the development services director in writing. The permit for said wireless telecommunications facility shall be deemed lapsed and of no further effect six months thereafter unless: 
1.  The development services director has determined that the same operator resumed operation within six months of the notice; or 
2.  The city has received an application to transfer the permit to another operator. 
B.  No later than thirty (30) days after a permit has lapsed under the preceding subsection, the operator shall remove all wireless telecommunication facilities from the site. If the operator fails to do, the property owner shall be responsible for removal, and may use any bond or other assurances provided by the operator pursuant to the requirements of Section 17.80.050 to do so. If such facilities are not removed, the site shall be deemed to be a nuisance and the city may call the bond to pay for removal. 
C.  Failure to inform the development services director of cessation of operations of any existing facility shall constitute a violation of the zoning ordinance and be grounds for: 
1.  Revocation or modification of the use permit: 
2.  Removal of the facilities at the applicant's or property owner's expense by calling of any bond or other assurance secured by the operator pursuant to the requirements of Section 17.80.050; and/or 
D.  Any FCC-licensed telecommunications carrier that is buying, leasing, or considering a transfer of ownership of an already approved facility, shall provide written notification to the development services director. 
The development services director may require submission of any supporting materials or documentation necessary to determine that the proposed use is in compliance with the existing use permit and all of its conditions including, but not limited to, statements, photographs, plans, drawings, models, and analysis by a state-licensed radio frequency engineer demonstrating compliance with all applicable regulations and standards of the Federal Communications Commission and the California Public Utilities Commission. If the development services director determines that the proposed operation is not consistent with the existing use permit, he or she shall notify the applicant who may revise the application or apply for modification to the use permit. 
(Ord. 02-142 § 1 (part))  
CHAPTER 17.81 - AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
 
17.81.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the affordable housing chapter is to provide for a variety of incentives for the creation of affordable and accessible housing. This chapter implements portions of state law, sections of which are referenced throughout the chapter as well as the city housing element's policies and implementation programs. Each section provides requirements as they relate to the individual incentive. Each section identifies in which zoning district the proposed use is allowed and the development standards to be met for the use. Administration and enforcement of the standards are included in the sections where enforcement is required. 
(Ord. No. 14-223, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.81.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)." An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) includes all units meeting the requirements of Section 17.81.030. These types of uses have been previously referred to as family care residences, guest houses, second units, servant's quarters, and senior care residences. All ADUs must meet the standards in Section 17.81.030. Only one ADU may be constructed on an individual parcel in addition to a primary dwelling unit. 
B.  "Emergency homeless shelter." Emergency shelters are defined as housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person (California Health and Safety Code Section 50801(e)). Such housing is considered temporary but may be continuous for a period of the six-months occupancy. Emergency shelters must meet the development and operational standards in Section 17.81.060. 
C.  "Floor area ratio (FAR)." As defined in Section 17.02.228. 
D.  Reserved ("live work"). 
E.  Reserved ("mixed use"). 
F.  "Reasonable accommodation." Reasonable accommodation shall mean a program by which the City of Shasta Lake removes constraints or provides reasonable accommodation for housing designed for, intended for occupancy by, or with supportive services for, persons with disabilities. 
G.  "Single-room occupancy (SRO)." A single room occupancy (SRO) means an efficiency unit, as defined by the California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1, intended or designed to be used, or which is used, rented, or hired out, to be occupied, or which is occupied, as a primary residence, by individuals. 
An SRO does not include any institution in which persons are housed or detained under legal restraint or hospitalized or otherwise under medical, nursing, or psychiatric care, or fraternity or sorority houses. 
An SRO provides permanent living space that may or may not have individual bathroom or kitchen facilities within a building that provides for four or more units. 
H.  "Supportive housing." Supportive housing means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. (California Health and Safety Code 50675.14(b)(2)). 
I.  "Target population." Target population means persons with low incomes having one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 4500 et seq.), and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated youth, families, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 50675.14. 
J.  "Transitional housing and transitional housing development." Transitional housing and transitional housing development means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. 
(Ord. No. 14-223, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.81.030 - Accessory dwelling units (second units and other accessory units). 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of this section is to comply with the California Government Code pertaining to second dwellings as a means to increase the supply of smaller affordable housing units. One accessory dwelling, which meets all of the requirements of this section, may be approved per lot. 
Second dwellings are now defined as part of the accessory dwelling unit (ADU) definition in this chapter, along with other accessory dwelling units previously referred to as family care residences, guest houses, servant's quarters and senior care residences. 
This section establishes standards for the development of ADUs to ensure that they remain compatible with the existing neighborhood. Any application that meets the requirements of this section shall be approved as a ministerial act, without a public hearing, and is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). An exception would be if the building site is on a hillside and the access/building pad requires CEQA review. 
B.  Location. An ADU may be located in the R-R, I-R, R-1 or R-2 zoning districts as a permitted use, provided it meets the requirements of this section. Applications for ADUs can be denied if: 
1.  The proposed unit is located on, or adjacent to, real property listed in the state register of historic places; 
2.  The ADU will not be in compliance with all provisions of this section; or 
3.  The property access or the building pad is on a hillside that is over an average of twenty (20) percent slope. 
C.  Development Standards. An ADU pursuant to this chapter shall be approved only if it complies with the following development standards: 
1.  Density. The ADU shall not exceed the allowable general plan density for the lot upon which the ADU is located if the parcel is over one acre. For all lots under an acre the density permitted shall be the FAR as noted in Section 17.81.030(C)(3). 
2.  Location on Lot. An ADU may be attached or detached from the existing primary dwelling unit. If detached, the ADU shall be separated from the primary dwelling unit by a minimum of six feet and shall meet the setbacks of the zoning district in which it is located. If attached, the ADU must meet all building setbacks required of the primary dwelling. 
3.  Unit Size for detached or attached ADUs. The floor area of the ADU, either attached or detached, shall not be less than four hundred (400) square feet. Property owners shall declare upon applying for a building permit for an ADU which unit will be considered the primary dwelling unit and which will be the ADU. Such declarations shall be included in the deed restriction to be recorded against the property so as to notify future purchasers. 
The total of the two units' sizes may not exceed the following floor area ratio (FAR): 
a.  The total of the structures' square footage (including garages, outbuildings, or other structures requiring a building permit) shall not exceed forty-five (45) percent of the floor area ratio (FAR) of the lot for lot sizes that are up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet; and 
b.  The total of the structures' square footage (including garages, outbuildings, or other structures requiring a building permit) shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the floor area ratio (FAR) of the lot for lot sizes that are over ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
4.  Lot Coverage. Construction of the accessory dwelling unit (ADU) shall not result in lot coverage in excess of the limit established by the zoning district in which it is located. 
5.  Height. An attached or detached ADU shall not exceed two stories or a maximum height of twenty-two (22) feet at the building plate and twenty-eight (28) feet at the peak of the roof. 
6.  Architectural Compatibility. The ADU shall incorporate the same or similar architectural features, building materials, and colors as the primary dwelling unit. 
7.  Off-Street Parking. One off-street parking space shall be provided for every ADU. The required parking for the ADU may be covered or uncovered. As governed by state law, this additional space may be a tandem space within a driveway or may be located in the front yard setback immediately adjacent to the driveway, unless specific findings are made that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based upon specific site or regional topographical or fire and life safety conditions. If the primary dwelling unit does not meet current parking requirements then parking that meets the parking ordinance must be installed as part of the ADU construction. 
8.  Utilities. One electric, water, and gas meter shall be allowed on the property per each primary dwelling unit and ADU. Both meters shall be in the property owner's name for the purposes of billing by the city. Both the primary dwelling and ADU shall be tied into the city's sewer system if available. For areas where sewer service is not available, the primary dwelling unit and ADU shall be connected to a septic system approved by the Shasta County Department of Environmental Health. 
9.  Permanent Foundation. A permanent foundation shall be required of all ADUs. 
10.  Development Standards. 
a.  The development standards for all ADUs shall be the same as the zoning district in which it is located. Manufactured homes shall be subject to the development standards included in Section 17.84.090. 
b.  When the new structure is constructed on the front of the lot facing the street, it shall be constructed to look as though there is only one unit on the lot. On a corner lot, the main entrance for the primary dwelling unit may face one street, and the main entrance of the ADU may face the other street. 
c.  Exceptions may be made if approved by the development services director or his/her designee based on justification that the design of the development improves the architectural compatibility. 
d.  Windows located on the side yard sides will be permitted only on the top third of the second story for the ADU or primary unit allowing for light transmission (includes clerestory windows). Permanently opaque windows may be installed at any height with the approval of the development services director or his/her designee. 
D.  California Building Code requirements which apply to additions to existing single-family dwellings, and construction of new dwelling units, as appropriate, shall apply to ADUs. 
E.  Approval by the Shasta County Environmental Health Department is required where an onsite waste treatment system is being used. 
F.  Deed Restrictions. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the property owner shall enter into an agreement with the city acknowledging the restrictions for an ADU. Said agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. The agreement shall contain a reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by the owner stating that: 
1.  The ADU shall be considered legal only so long as either the primary dwelling unit or the ADU is occupied by the owner of the property. If the city determines the property owner no longer resides on the property, a notice shall be sent to the county assessor's office notifying them that the property owner is no longer eligible to claim the homeowner's property tax exemption. A notice of violation will also be recorded with the county recorder's office so that it appears in the chain of title. Abatement proceedings will be initiated through the city's abatement process. 
2.  Neither the primary dwelling nor the ADU may be sold separately. Either unit may be rented so long as the owner occupies one of the units. 
3.  The restrictions shall be binding upon any successor in ownership of the property, and lack of compliance may result in legal action against the property owner. 
G.  Preexisting ADUs. ADUs existing prior to adoption of this section, the use of which is nonconforming in the zoning district in which it is located, may be considered conforming if the development services director or his/her designee issues a zoning clearance determining that the ADU complies with all of the requirements of this section, which includes compliance with planning, building and fire codes. Prior to issuance of the zoning clearance, an agreement shall be recorded pursuant to Subsection F of this section. 
H.  Building and Planning Standards. No conversions of other structures, including garages, out buildings, second floors over garages or other buildings shall be permitted unless replacement parking is provided as required by the zoning district in which it is located. 
I.  Temporary Emergency Use. A mobile home, no older than ten years with a current license from the state department of housing and community development, may be occupied on a temporary basis pursuant to approval of an administrative permit by the development services director or his/her designee provided: 
1.  The temporary mobile home shall not be considered a permanent ADU. 
2.  A recreational vehicle may be occupied for emergency use if it satisfies the following criteria: 
a.  It shall be certified by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
b.  It shall have a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) seal. 
c.  It shall be no older than ten years old. 
3.  The temporary use is limited to direct, primary, family members to include parents, siblings, children, grandparents, and grandchildren. 
4.  The mobile home shall utilize existing water and wastewater service available on-site. 
5.  The temporary mobile home shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, and shall be placed on the rear of the lot or screened with wood or block fencing. 
6.  The maximum period for temporary ADUs would be six months in order for the property owner to add to the dwelling or provide a permanent ADU. No more than one six-month extension of time may be granted by the development services director or his/her designee. The decision of the development services director may be appealed to the planning commission. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. Such appeals shall follow the same procedures for variance and use permit appeals in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.92.030. 
7.  The temporary mobile home must be removed from the site at the end of the emergency period. No storage of the mobile home is permitted on-site. A notice of violation will be recorded with the county recorder if the mobile home is not removed after the emergency period. Abatement proceedings will be initiated through the city's abatement process. 
(Ord. No. 14-223, § I, 5-20-2014; Ord. No. 18-270, § 1, 4-3-2018)  
17.81.040 - Reserved (agreements).  
17.81.050 - Density bonus. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement California Government Code Sections 65915—65919. The city's intent in including this section is to provide incentives to developers of affordable housing which meet the standards for affordable housing. 
For the purpose of allocating a density bonus, affordable housing means developments with households with less than eighty (80) percent of the county's median income. All density bonuses and incentives are targeted to developments which meet the requirements for long-term affordability. 
B.  Reference for Density Bonuses and Applicability. All application of density bonuses as required by California Government Code Sections 65915—65919 shall be governed by the aforementioned Government Code Sections and subsequent amendments. 
C.  Application. Developers of property asking for density bonuses shall apply for said density bonus using application forms provided by the development services department. If other discretionary actions are required, consideration of the density bonus shall be processed together with the other discretionary actions unless waived by the development services director or his/her designee. 
In all other instances, the development services director or his/her designee shall have thirty (30) days to determine if the density bonus shall be applied and a response provided to the developer and property owner. 
D.  Long-term Affordability. All developments which receive approval of density bonuses shall enter into a long term affordability agreement for affordable housing which shall be recorded prior to receiving a building permit for any of the structures in the development. The affordability clauses in the agreement shall follow the applicable California Code sections governing the density bonus. 
(Ord. No. 14-223, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.81.060 - Emergency homeless shelters. 
A.  Purpose. California Government Code Section 65583(a)(4) requires that each jurisdiction provide for at least one zoning district in which an emergency shelter must be permitted. The Government Code also permits jurisdictions to provide for specified development standards in providing an emergency shelter. 
B.  Zone. Emergency homeless shelters shall be allowed in the Community Commercial (C-2) zoning district as a permitted use subject to the following development standards as permitted by California Government Code Section 65583, and incorporated in this section. 
C.  Number of Beds. The maximum number of beds or persons permitted to be served nightly by the facility shall be fifteen (15). The number of beds may be exceeded if an administrative permit is issued by the development services director or his/her designee based on the following findings: 
1.  The city has been declared a disaster area by either the Governor or the President; or 
2.  The annual homeless count exceeds fifteen (15) homeless people within the city. 
D.  Parking. One uncovered parking space per bed shall be required. A reduced number of spaces may be permitted if an administrative permit is issued by the development services director or his/her designee to justify fewer spaces. 
E.  Waiting Space. Exterior waiting space shall be provided that is covered and handicapped accessible in the amount of uncluttered space of twenty-five (25) square feet per bed. Interior waiting space shall be provided that will provide for fifteen-person occupancy, is handicapped accessible and is approved by the fire department for exiting. 
F.  On-site management shall be provided for all hours the shelter is open for occupancy and shall include a period of one hour before opening and one hour after closing should the facility be open less than twenty-four (24) hours. 
G.  Emergency shelters may be adjacent to each other if they are operated by one management operator such that the management of the facilities are coordinated but no more than thirty (30) beds shall be located closer than three hundred (300) feet apart. If common management is not available, emergency shelters shall not be closer than three (300) hundred feet apart. 
H.  The maximum length of stay for each person shall be no longer than six months. 
I.  Outside security lighting shall be provided for all entrances and exits, parking and storage areas. Lighting will meet California Energy Commission lighting standards for night lighting and will not expose adjacent properties to light or glare. 
J.  Security shall be provided for the timeframe during which the shelter is in operation. For a shelter housing a small number of people the security provision may be waived by the development services director or his/her designee with an administrative application if on-site management is adequate. Emergency contact information shall be required for twenty-four-hour access to management staff that must be local. 
K.  Emergency shelter development is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
(Ord. No. 14-223, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.81.070 - Reserved (incentives).  
17.81.080 - Reserved (live work).  
17.81.090 - Reserved (mixed use).  
17.81.100 - Reasonable accommodation. 
A.  Purpose. This section provides a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the Acts) in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies, and procedures. 
B.  Applicability. A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has a record of such impairment. This section is intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled under the Acts. Reasonable accommodation accrues to the person not the land. If the person needing the reasonable accommodation moves out the accommodation is no longer valid. 
C.  Request for Reasonable Accommodation. A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative, or any entity, when the application of a zoning law or other land use regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. Such a request may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards, and practices for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice. 
D.  Application. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an application form provided by the development services department and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The applicant's name, address and telephone number. 
2.  Address and parcel number of the property for which the request is being made. 
3.  The current actual use of the property. 
4.  The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the Acts. 
5.  The zoning code provision, regulation, or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested. 
6.  Why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual. 
E.  Review with Other Land Use Applications. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires other discretionary approval (including but not limited to: conditional use permit, design review, general plan amendment, zone change, annexation, etc.), then the applicant shall file the information required by subsection D together for concurrent review with the application for discretionary approval. If no other approvals are necessary, the request alone is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
F.  Review Authority and Process. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the development services director or his/her designee, or his designee if no approval is sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation. The director, or his designee, shall make a written determination within fifteen (15) business days and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation. 
G.  Findings. The written decision to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be consistent with the Acts and shall be based on consideration of the following factors: 
1.  Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request, shall be used by an individual disabled under the Acts. 
2.  Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Acts. 
3.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city. 
4.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning. 
5.  Potential impact on surrounding uses. 
6.  Physical attributes of the property and structures. 
7.  Alternative reasonable accommodations which may provide an equivalent level of benefit. 
H.  Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the development services director or his/her designee may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by subsection G above. 
I.  Appeal of Determination. A determination by the development services director to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation may be appealed to the planning commission. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. Such appeals shall follow the same procedures for variance and use permit appeals in accordance with the provisions of Shasta Lake Municipal Code Section 17.92.030. 
(Ord. No. 14-223, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.81.110 - Required findings for denial of affordable housing developments. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes the required findings that must be made by the development services director or his/her designee, the planning commission or the city council when denying an affordable housing development or zoning for such developments pursuant to California Government Code Section 65589.5. 
B.  State Required Findings. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65589.5(d), the City shall not disapprove a housing development project, including farmworker housing as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 50199.50 of the Health and Safety Code, for very low, low-, or moderate-income households, or an emergency shelter, or condition approval in a manner that renders the project infeasible for development for the use of very low, low-, or moderate-income households, or an emergency shelter, including through the use of design review standards, unless it makes written findings, based upon substantial evidence in the record, as to one of the following: 
1.  The jurisdiction has adopted a housing element pursuant to this article that has been revised in accordance with Section 65588, is in substantial compliance with this article, and the jurisdiction has met or exceeded its share of the regional housing need allocation pursuant to Section 65584 for the planning period for the income category proposed for the housing development project, provided that any disapproval or conditional approval shall not be based on any of the reasons prohibited by Section 65008. If the housing development project includes a mix of income categories, and the jurisdiction has not met or exceeded its share of the regional housing need for one or more of those categories, then this paragraph shall not be used to disapprove or conditionally approve the project. The share of the regional housing need met by the jurisdiction shall be calculated consistently with the forms and definitions that may be adopted by the department of housing and community development pursuant to Section 65400. In the case of an emergency shelter, the jurisdiction shall have met or exceeded the need for emergency shelter, as identified pursuant to paragraph (7) of subdivision (a) of Section 65583. Any disapproval or conditional approval pursuant to this paragraph shall be in accordance with applicable law, rule, or standards. 
2.  The development project or emergency shelter as proposed would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households or rendering the development of the emergency shelter financially infeasible. As used in this paragraph, a "specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. Inconsistency with the zoning ordinance or general plan land use designation shall not constitute a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety. 
3.  The denial of the project or imposition of conditions is required in order to comply with specific state or federal law, and there is no feasible method to comply without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households or rendering the development of the emergency shelter financially infeasible. 
4.  The development project or emergency shelter is proposed on land zoned for agriculture or resource preservation that is surrounded on at least two sides by land being used for agricultural or resource preservation purposes, or which does not have adequate water or wastewater facilities to serve the project. 
5.  The development project or emergency shelter is inconsistent with both the jurisdiction's zoning ordinance and general plan land use designation as specified in any element of the general plan as it existed on the date the application was deemed complete, and the jurisdiction has adopted a revised housing element in accordance with Section 65588 that is in substantial compliance with this article. 
a.  This paragraph cannot be utilized to disapprove or conditionally approve a housing development project if the development project is proposed on a site that is identified as suitable or available for very low, low-, or moderate-income households in the jurisdiction's housing element, and consistent with the density specified in the housing element, even though it is inconsistent with both the jurisdiction's zoning ordinance and general plan land use designation. 
b.  If the local agency has failed to identify in the inventory of land in its housing element sites that can be developed for housing within the planning period and that are sufficient to provide for the jurisdiction's share of the regional housing need for all income levels pursuant to Section 65584, then this paragraph shall not be utilized to disapprove or conditionally approve a housing development project proposed for a site designated in any element of the general plan for residential uses or designated in any element of the general plan for commercial uses if residential uses are permitted or conditionally permitted within commercial designations. In any action in court, the burden of proof shall be on the local agency to show that its housing element does identify adequate sites with appropriate zoning and development standards and with services and facilities to accommodate the local agency's share of the regional housing need for the very low and low-income categories. 
c.  If the local agency has failed to identify a zone or zones where emergency shelters are allowed as a permitted use without a conditional use or other discretionary permit, has failed to demonstrate that the identified zone or zones include sufficient capacity to accommodate the need for emergency shelter identified in paragraph (7) of subdivision (a) of Section 65583, or has failed to demonstrate that the identified zone or zones can accommodate at least one emergency shelter, as required by paragraph (4) of subdivision (a) of Section 65583, then this paragraph shall not be utilized to disapprove or conditionally approve an emergency shelter proposed for a site designated in any element of the general plan for industrial, commercial, or multifamily residential uses. In any action in court, the burden of proof shall be on the local agency to show that its housing element does satisfy the requirements of paragraph (4) of subdivision (a) of Section 65583. 
(Ord. No. 14-223, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.81.120 - Single-room occupancies (SRO). 
A.  Purpose. This section provides for the development of single-room occupancies (SROs) as a form of affordable housing. 
B.  Kitchen and Bathroom Facilities. Those SROs without kitchen or bathroom facilities shall be provided congregate on-site facilities sufficient for the number of SROs pursuant to the California Building Code. Congregate bathrooms with showers must have individual stalls that can be locked. 
C.  Laundry. For all SRO buildings, congregate laundry facilities shall be provided with one washer or dryer for every five units. 
D.  Unit Size. The minimum size for a unit shall be two hundred (200) square feet and the maximum shall be four hundred (400) square feet. Units of two hundred (200) square feet shall house no more than one person. No unit shall house more than two people. 
E.  Community Room. Buildings of over ten units shall provide a common community area that is at least fifty (50) square feet per SRO. 
F.  Building and Development Standards. SRO buildings shall meet all state and local building and development standards, including parking, in accordance with the zoning district in which they are located. 
G.  Management Plan. All SRO buildings of seven or more units shall provide a management plan that includes the placement of the congregate facilities (laundry, bathrooms, and kitchens), number of units, number of beds, and provision for twenty-four-hour on-site management. If the units are for transitional or supportive housing, the management plan must so designate and meet the requirements for transitional or supportive housing including length of stay and the designation and contracting for supportive services. Verification of the services to be provided by contract must be provided. The management plan must provide the name, title and contact information for the management staff and the property owner for emergency purposes. 
H.  Zoning Districts. SRO buildings are permitted in the R-3 and R-4 zoning districts with an administrative permit. SRO buildings are permitted in VC, CC, and C-2 zoning districts as second floor uses only, where the residential is combined with commercial on the first floor, with an administrative permit. An exception may be made and approved by the development services director or his/her designee for handicapped accessible units with the provision of a site plan which defines which units are accessible. 
(Ord. No. 14-223, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.81.130 - Supportive housing. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with California Government Code Sections 65582 and 65583 which define supportive housing development and identify supportive housing development as a residential use subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. 
B.  Zoning District. Supportive housing is allowed in zoning districts where other residential uses are allowed under the same development standards and requirements of the applicable zoning district. Supportive housing with six or fewer residents is recognized as single-family residential and shall be allowed in zoning districts in which other single-family residential uses are allowed as permitted uses. Supportive housing with seven or more residents shall be recognized as multi-family residences and shall be allowed in zoning districts in which other multi-family residential uses are allowed as permitted uses or as uses requiring a use permit. 
C.  Supportive Services. Supportive housing proposals shall provide evidence that clients and/or residents are participating in a program which provides supportive services on an ongoing basis. Evidence of the required supportive services can be presented with a contract for the services, on-site staff with professional credentials or with appropriate licenses. Management shall also provide evidence of clients and/or residents participating in such services. 
D.  Management Plan. For multi-family developments, a management plan shall be provided that describes how the development meets the development standards for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 14-223, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.81.140 - Transitional housing. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with California Government Code Sections 65582 and 65583 which define transitional housing development and identify transitional housing development as a residential use subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. 
B.  Zoning District. Transitional housing is allowed in zoning districts where other residential uses are allowed under the same development standards and requirements of the applicable zoning district. Transitional housing with six or fewer residents is recognized as single-family residential and shall be allowed only in zoning districts in which other single-family residential uses are allowed as permitted uses. Transitional housing with seven or more residents shall be recognized as multi-family residences and shall be allowed only in zoning districts in which other multi-family residential uses are allowed as permitted uses or as uses requiring a use permit. 
C.  Transitional Units. Transitional units shall be available for a minimum of six months and a maximum of two years. Evidence of the transitional nature of the program shall be provided through provision of a management plan that outlines the transition period and programs to assist clients and/or residents in making a transition to permanent housing. 
(Ord. No. 14-223, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.81.150 - Water and sewer priority for affordable housing. 
A.  Purpose. California Government Code Section 65589.7 requires local jurisdictions to provide for priority use for water and sewer connections for affordable housing. This section provides for findings and a process for the prioritization. 
B.  Priority. The City of Shasta Lake (city) shall grant priority to affordable housing projects when allocating water and sewer allocations at the time of discretionary or ministerial approvals applicable to the development. 
C.  Development Review. The city will prohibit denial or conditioning of affordable housing developments with regard to those services unless the findings in Section 17.81.150(E) are made. The review is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
D.  Urban Water Management Plan. The city's urban water management plan shall include projected water use for single and multi-family housing needed for lower income households. 
E.  State Required Findings. Findings required for any denial or conditioning of an approval for water and sewer priority for affordable housing shall include one or more of the following: 
1.  The city does not have sufficient water supply as defined in California Government Code Section 66473.7(a)(2), or is operating under a water shortage emergency as defined in California Water Code Section 350, or does not have sufficient water treatment or distribution capacity to serve the needs of the proposed development, as demonstrated by a written engineering analysis and report. 
2.  The city is subject to a compliance order issued by the state department of health services that prohibits new water connections. 
3.  The city does not have sufficient sewer treatment or collection capacity, as demonstrated by a written engineering analysis and report on the condition of the treatment or collection works, to serve the needs of the proposed development. 
4.  The city is under an order issued by a regional water quality control board that prohibits new sewer connections. 
5.  The applicant has failed to agree to reasonable terms and conditions relating to the provision of service generally applicable to development projects seeking service from the city, including, but not limited to, the requirements of local, state, or federal laws and regulations or payment of a fee or charge imposed pursuant to California Government Code Section 66013. 
(Ord. No. 14-223, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.81.160 - Reserved (Workforce Housing).  
Chapter 17.82 - Medical Marijuana Collectives/Cooperatives[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-224, § 2, adopted Feb. 21, 2012, repealed former Ch. 17.82, §§ 17.82.010—17.82.140, and enacted a new Ch. 17.82 as set out herein. Former Ch. 17.82 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10-209, § 2, adopted Jan. 5, 2010 and Ord. No. 11-217, adopted Jan. 18, 2011. 
 
17.82.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the locations and operations of medical marijuana collectives/cooperatives in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of residents and businesses within the city. It is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the use or possession of marijuana except as allowed by California law. 
(Ord. No. 12-224, § 2, 2-21-2012)  
17.82.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.  Drug paraphernalia. As defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11364.5, and as may be amended from time to time. 
B.  Identification card. As defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq., and as may be amended from time to time. 
C.  Medical marijuana collectives and cooperatives. 
1.  Collective or cooperative shall be as defined by California statute or determined by case law and may include any facility or location where the primary purpose is to dispense medical marijuana that has been recommended by a physician, and where medical marijuana is made available to or distributed by or to a primary caregiver or a qualified patient in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. A collective or cooperative shall not include dispensing by primary caregivers to qualified patients in the following locations, so long as the location of the clinic, health care facility, hospice, or residential care facility is otherwise permitted by the Shasta Lake Municipal Code or by applicable state laws: 
a.  A clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
b.  A health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter Two of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
c.  A residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
d.  A residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
e.  A residential hospice or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code; provided that any such clinic, health care facility, hospice or residential care facility complies with applicable laws, including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5. 
D.  Person. An individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, limited liability company, or combination of the above in whatever form or character. 
E.  Person with an identification card. As set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq., and as may be amended from time to time. 
F.  Physician. A licensed medical doctor, including a doctor of osteopathic medicine as defined in the California Business and Professions Code. 
G.  Primary caregiver. As defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq., and as may be amended from time to time. 
H.  Qualified patient. As defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq., and as may be amended from time to time. 
I.  School. An institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering a regular course of instruction required by the California Education Code. This definition includes an elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years, whether public or private. 
J.  Storefront. A store or other commercial building at ground level that has frontage on a public street. 
(Ord. No. 12-224, § 2, 2-21-2012)  
17.82.030 - Sales tax liability. 
An owner/operator of a collective or cooperative shall be required to apply for and obtain a seller's permit, as required by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. No. 12-224, § 2, 2-21-2012)  
17.82.040 - Allowable zoning/locations. 
A.  Allowable Zoning for Collectives/Cooperatives. A collective or cooperative may be located within the Community Commercial (C-2) zone district on State Route 151 (SR 151) between the Ashby Road and Cascade Boulevard. 
A collective or cooperative may be located within the Village Commercial (VC) zone district on properties abutting SR 151. 
B.  Storefront Locations. A collective or cooperative shall be located only in a visible store-front type location which provides good public views of the collective/cooperative entrance, its windows, and the entrance to the collective/cooperative premises from a public street. 
C.  Areas Where Collectives/Cooperatives are not Allowed. Notwithstanding subparagraph (A) above, a collective or cooperative shall not be allowed in the following locations or zones: 
1.  On a parcel located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a school when on the same side of the street of SR 151 and at least six hundred (600) feet when on the opposite side of SR 151; or 
2.  On a parcel located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a day care center, day care home, recreation center, youth center, library or a public park when on the same side of the street of SR 151 and at least five hundred (500) feet when on the opposite side of SR 151; or 
3.  On a parcel located within nine hundred (900) feet of another collective or cooperative. 
D.  Locational Measurements. The distance between a collective or cooperative and the above-listed uses shall be made in a straight line from any parcel line of the real property on which the collective or cooperative is located to the parcel line of the real property on which the facility, building, or structure, or portion of the building or structure, in which the above-listed use occurs or is located. 
(Ord. No. 12-224, § 2, 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 16-245, § 3, 4-19-2016)  
17.82.050 - Operating requirements for collectives/cooperatives. 
Collective/cooperative operations shall be maintained only in compliance with the following day-to-day operational standards: 
A.  Criminal History. A collective/cooperative owner/operator, his or her agent or employees, volunteer workers, or any person exercising managerial authority over a collective/cooperative on behalf of the owner/operator shall not have been convicted of or be on probation or parole for the sale or distribution of a controlled substance. 
B.  Minors. It is unlawful for any collective/cooperative, owner/operator, or other person in charge of any collective/cooperative to employ any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age. Persons under the age of eighteen (18) shall not be allowed on the premises of a collective/cooperative unless they are a qualified patient or a primary caregiver, and they are in the presence of their parent or guardian. The entrance to a collective/cooperative shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under the age of eighteen (18) are precluded from entering the premises unless they are a qualified patient or a primary caregiver, and they are in the presence of their parent or guardian. 
C.  Collective/Cooperative Access. The following restrictions shall apply to all collectives/cooperatives: 
1.  The entrance area of the collective/cooperative building shall be strictly controlled. A viewer or video camera shall be installed in the door that allows maximum angle of view of the exterior entrance. 
2.  Only primary caregivers and qualified patients shall be allowed in the designated dispensing area along with collective/cooperative personnel. 
D.  Collective/Cooperative Operations. The following restrictions shall apply to all operations by a collective/cooperative: 
1.  Floor Layout. A collective/cooperative shall have a lobby waiting area at the entrance to the collective/cooperative to receive clients, and a separate and secure designated area for dispensing medical marijuana to qualified patients or designated caregivers. The primary entrance shall be located and maintained clear of barriers, landscaping and similar obstructions so that it is clearly visible from public streets, sidewalks or site driveways. 
2.  Storage. A collective/cooperative shall have suitable locked storage on site, for after-hours storage of medical marijuana. 
3.  Security. A collective/cooperative shall provide adequate security on the premises, including provisions for adequate lighting and alarms, in order to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft. 
4.  Security Cameras. Security surveillance cameras shall be installed to monitor the main entrance and exterior of the premises to discourage loitering, crime, illegal or nuisance activities. Security video shall be maintained for a period of not less than seventy-two (72) hours. 
5.  Alarm System. Professionally monitored robbery alarm and burglary alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in good working condition within the collective/cooperative at all times. 
6.  A collective/cooperative shall meet all the operating criteria for the dispensing of medical marijuana as is required pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. 
7.  Odors Control. A collective/cooperative shall have an air treatment system that ensures off-site odors shall not result. 
8.  Operating Hours. A collective/cooperative may operate seven (7) days per week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
9.  A collective/cooperative shall dispense only to qualified patients or primary caregivers with a currently valid physician's recommendation in compliance with the criteria in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. Collectives/cooperatives shall require such persons to provide valid official identification, such as a department of motor vehicles driver's license or State Identification Card. 
10.  Prior to dispensing medical marijuana, the collective/cooperative shall obtain a verification from the recommending physician's office personnel that the individual requesting medical marijuana is or remains a qualified patient pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. 
11.  A collective/cooperative shall not have a physician on-site to evaluate patients and/or provide a recommendation for the use of medical marijuana. 
12.  No person shall maintain, use, or operate a vending machine on the premises which dispenses marijuana to a qualified patient or primary caregiver. 
E.  Consumption Restrictions. The following medical marijuana consumption restrictions shall apply to all collectives and cooperatives: 
1.  Marijuana shall not be smoked, ingested or otherwise consumed by any individual on the premises of the collective/cooperative. The term "premises" includes the actual building, as well as any accessory structures, parking lot or parking areas, or other surroundings within two hundred (200) feet of the collective/cooperative's entrance. 
2.  Collective/cooperative operations shall not result in illegal re-distribution of medical marijuana or any controlled substance obtained from the collective/cooperative, or use or distribution in any manner which violates state law. 
F.  Retail Sales and Cultivation. 
1.  No marijuana shall be cultivated on the premises of the collective/cooperative, except in compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. 
2.  A collective/cooperative shall acquire medical marijuana only from their constituent members, because only marijuana grown by a qualified patient or his/her primary caregiver may lawfully be transported by, or distributed to, other members of a collective or cooperative. 
3.  A collective/cooperative shall not cultivate, distribute or sell medical marijuana for a profit. 
4.  A collective/cooperative shall not sell or display any drug paraphernalia or any implement that may be used to administer medical marijuana with the exception of: 
a.  Pipes. For purposes of this section, "pipe" shall mean a small, hand-held burning device that holds a burning, dried marijuana leaf in a small cup at one end, while user uses lips to draw smoke through a small cylinder attached to the side of the bowl. 
b.  Rolling papers: For purposes of this section, "rolling paper" shall mean small sheets, rolls, or leaves of paper for rolling one's own cigarettes. 
5.  A collective cooperative shall not conduct or engage in the commercial sale, trade, barter, exchange or provision of any product, good or service other than medical marijuana pursuant to the terms and conditions consistent with this chapter and applicable law. 
6.  A collective/cooperative shall comply with all the operating criteria for the dispensing of medical marijuana as is required pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. 
G.  Reserved. 
H.  Collective/Cooperative Signage and Notices. 
1.  A notice shall be clearly and legibly posted in the collective/cooperative indicating that smoking, ingesting or consuming marijuana on the premises or in the vicinity of the collective/cooperative is prohibited. 
2.  Signs on the premises shall not obstruct the entrance or windows. 
3.  Address identification shall comply with local fire protection district address sign requirements. 
4.  Business identification signage shall comply with Shasta Lake Municipal Code Section 17.84.050 and shall be limited to that needed for identification only, consisting of a single window sign or wall sign that shall not exceed six square feet or ten percent of the window area, whichever is less. 
I.  Employee Records. Each owner/operator of a collective/cooperative shall maintain a current register of the names of all volunteers and employees currently working at or employed by the collective/cooperative, and shall disclose such registration for inspection by any city officer or official, but only for the purposes of determining compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
J.  Patient Records. A collective/cooperative shall maintain confidential health care records of all patients and primary caregivers using only the identification card number issued by the county, or its agent, pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.71 et seq., as a protection of the confidentiality of the cardholders, or a copy of the written recommendation from a physician stating the need for medical marijuana under California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. 
K.  Staff Training. Collective/cooperative staff shall receive appropriate training for their intended duties to ensure understanding of rules and procedures regarding dispensing in compliance with state and local law, and properly trained or professionally-hired security personnel. 
L.  Site Management. 
1.  The owner/operator of the establishment shall take all necessary steps to discourage and correct objectionable conditions that constitute a nuisance in parking areas, sidewalks, alleys and areas surrounding the premises and adjacent properties during business hours, if directly related to the patrons of the subject collective/cooperative. 
2.  The owner/operator of the establishment shall take all necessary steps to reduce loitering in public areas, sidewalks, alleys and areas surrounding the premises and adjacent properties during business hours. 
3.  The owner/operator of the establishment shall provide patients with a list of the rules and regulations governing medical marijuana use and consumption within the city. 
M.  Trash, Litter, Graffiti. 
1.  The owner/operator shall clear the sidewalks adjoining the premises plus ten feet beyond property lines along the street, as well as any parking lots under the control of the operator, as needed to control litter, debris and trash. 
2.  The owner/operator shall remove all graffiti from the premises and parking lots under the control of the operator within twenty-four (24) hours of its application. 
N.  Compliance with Other Requirements. The collective/cooperative operator shall comply with all provisions of all local, state or federal laws, regulations or orders. 
O.  Alcoholic Beverages. No collective/cooperative shall hold or maintain a license from the State Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control for the sale of alcoholic beverages, or operate a business on the premises that sells alcoholic beverages. No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed or consumed on the premises. 
P.  Parking Requirements. Collectives and cooperatives shall be considered general retail (enclosed) uses relative to the parking requirements imposed by Shasta Lake Municipal Code Section 17.86.140. 
Q.  Inspection Authority. City of Shasta Lake Development Services Department staff may inspect every medical marijuana collective/cooperative at any time during regular business hours to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-224, § 2, 2-21-2012)  
17.82.060 - Pre-existing collectives/cooperatives. 
A.  Those collectives/cooperatives which were authorized by the city prior to the date of the adoption of the ordinance enacting this chapter shall be deemed pre-existing legal uses of real property upon which they are situated. 
B.  The collective/cooperative shall be subject to the requirements for nonconforming uses of Shasta Lake Municipal Code Chapter 17.90. 
(Ord. No. 12-224, § 2, 2-21-2012)  
Chapter 17.84 - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
17.84.005 - Design and architectural objectives. 
A.  Purpose and Use. 
The purpose of this chapter is to define general design objectives for new commercial, industrial and public development projects, in order to assist site planners and designers in understanding the city's basic design expectations for on-site development. These guidelines should also be applied as feasible to enhance existing structures or site conditions. The intent is to enhance the community's overall value and appearance, and to achieve well-designed projects that complement the small-town feel of the community and its heritage. In addition, these design objectives are intended to: 
1.  Encourage originality, flexibility, innovation in site planning and development, including the architecture, landscaping and design of proposed developments in relation to the city as a whole and/or surrounding areas. 
2.  Discourage monotonous, drab, unsightly, dreary and inharmonious developments, minimize discordant and unsightly surroundings and visual blight, and avoid inappropriate and poor quality design. 
3.  Aid in assuring that structures, signs and other improvements are properly related to their sites and the surrounding sites and structures, with due regard to the aesthetic qualities of the natural terrain and landscaping and that proper attention is given to exterior appearances of structures, signs and other improvements. 
These objectives shall be considered during the design and review of development proposals, and are to be used in conjunction with other applicable zoning development standards, ordinances and/or special development requirements. In the event that a general design objective conflicts with a specific standard of other ordinances or codes, the specific standard shall prevail. 
The design criteria established in this section are not intended to be rigid or restrict creative solutions. The planning commission, at its discretion, shall have the authority to consider and accept alternative site and/or building designs that are determined to meet the general intent of this chapter. 
B.  Site Design Objectives. 
1.  Sites should be developed in a coordinated manner to complement adjacent structures through placement, architecture, colors and size/mass. 
2.  Whenever possible, buildings on the same site should be clustered and incorporate plazas, court-yards, pocket parks and other pedestrian use areas. 
3.  Sites should be designed to avoid the appearance of domination by automobiles. Positive methods to achieve this concept include: 
a.  Orienting buildings to fronting streets and placing parking at the rear and/or sides; 
b.  Designing the required parking area into smaller, discrete, connected lots rather than large, single-use lots; 
c.  Providing well-defined pedestrian walkways through parking areas and from public sidewalks into the site. Well-defined walkways use pavers, changes in color, texture and composition of paving materials and vertical plantings such as trees and shrubs. The minimum width of walkways shall be five feet. 
d.  Parking areas shall be designed to be partially screened from view from adjacent streets and building occupants. Screening can be accomplished through a number of methods, including: 
i.  Orienting buildings away from parking areas; 
ii.  Placing buildings between streets and parking lots; 
iii.  Using extensive landscape screening, beams, and architecturally treated walls. 
4.  Sites shall incorporate transit-compatible designs where appropriate. Transit compatibility means designs that are pedestrian oriented, provide safe and convenient access to transit facilities, and foster efficient transit service. 
5.  Where appropriate, site plans shall be designed to provide vehicle and pedestrian connections with adjacent sites. 
6.  All utility lines should be placed underground onsite and along street frontages. 
7.  Phased projects shall be designed to the greatest degree possible so that each phase, in and of itself, is complete in its functional, traffic, parking, visual, drainage and landscaping aspects. 
C.  Building Design Objectives. 
1.  No single architectural style is required. How-ever, design themes that reflect the city's small-town atmosphere, and its natural resource and recreation-based heritage, are preferred. Such design themes typically include use of stone, heavy timbers, other natural appearing materials and colors in the building, and overall site design. Building accents which relate to the community's origin in the late 1930's and 1940's are also encouraged. Reliance on or use of standardized "corporate or franchise" design prototypes that are more representative of typical urban development is strongly discouraged. 
2.  Buildings should reflect an individual design that has considered site location, conditions, and surrounding development. Building design should pro-vide a sense of permanence and timelessness. High quality construction and materials should be used to ensure that buildings will not look dated or worn down over time. Building designs should reflect an individual style and form and not merely current trends. 
3.  A consistent visual identity shall be applied to all sides of buildings visible to the general public. In these areas, all building sides shall have an equivalent level of quality of materials, detailing and window placement. Abrupt ending of architectural details shall be avoided with no radical change in details or features or materials. 
4.  Long blank walls are to be avoided. Positive methods to achieve this objective include change in colors and materials, placement of windows, use of awnings and canopies, and architectural details and features such as corners, setbacks, and offsets. Windows at ground level may be tinted; however, mirrored windows are not allowed. Reflective roofing is not allowed. 
5.  Buildings facing streets shall incorporate pedestrian scaled entrances. Pedestrian scaled en-trances are those that provide an expression of human activity or use in relation to building size. Doors, windows, entrances and other features should be designed to respond to the size of the human body and not give the appearance of anonymity or over-whelming the building's users. 
6.  Modulation (defined as a measured setback or offset in a building face) shall be incorporated to re-duce overall bulk and mass of buildings. The planes of exterior walls should not run in one continuous direction more than fifty (50) to sixty (60) feet without an offset or setback. 
7.  Large buildings should have height variations to give the appearance of distinct elements. 
8.  Building design and/or facade shall incorporate traditional building materials such as masonry, stone, heavy timbers, brick and other natural appearing materials. 
9.  Building colors and roof materials should accent, blend with, or complement surroundings. Bright or brilliant colors should be reserved for trim and accents. 
10.  Existing buildings that have faded exterior color(s), and/or that have generally a worn or weathered appearance, should be repainted prior to establishment of any new uses. 
11.  Landscape areas or planting beds should be provided around perimeters to separate buildings from surrounding pavement areas. 
12.  Outdoor storage areas, mechanical equipment, utility vaults, and trash receptacles must not be visible from adjacent streets and pedestrian walkways. 
13.  Outdoor mechanical equipment shall be appropriately screened from view and to minimize noise. The method of screening shall be architecturally integrated with the building with respect to materials, color, shape and size. 
14.  Site services should be located on the least visible side of a building or site or within interior building spaces. 
15.  Ground level outdoor enclosures shall be composed of materials similar to the main structure. 
16.  Materials used for site features such as fences, screen walls, and signs should be appropriate to the zone district where the development is located and should complement building design through materials, color, shape, and size. 
17.  Developments should provide transition with adjacent uses especially regarding building location, size and scale. No single building or development should dominate adjacent uses in terms of size, bulk, view blockage, or shading. 
D.  Sign Objectives. 
1.  Building Signs. 
a.  Individual letters rather than cabinet signs are preferred. 
b.  Backlit individual letters are a preferred alternative. 
c.  Signs should be compatible in scale and proportion with building design and other signs. 
d.  A specific sign program or concept should be designed for multiple tenant buildings or complexes. Color and letter style shall be coordinated when businesses share the same building and consistent sign patterns (placement on buildings) shall be utilized. 
e.  Exposed neon tubes are acceptable for non-letter sign elements but are discouraged for letters. 
2.  Freestanding Signs. 
a.  Freestanding signs should provide only name and address of the building and/or building tenants. 
b.  Project landscaping should be designed to incorporate freestanding signs. 
E.  Landscaping Objectives 
1.  Provide unity of design through repetition of plants and coordination with adjacent developments. 
2.  Landscape materials should be hardy species that are adaptable to local conditions, easily maintained, and drought tolerant. Use of native plants is strongly encouraged. 
3.  The design for parking areas shall include deciduous and evergreen trees to provide shade and break up expanses of asphalt. 
4.  Landscape islands or medians shall have no dimension narrower than four to five feet. 
5.  Interior landscaping is required for parking lots containing ten or more spaces at a ratio of twenty (20) square feet of landscape area for every one hundred (100) square feet of parking area. All landscaped areas should be protected by wheelstops or curbing, or be of sufficient width to prevent damage to plants by overhanging vehicles. 
6.  Existing vegetation should be incorporated into overall site design. 
7.  Landscaped areas shall be irrigated by mechanical sprinkler systems. Reclaimed water should be used in the irrigation system if practicable. 
8.  Required perimeter setback areas shall be densely landscaped with a combination of trees and shrubs, which form a ninety (90) percent ground cover within three years of planting. 
9.  Interior site landscaping is required to define pedestrian ways, enclose outdoor gathering and seating areas, and reduce building mass. 
10.  Architectural features such as low walls, fountains and sculptures may be used in places where planting areas are limited or restricted. 
11.  Project entrances should be enhanced through changes in paving materials such as brick payers, textured and colored concrete, providing entry structures and unity in planting of trees and shrubs. 
12.  Individual trees along walkways and along sidewalks in the internal portions of projects should be planted in tree wells or planter boxes. 
13.  Open stormwater detention facilities should be incorporated into project landscaping and open space where geographically feasible. 
14.  Open stormwater detention facilities shall be landscaped and visually screened. 
F.  Lighting Objectives 
1.  Moving and flashing lights are prohibited. 
2.  Use cut-off lenses or hoods to prevent glare and light spill off project site onto adjacent properties, buildings and roadways. 
3.  Lighting standards should be designed and sized to be compatible with the character of the development. 
(Ord. 01-136 § 1)  
17.84.010 - Building sites. 
The following general development standards apply to building sites in the city: 
A.  Substandard Lot Sizes. A legally created lot that contains less area than is required by the applicable district and is not merged pursuant to the state Subdivision Map Act and/or local ordinance, shall be considered a building site if one of the following criteria is met: 
1.  All other development standards of the district in which the lot is located and all other applicable city development standards, except lot size, are met; or 
2.  A variance is approved for the building. 
B.  Gross Versus Net Acreage. Building sites of two acres or more shall be determined by reference to gross acreage. Building sites of less than two acres shall be determined by reference to net acreage. 
C.  Exception—Public Uses. The minimum building site required in any district shall not apply to lots created for a public use or public utility for which a use permit is required. 
D.  Exception—Preexisting Residences. Lots containing two or more detached one-family residences or mobile homes may be divided into lots smaller than permitted by the district in which the property is located provided: 
1.  All such habitable one-family residences or mobile homes were legally constructed or installed before January 10, 1984; and 
2.  Each newly created parcel is occupied by at least one of the one-family residences or mobile homes; and 
3.  Each newly created parcel meets all city development standards, except minimum building site. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.84.020 - Yards. 
A.  General. The regulations for yards shall apply in all districts unless different yards are shown on a recorded parcel map or final map. Except as otherwise provided herein, no building or structure shall be permitted within any required yard area. 
B.  Measurement from Roads. Yards, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be measured from existing property lines, or road right-of-way lines if the property lines are within a road right-of-way, except that lots fronting on roads designated in the city general plan as either an arterial or collector shall meet one of the following ultimate right-of-way criteria: 
1.  If a plan line has been established for any street, as provided for in Section 17.92.070 of this title, required yards shall be measured from such line. 
2.  If no plan line exists, the yard shall extend from the centerline of the road and shall extend a distance equal to one-half the distance of the ultimate right-of-way, as designated in the general plan, plus the yard required by the appropriate district. 
C.  Preexisting Buildings. Buildings which existed before the effective date of this chapter and which do not comply with all of the yard requirements of the district in which they are located or as provided in this chapter, may be enlarged or modified, provided the proposed modification or expansion conforms to all applicable yard, lot coverage and other permit requirements. 
D.  Residential Main Buildings. 
1.  Preexisting Lots. For preexisting lots in districts which permit residential and accessory uses and have a minimum building site of two acres or larger, the minimum building setback for lots that are smaller than two net acres shall be as follows: (Note: city fire safety standards may require additional building setbacks for lots as small as one acre in size.) 
a.  Front, twenty (20) feet; 
b.  Side, twelve (12) feet on one side and five feet on the other side; 
c.  Rear, ten feet. 
2.  Architectural Features. Cornices, eaves, canopies and similar architectural features may extend into any required yard not more than two and one-half feet. 
3.  Structural Appendages. Uncovered porches, stairways, fire escapes or landing places may extend into any required front or rear yard not more than six feet, and into any required side yard not more than three feet. 
4.  Dwellings Facing Side Yards. A dwelling which is to be located with the main entrance facing any side property line shall have a minimum ten-foot side yard on the main entrance side. 
5.  Corner/Key Lots. For corner/key lot situations, the required street side yard of the corner lot shall be as follows: 
a.  Within twenty-five (25) feet of the side line of the key lot, the side yard shall be equal to the front yard required on the key lot; and 
b.  Beyond twenty-five (25) feet on the side line of the key lot, the side yard shall be fifty (50) percent of the front yard required on the key lot. 
6.  Flag Lots. Front yards on flag lots shall be located on either the side in which the property line is a continuation of the driveway lot line or the lot line nearest and perpendicular to the driveway. 
E.  Residential Accessory Buildings. 
1.  Distance from Main Buildings. Detached accessory buildings shall be at least six feet from the main buildings. 
2.  Front Yard. Detached accessory buildings shall not encroach upon a front yard, unless otherwise provided for herein. 
3.  Garages on Street Side Yards. If an attached or detached garage faces a street side yard, the minimum street side yard shall be twenty (20) feet. 
4.  Agricultural Buildings. Where allowed, barns, stables, chicken houses and similar agricultural and residential accessory buildings that house animals shall not be closer than fifty (50) feet from the front property line or road right-of-way line, ten feet from side and rear property lines, and twenty (20) feet from any dwelling unit on the same or adjacent property. 
5.  Nonliving Quarters. Accessory buildings not used for human habitation or the keeping of animals shall be at least six feet from the interior side lot line on the front half of the lot and one foot from an interior side lot line on the rear half of the lot, except interior residential lots in which a twelve (12) foot or wider side yard is required, no accessory buildings shall be permitted within one twelve (12) foot side yard for the front fifty (50) feet of that side yard. On corner lots, accessory buildings shall be at least ten feet from street side lot lines. 
6.  Exception—Topography. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, if the elevation of the front half of a lot at fifty (50) feet from the centerline of the traveled roadway is seven feet above or below the grade of the centerline, a private garage, attached or detached, may be built to a minimum of five feet from the front line of the lot, if the lot is smaller than two acres. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.84.030 - Height limits—Exceptions. 
The following general height regulations apply: 
A.  Fences. The following shall apply, unless otherwise provided: 
1.  The height of any fence, wall, hedge, screen, planting or other dividing structure placed, grown or maintained in any residential or commercial district shall not exceed three feet within any required front yard or within any side yard on the street side of a corner lot, except as provided in subsection (A)(3) of this section. 
2.  The height of any fence, wall or other dividing structure placed in any residential district shall not exceed six feet in any rear yard, or in any required side yard not subject to subsection (A)(1) of this section, except as provided in subsection (A)(3). A fence may exceed this height limit if a use permit is first secured. 
3.  The height limits of this subsection do not apply to open wire fencing material used as a fence or dividing structure or placed atop any fence, wall or other dividing structure. 
B.  Height Exceptions. The following exceptions apply to height regulations: 
1.  Roof Structure. Roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, solar equipment or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, wireless masts, radio and television antennas or similar structures may be erected above the height limits specified in this title, but no roof structure or any space above the height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space. 
2.  Slope. Where the average grade under any dwelling exceeds fifteen (15) percent, the maximum height limit shall be increased by fifteen (15) feet on the downhill side of the building. 
3.  Transmission Lines. Height limitations provided in this title shall not apply to electric transmission lines or towers. 
4.  Use Permit. Except as otherwise provided in this section, any structure, building or fence in any district may be erected to a greater height or number of stories than the limit established for the district in which the structure is to be located, provided that a use permit is issued. 
C.  Fire Safety. Whenever the lowest portion of the roof is greater than twenty (20) feet from the ground, roof access for fire safety shall be provided as required by the local fire authority. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.84.040 - Landscaping. 
The following general landscaping requirements apply: 
A.  Areas Requiring Landscaping. 
1.  Parking Areas. Open parking areas containing five or more required vehicle spaces which abut a public street shall be landscaped to a depth of ten feet, measured from the abutting street right-of-way line, with openings for walkway and/or driveway purposes, in accordance with city standards. 
2.  Large Parking Areas. Open parking areas, excluding underground or structural parking, which contain twenty (20) or more spaces, shall landscape a minimum of five percent of the gross lot area used for offstreet parking and access thereto, exclusive of any landscaped strip abutting the street right-of-way or area used for walkways or driveways. This required landscaping shall include one tree, of a species suited to the area climate zone, for every eight parking spaces. 
3.  Parking Next to Residential Areas. A minimum three-foot-wide landscaped strip shall be planted and maintained along the edge of parking areas that abut residential districts. This shall be counted as a part of the five percent landscaped area described in subsection (A)(2) of this section, if applicable. 
4.  Commercial Industrial and Multi-Family Yard Areas. For commercial, industrial or multifamily residential uses, required yards adjoining public streets shall be landscaped to a depth of ten feet. 
5.  Adjacent to Freeways. A use in a commercial or industrial district whose side or rear yard abuts a freeway right-of-way shall have a ten-foot-wide screened landscaped area shall include trees planted on forty (40) feet on center spaces, with a minimum of three trees. 
B.  Landscaping Materials. Required landscaping may consist of a combination of plant and nonplant material, provided no less than fifty (50) percent of the required landscaped area shall be living plant material, based on mature plant size. 
C.  Watering. All required planted areas shall be served with adequate and permanent watering systems, except where native plants that do not need a watering system are used. All plants shall be maintained in a living condition. 
D.  Border Materials. Except where abutting a sidewalk, all required landscaped areas shall be enclosed by either a concrete curb having a minimum height of six inches or a wooden frame constructed from materials such as railroad ties or other heavy lumber materials which measure no less than six inches in diameter. 
E.  Maintenance. All required landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition. 
F.  Sight Distance. In order to provide safe sight distance at driveways and street intersections, all plant material within a thirty (30) foot triangle at the intersection of streets, and a fifteen (15) foot triangle at the intersection of driveways and streets, shall be no more than two feet in height above the curb level, except for trees which are trimmed so that no branches extend lower than six feet above curb level. 
G.  Exception. Any portion of this section may be modified if a use permit is obtained. 
H.  Landscaping Plan. All landscaping required by this section shall be installed and maintained in accordance with a landscaping plan. The plan shall be submitted to and approved by the development services director or his or her designee prior to issuance of a building permit or use permit, and shall show the location, size and variety of all plantings, water supply and other pertinent improvements. This plan may be combined with a parking plan. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.84.050 - Lighting. 
All lighting, exterior and interior, shall be designed and located so as to confine direct lighting to the premises. A light source shall not shine upon or illuminate directly on any surface other than the area required to be lighted. No lighting shall be of the type or in a location such that constitutes a hazard to vehicular traffic, either on private property or on abutting streets. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.84.060 - Signs. 
In addition to the sign requirements specified in individual districts, the following shall also apply: 
A.  Under-Canopy Signs. In a shopping center, an under-canopy sign may be permitted for each business; provided it shall not exceed five feet in length or one foot in height. Under-canopy signs shall be located perpendicular to the face of the building under the canopy, and shall have an eight-foot clearance between the bottom of the sign and the sidewalk or other pedestrian way. 
B.  Window Signs. Window signs may be permitted in any commercial or industrial district if the signs are place entirely within the building and do not cover more than twenty (20) percent of the window area of the ground floor. None shall be permitted above the ground floor. 
C.  Gasoline Price Signs. Gasoline price signs shall be allowed on freestanding signs if made integral with the design of the freestanding sign. 
D.  Sign Area. Sign area shall include the sum of the area enclosed within a geometric form or forms drawn around all writing, representations, emblems or designs on all surfaces of the sign which contain or is designed to contain the advertising. 
E.  Color and Lighting. 
1.  No blinking, flashing, rotating or animated signs, or signs that change color or intensity or emit odors, fluids, noise, smoke, etc., shall be permitted on the exterior of any building, except to display time, date or weather information. 
2.  Lights used to illuminate signs or advertising structures shall be installed so as to concentrate the illumination on the sign or advertising structure and minimize glare or direct illumination upon a public street or adjacent property. 
3.  No red, green or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such positions that they could reasonably be expected to interfere with or be confused with an official traffic control device or traffic signal or official directional guide signs. 
F.  Placement on Buildings. 
1.  Roof signs shall not be permitted in any zone. 
2.  All building signs projecting more than twelve (12) inches from the building face, wall or canopy upon which it is displayed shall have at least eight feet of clearance between the sign and the ground. 
G.  Locational Requirements. 
1.  There shall be no lighted, freestanding sign within fifty (50) feet of a residential district. 
2.  No sign shall be permitted in or over a public right-of-way or any driveway or walkway, except signs constructed on the face of a building that is located on the property line and parallel to such a right-of-way may project over such right-of-way a maximum of twelve (12) inches. Any such sign shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet above such right-of-way, driveway or walkway. 
H.  Exceptions. Exceptions may be made to the size, height, location and numbers of signs as specified in any district, or this section, if a use permit is issued. The burden of proof to justify an exception shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that practical difficulties or hardships would otherwise be caused, and the exception applied for is the most suitable and effective in relation to the location or terrain of the site or from the standpoint of the intended viewer. 
I.  Electronic readerboard signs shall be allowed pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.88.095 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 12-227, § 1(1), 8-7-2012)  
17.84.070 - Zone walls. 
Requirements for zone walls are as follows: 
A.  Urban Areas. A use proposed in a commercial (C) or industrial (I) district that abuts an R-1, R-M, R-2, R-3 or MHP district, or a proposed multiple-family residential use that abuts an R-1 district, shall have a solid masonry concrete wall or planted berm six feet in height, constructed along the rear and/or interior side lot line, except for the twenty (20) feet nearest the front lot line, the wall or berm shall be only three feet high. 
B.  Rural Areas. For a use proposed in a commercial (C) or industrial (I) district that abuts a resource district or an R-R or R-L district, or a proposed commercial or light industrial use in an MU district that abuts a resource or residential district, a screened cyclone fence may be substituted for the block wall or berm. 
C.  Unclassified District. If a proposed commercial or industrial use or abutting property is in a U district, the criteria of subsections A and B shall be applied, as appropriate. 
D.  Height Measurement and Location. The height of the wall, berm or fence shall be deter-mined by the vertical distance measured from the top of the wall, berm or fence to the lowest point within three feet of the wall, berm or fence on the commercial or industrial property. The wall, berm or fence shall be constructed on or immediately adjacent to the line dividing the residential and commercial or industrial properties. 
E.  Exceptions. If a use permit is issued, exceptions to the zone wall regulations may be made, in whole or part, if it is found that there is a topographic or natural vegetative barrier that will serve to divide the potentially incompatible uses, or if there is a significant distance between the uses that will pro-vide the same buffering. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.84.080 - Paved street requirements. 
All new construction of residential, commercial or industrial buildings shall have primary access from an existing paved street. The standards for street construction and exceptions shall be as follows: 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  If the street paving existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, the construction standard may be chip seal or asphalt paving. The existing road shall meet at mini-mum the fire safety standards. 
2.  If the street is paved after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, it shall be constructed to city development standards for paved streets. 
3.  Development of any vacant parcel shall be served by a road that meets at minimum the fire safety standards. 
B.  Exceptions. 
1.  In lieu of paving, the city council may permit the developer to pay a dust mitigation fee. The amount of said dust mitigation fee to be determined by the city council. 
A fund shall be established in the city treasury and all dust mitigation fees shall be deposited in said fund. Policies and procedures for expenditure of money in the fund shall be established by the city council. The funds shall be used for paving of city streets, including seed money needed to design and start assessment proceedings for the paving of streets. 
2.  The owner shall sign a deferred improvement agreement by which the owner agrees to participate in an assessment district formed to provide a paved road. Said agreement shall be recorded and shall run with the land, and obligates any owner, heirs, successors, or assigns. When sixty (60) percent or more of the owners within a block have signed a deferred improvement agreement, the city council shall call up said agreements and require the paving of said road. 
3.  Existing conforming and nonconforming residential structures which do not have frontage on a paved street may be replaced provided the new structure is not more than ten percent larger than the existing floor area and the property owner signs a deferred improvement agreement to participate in the paving at a future date as determined by the city council. Any dwelling replaced shall meet all other standards of the city code and shall comply with Sections 17.30.020A and B of this title. Any replaced structure larger than ten percent may be permitted provided the owner pays a dust mitigation fee as provided for in subsection A of this section. 
4.  Conforming structures on parcels not fronting on a paved street may be enlarged up to ten percent of the existing floor area, and accessory buildings not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet may be constructed provided the owner signs a deferred improvement agreement to participate in the paving at a future date as determined by the city council. Any enlarged structure larger than ten percent may be permitted provided the owner pays a dust mitigation fee as provided for in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.84.090 - Standards of manufactured homes in residential zoning districts. 
Manufactured homes are allowed in all zoning districts which permit one-family residences and shall be subject to the following development standards: 
1.  All manufactured homes shall be placed on a permanent foundation system of state-approved design or a permanent foundation system designed by a licensed architect or structural engineer as required by Section 65852.3 of the State of California Government Code; 
2.  The manufactured home shall be certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974; 
3.  Manufactured homes placed on a foundation system shall not be older than ten years of age measured from the date of manufacture of the unit to the date of building permit application except that manufactured homes lawfully installed prior to the effective date of this ordinance which have been certified under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974 shall be exempt from the ten-year age standard; 
4.  Manufactured homes shall provide parking in accordance with Section 17.30.060 and Chapter 17.86. The exterior wall covering and roof material of any required garage or carport shall be the same as those of the manufactured home; 
5.  Requirements for building height, lot coverage, side yard setbacks, front yard setbacks, rear yard setbacks, and usable open space shall be subject to the same requirements as the zone in which the manufactured home is located; 
6.  Exterior wall covering materials and roofing materials shall conform to the requirements of the State of California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) and the uniform building code for frame constructed dwellings. Exterior wall coverings shall extend (at a minimum) to the top of the perimeter foundation. 
7.  A foundation enclosure shall be installed between the finish grade and the siding material. Add-on siding needed to extend the exterior siding to the foundation enclosure shall consist of materials similar to the main exterior siding. Venting per the uniform building code shall be required. 
8.  All roof and gable overhangs shall extend not less than six inches when measured horizontally from the wall. Roof and gable overhangs shall be manufactured or engineered and designed to appear as an integral part of the manufactured home; 
9.  The roof of the manufactured home shall have a minimum pitch of not less than a nominal three inches of vertical rise for each twelve (12) inches of horizontal run; 
10.  Roof design shall meet the snow load requirements of the city of Shasta Lake, and roofing materials shall meet the requirements of a Class A or B fire rating as defined by the currently adopted uniform building code. 
11.  No ramada or other free-standing structure shall be allowed to be constructed over a manufactured home. 
(Ord. 02-146 § 1)  
Chapter 17.86 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.86.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter specifies off-street parking and loading spaces for all land uses. The following standards are intended to minimize street congestion and traffic hazards; provide safe and convenient access to residences, businesses, public services and places of public assembly; and make the appearance of parking areas aesthetically pleasing and compatible with surrounding land uses. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.020 - Application. 
All uses shall be provided with regularly maintained off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.030 - When required. 
Every building or mobile home hereafter installed, constructed, enlarged or structurally altered and every use of property hereafter inaugurated or expanded, shall be required to provide off-street parking and loading facilities, as specified by this chapter. The spaces shall be improved and installed prior to final building inspection or occupancy. When justified, a deferral of the required parking improvements may be approved, as set forth in the city development standards. All required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be maintained in good condition for the duration of the use that they are intended to serve. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.040 - Parking facilities location. 
Required parking shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the use which the spaces serve, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.050 - Joint use. 
The joint use of off-street parking areas may be authorized by use permit for the following uses or activities under the following conditions: 
A.  The joint use of off-street parking for "nighttime" uses, such as theaters, bowling alleys, bars or restaurants, may be supplied by the parking area provided for "daytime" uses, such as banks, offices, retail and personal service establishments. 
B.  Up to fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking for "daytime" uses may be supplied by the parking area provided by "nighttime" uses. 
C.  Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking for churches or auditoriums may be supplied by the parking facilities provided by "daytime" uses. 
D.  Parking in commercial or industrial zones may be located offsite, but must be located within five hundred (500) feet of the use which it serves. 
E.  A use permit application for joint use of off-street parking shall contain information which will substantiate that there will be no conflict between the principal operating hours of the buildings or uses for which joint parking or off-street parking is proposed and that all other requirements of this section will be met. In addition, a conveyance or an agreement shall be signed by the affected landowners or their duly authorized agents guaranteeing that joint parking or off-street parking will be available for the use which it serves during the term of the permit. The agreement or conveyance shall be approved as to form by the city attorney, recorded with the county recorder and a copy submitted to the planning division, prior to issuance of the use permit. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.060 - Compact car parking. 
Compact vehicle parking may be provided at the following rate: 
Total Parking Spaces 	MaximumCompact Spaces 
1 to 10 spaces 	None 
11 to 30 spaces 	10 percent of all spaces 
31 to 100 spaces 	30 percent of all spaces 
101 or more spaces 	30 spaces plus 40 percent of all spaces in excess of 100 
 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.070 - Parking within front and street side yards. 
Off-street parking spaces for one-family and two- family residences and residential accessory uses shall not be located in required front or street side yard areas. Off-street parking spaces for other uses may be located in front or street side yard areas, except in required landscape areas. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.080 - Parking within interior side and rear yards. 
Interior side and rear yards may be used for vehicle parking and access, except in required landscape area. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.090 - Tandem parking. 
Except in mobile home parks, or as provided by a use permit, tandem parking (parking where a car or cars have to be moved in order to allow a car to back from a parking space) shall count only as one parking space. To meet off-street parking requirements, each car must be able to enter and exit a parking space independently of the movement of any other vehicle. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.100 - Surfacing. 
For all uses required to provide five or more parking spaces, the parking areas and driveways shall be paved in accordance with city development standards unless modified or delayed by issuance of a use permit. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.110 - Controlled access. 
Except for a one-family or two-family residence and residential accessory uses, access to required parking spaces shall be designed in such a manner that vehicles leaving a parking space do not back directly onto any public street. Parking lots shall be designed and improved to prevent entrance or exit at any point other than designated driveways. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.120 - Off-street loading spaces. 
Loading space requirements are as follows: 
A.  No building or part thereof having a floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, which will be occupied by a hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial use or other similar uses shall be erected, structurally altered or allowed to house a change in use unless at least one off-street parking space, plus one additional loading space for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area is provided. On-site driveways and maneuvering areas may be used in lieu of providing off-street loading space, as long as maneuvering areas for delivery vehicles are provided. 
B.  Each off-street loading space shall not be less than twelve (12) feet in width, thirty (30) feet long (exclusive of driveways and maneuvering areas), and if covered, a minimum of fifteen (15) feet high. 
C.  A loading space which does not adjoin a street or alley shall have a minimum twenty (20) foot wide access. 
D.  Loading space(s) shall be improved to the same standard as required for parking areas. 
E.  No off-street loading space shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any lot in a residential district unless the space is wholly within a building or enclosed on three sides by a wall not less than eight feet in height. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.130 - Parking plan. 
All parking required by this section shall be installed and maintained in accordance with a parking plan. The plan shall be submitted to and approved by the development services director or his or her designee prior to issuance of a building permit or use permit, and shall show the layout of the parking spaces, access, interior aisles and other pertinent improvements. This plan may be combined with a landscaping plan. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.140 - Off-street parking standards. 
The following parking schedule applies in all zone districts. The required parking spaces are in addition to company operated vehicles. When computing the required number of off-street parking or loading spaces, a remaining fraction of one-half or more shall be deemed a whole unit of measurement; a remaining fraction of less than one-half will be disregarded. 
A.  Parking Requirements. 
Off-Street Parking 
Use 	Space Requirements 
Animal care facility 	5 parking spaces per doctor. 
Automobile service, including repair, body shop or service station 	5 parking spaces exclusive of service bays, pumping areas, or auto storage areas. 
Bowling alley 	5 parking spaces for each bowling lane, plus 1 parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to accessory uses. 
Business or trade school 	1 parking space per 3 students, plus 1 space per employee. 
Church, social hall, club, lodge, community center, theater, or other place of public assembly 	1 parking space for each 4 seats in the principal seating area, or 1 parking space for every 40 square feet in the principal seating area, whichever is greater, plus 1 passenger loading space. 
Condominiums or townhouses 	See "multiple-family residences." 
Convalescent hospital 	1 parking space for each 3 beds. 
Day care center 	1 parking space for each 10 children, plus 2 other parking spaces, plus 1 passenger loading space. 
Day care home, large 	In addition to the required residential parking, 1 parking space, plus 1 passenger loading space. 
Flea market 	1 parking space for each 500 square feet of sales or display area, plus 1 per sales booth. 
Golf course 	4 parking spaces per hole, plus required parking for accessory uses. 
Guest house, servant's quarters, or senior citizen residence 	1 space in addition to that required for the main residence. 
Hotel, motel, boarding-house, or bed and break-fast guest facility 	1 parking space per guest room, plus 1 space per two employees, plus required parking for accessory uses. 
Industry 	1 parking space for each 1,000 square feet of manufacturing or warehousing area, or 1 parking space for each employee on a major shift, plus 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of office area, plus 1 parking space for each 250 square feet of retail floor area, if retail sales are allowed. These standards may be modified by approval of a use permit. 
Medical offices and clinic 	1 parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
Mobile home park 	2 parking spaces per unit (tandem parking permitted), plus 1 guest parking space for each 4 units, plus 1 recreational vehicle parking space for each 5 units. 
Mortuary 	1 parking space for each 4 seats in the principal seating area, plus 3 parking spaces; or 1 parking space for each 45 square feet in the principal seating area, whichever is the greater. 
Motel 	See "hotel." 
Multiple-family or group residence, condominiums or townhouses 	1.5 parking spaces per one-bedroom or studio unit; 2 parking spaces per unit, for two or more bedroom units; plus 1 guest parking space for each 5 units, plus 1 recreational vehicle parking space for each 10 units. 
One-family or two-family residence 	2 parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
Personal services 	1 parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
Professional office, including bank or other financial institution 	1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
Research and development 	1 parking space per 2 employees. 
Residential facility for the elderly 	½ parking space per unit, in addition to parking for other types of residences. 
Restaurant (standard) or bar 	1 parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space for every 4 seats based upon the capacity of the fixed or movable seating area, whichever is greater. 
Restaurant (drive-in, fast food, or self-service) 	1 parking space for each 75 square feet of gross floor area. 
Retail: 	
a. Enclosed—General retail 	1 parking space for each 350 square feet of gross floor area. 
b. Shopping center 	1 parking space for each 275 square feet of gross floor area. 
c. Enclosed—Furniture, large appliance, carpet, piano, auto showroom or similar uses 	1 parking space for each 500 square feet of retail floor area. 
d. Open lot, including auto, boat, recreation vehicle and mobile home (does not include flea market or similar uses) 	1 parking space for each 5000 square feet, not to exceed 5 spaces, plus 1 space for each 2 employees. 
School: 	
a. Grades K—8 	1 parking space per employee, plus 10 spaces. 
b. Grades 9—12 	1 parking space per 5 students, plus 1 space per 2 employees. 
Senior citizen residence 	1 parking space per residence. 
Skilled nursing/intermediate care facility 	1 parking space for each 3 beds. 
 
B.  Drive-Up Facilities. In addition to the required off-street parking, drive-up facilities shall provide twenty (20) foot long stacking or vehicle reservoir spaces, in addition to the space where the service is being provided, in accordance with the following schedule: 
Off-Street Parking 
Use 	Space Requirements 
Car wash 	2 reservoir spaces per rack. 
Drive-in bank 	7 reservoir spaces for 1 teller drive-up, 4 reservoir spaces per window for 2 window tellers, and 3 reservoir spaces per window for 3 or more tellers. 
Drive-up restaurant 	6 reservoir spaces per window. 
Photo drop 	1 reservoir space per window. 
Service station 	2 per aisle/lane. 
 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 17-261, § 1, 8-15-2017)  
17.86.150 - Parking lot design and striping standards. 
Parking lot design and striping standards for this chapter are set out in Figures 17.86.150A and B. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.86.160 - Exceptions. 
Any portion of Sections 17.86.010 through 17.86.120 and Section 17.86.150 of this chapter may be modified for a particular use if a use permit is obtained. The approving body must find, based upon information submitted by the applicant, that the proposed modified arrangement and design will meet the intent of the parking regulations and will provide adequate parking or loading for the intended use. Exceptions to Section 17.86.140 of this chapter may be made if a use permit is first obtained, provided that the building or use existed prior to July 2, 1993, and does not conform to the off-street parking and loading provisions within this chapter and the approving body finds that it is not feasible, due to space constraints or other reasons, to provide the required parking and improvements. In approving an exception, the approving body may condition the permit to comply with the provisions of this chapter or part thereof within a reasonable time limit in addition to other appropriate conditions. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
  
NOTE 1: 	Minimum 8.5-foot width except when located alongside a structure, pole, post, wall, or fence, in which case a minimum ten-foot width is required. A parking space may be reduced in length from twenty (20) feet to eighteen (18) feet if it abuts a six-foot wide landscaped area and is separated from the landscaped area by a six-inch curb or bumper stop; or if it abuts a nonpublic six-foot wide sidewalk and is separated from the sidewalk by a six-inch curb or bumper stop. 
NOTE 2: 	Locations of required parking spaces, garage spaces, garages and carports, are also governed by yard and other regulations of this section. 
NOTE 3: 	Any aisle that provides primary access to a building shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet wide. 
 
  
NOTE 1: 	Minimum 7.5 foot width is required except when located alongside a structure, pole, post, wall, or fence, in which case a 9.0 foot width is required. 
NOTE 2: 	Locations or required parking spaces, garage spaces, garages and carports are also governed by yard and other regulations of this section. 
NOTE 3: 	Compact car spaces must be identified by signage or other designation and must be differentiated from standard car spaces. 
NOTE 4: 	The arrangement of standard and compact spaces shall be approved by the development services director or his or her designee. 
NOTE 5: 	Any aisle that provides primary to a building shall be a minimum sixteen (16) feet wide. 
  
Chapter 17.88 - SPECIAL USES 
Sections:  
Article I. - Uses Permitted in All Districts 
 
17.88.010 - Generally. 
There are certain land uses that are an integral part of the city which, because of their reliance on the city's natural resource base, must necessarily operate where the resource is located. There are other types of uses which depend on varying geo-graphic conditions or locational requirements that do not fit within a standard zone district and, therefore, must be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. The uses described in Sections 17.88.020 through 17.88.110 of Article I of this chapter may be located in most or all districts, subject to the specified limitations and requirements, unless the use directly conflicts with a specific district regulation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.020 - Mining. 
The exploration, extraction and processing of minerals, rock, sand, gravel, topsoil or steam for commercial purposes and accessory uses may be allowed, provided a use permit is issued in each case except that gravel crushing and asphalt and cement batch plans shall be located only in industrial (I) and mineral resource (MR) districts. The provisions of Chapter 18.04 of the Shasta County Code (Surface Mining and Reclamation Act) shall apply to all mineral extraction activities. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.030 - Small hydropower facility. 
A.  Small hydropower facilities may be permitted with an approved administrative permit, if all of the following are met: 
1.  The project is located in an EA, TP, TL, MR, F-1, M-L, M or PF district; 
2.  The height of the diversion structure, the amount of water to be impounded by it and the electrical capability of the facility will qualify the project for an exemption from the licensing requirements administered by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission; 
3.  The level of mechanical noise generated by the facility, when measured at the property lines of the site on the CNEL scale, shall not exceed the higher of either 55 dBA higher than the ambient noise level on properties adjoining the project site; 
4.  A grading plan is submitted to the planning division for review and approval by the department of public works. The plan shall include all provisions necessary to stabilize and revegetate all land temporarily or permanently disturbed by the construction and operation of the facility; 
5.  Security acceptable to the city has been filed by the owner or operator of the facility with the planning division to insure compliance with the requirements of subsection (A)(4) of this section. The amount of any security filed by the owner or operator of the facility with the Department of Fish and Game or the Regional Water Quality Control Board may be used to offset part or all of the security required under this subsection; 
6.  The proposed project meets the requirements of the California Department of Fish and Game; 
7.  The proposed project meets the requirements of the Regional Water Quality Control Board; 
8.  The project sponsor receives the necessary license or exemption from the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission; 
9.  The proposed project meets applicable requirements of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; 
10.  The project sponsor owns or has the concurrence of the property owner of the site on which the project will be located; 
11.  If, in the course of development, any archaeological, historical or paleontological resources are uncovered, discovered or otherwise detected or observed, construction activities in the affected area shall cease and a qualified archaeologist shall be contracted to review the site and advise the city of the site's significance. If the findings are deemed significant by the environmental review officer, appropriate mitigation measures shall be required. 
B.  If any of the above criteria are not met, the facility may be permitted if a use permit is issued for it. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.040 - Forest management. 
Forest management activities, as described in the California Forest Practices Act, are permitted as long as the regulations of the Forest Practices Act, along with other applicable state regulations, are met. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.050 - Fish and wildlife enhancement projects. 
Fish and wildlife enhancement projects are permitted as approved by the Department of Fish and Game. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.060 - Agricultural accessory building. 
Agricultural accessory buildings are permitted uses, provided the size of the property on which he building(s) is to be located meets the minimum acreage requirements for full-time agricultural operations. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.070 - Assemblage of people. 
Except in R-1, R-2, R-3, RM and MHP districts, circuses, carnivals, open air theaters, race tracks, boat races or similar uses involving temporary or intermittent assemblages of people, automobiles or boats and that do not involve permanent structural improvements, may be permitted if a use permit is issued in each case (not including fraternal or service groups), and it is determined that the proposal will not adversely impact surrounding properties. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.080 - Directional and other official signs and notices. 
Those types of outdoor advertising signs that qualify under Title 4, Chapter 6, Subchapter 4 of the California Administrative Code (Outdoor Advertising), including official signs and notices, public utility signs, service club and religious notices, and directional signs are permitted uses, except use permits must be issued for private directional signs. All of these signs may be located without regard to distances from other outdoor advertising signs. Outdoor advertising signs shall be subject to the requirements of Section 17.84.060 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.090 - Real estate signs. 
For sale or lease signs are permitted uses provided that, for residential lots, there are not more than two signs per lot, each sign not exceeding six square feet in size, or for commercial or industrial lots, one sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size. In addition to the on-site signs described above, if there are five or more lots for sale, one onsite and one offsite subdivision sign, each not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size, are permitted. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.095 - Electronic readerboard signs. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the electronic readerboard sign is to provide information on events, convey essential messages including emergency information, and communicate other noncommercial information to the public. 
B.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
1.  City shall mean the city of Shasta Lake. 
2.  Electronic readerboard shall mean a sign structure which can be electronically changed without altering the face or the surface of the sign and intended to accommodate changeable short-term messages. 
3.  Non-profit organization shall mean a corporation organized to provide religious, charitable, literary, educational, scientific, social, or other forms of public service that are exempt from federal income taxation under Section 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
4.  Sign shall mean the electronic readerboard sign. 
C.  Permit Requirements. An electronic readerboard shall be allowed pursuant to this section if an administrative permit is issued by the development services director or his/her designee pursuant to SLMC Section 17.92.050. The administrative permit shall include terms and conditions under which the permit is issued. 
D.  Allowable Locations. Notwithstanding the sign regulations specified for the individual zone district or SLMC Section 17.84.060, one readerboard sign may be located within the City Center (CC), Village Commercial (VC) or Community Commercial (C-2) Zone Districts on property abutting State Route 151 between the Union Pacific Railroad trestle and Cascade Boulevard. 
E.  Use Limitations. The sign shall be used only to publicize the following activities. The sign shall not be used to advertise any commercial business or for-profit event or to endorse any specific candidate for political office or to support or oppose any ballot measure or proposition. 
1.  City events and activities sponsored by non-profit organizations or local service clubs. 
2.  Candidates night forums and general public announcements regarding voting dates and locations. 
3.  School events such as football games, graduations and reunions. 
4.  Major community events that are co-sponsored (officially recognized, approved and/or subsidized) by the city or require downtown street closures, or held in city parks or facilities. 
5.  Messages regarding youth sports league sign-ups occurring within the city. 
6.  Messages regarding free meetings and events of general public interest sponsored by public agencies or legislators serving the city. 
7.  Messages and alerts related to the city's emergency response system. 
8.  Other messages found to be similar in nature as determined by the development services director or his/her designee. 
F.  Development Standards. 
1.  Maximum height shall be no more than fifteen (15) feet above grade. 
2.  Maximum size of the entire sign face shall be no more than forty-eight (48) square feet per side. 
3.  The sign may have no more than two faces. 
4.  The sign shall be located in a landscaped area not less than twice the total area of the sign face. 
5.  The sign shall not imitate or resemble any official traffic sign, signal or device. 
6.  The sign shall be placed in a manner that will not adversely interfere with the visibility or functioning of traffic signs, signals or devices, or interfere with official signs, taking into consideration physical elements of the sign in relation to the surrounding area, such as physical obstruction, line of sight, brightness and visual obstruction or impairment issues. 
7.  The sign shall be placed no closer than three hundred fifty (350) feet from a crosswalk across State Route 151. 
8.  The sign shall display only static text in each of its display messages. No sign shall display animated text, graphics or video, including flashing, blinking, fading, rolling, shading, dissolving, or any other effect that gives the appearance of movement. 
9.  Each message shall be displayed for a minimum of four seconds unless a greater amount of time is set forth as recommended by the development services director in consultation with the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). 
10.  The transition or blank screen time between one display message and the next shall not exceed one second. 
11.  Transition from one message to another message shall appear instantaneous as perceived by the human eye. 
12.  To the extent feasible, each message shall be complete in itself and shall not continue on a subsequent sign message. 
13.  Font size shall be determined by the development services director based on sight distance and the speed limit of the adjacent right-of-way. 
14.  The sign shall be designed and placed to prevent light and glare from being visible to adjacent residential properties. 
15.  The sign shall not emit light that could obstruct or impair the vision of any driver. 
16.  The sign shall utilize automatic dimming technology to adjust the brightness of the sign relative to ambient light. 
17.  The sign shall be turned off between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless an exception is granted by the development services director or his/her designee for special circumstances, such as, but not limited to, providing emergency notifications or announcing early morning or late evening events. 
18.  The sign shall contain a default mechanism that will cause the sign to revert immediately to a black screen if the sign malfunctions. 
19.  The sign shall comply with all state requirements governing such uses, including but not limited to the California Vehicle Code. 
20.  More restrictive or additional conditions of approval shall be included in the administrative permit as determined necessary by the development services director based on specific site conditions and consultation with applicable city departments and outside agencies. 
21.  The development services director may make minor exceptions to the development standards included in this section if it is determined the revised standard meets the intent of this section. 
G.  Maintenance Requirements. The administrative permit shall include the terms and conditions for ongoing operation and maintenance of the electronic readerboard. 
(Ord. No. 12-227, § 1(2), 8-7-2012)  
17.88.100 - Public uses and public utilities. 
A.  Public uses and public utilities are permitted if a use permit is issued, provided the use is found to be compatible with, and will not adversely impact, surrounding land uses, except that public utility transmission lines, towers, distribution poles and lines, regardless of height, and gas pipelines are permitted uses. 
B.  A use permit shall not be issued for a public use or utility in a resource district unless findings are made that there is not a reasonable alternative site outside of a resource district, and the impacts from the project on the resource land have been reduced to the lowest reasonable level. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.110 - Aircraft landing sites. 
Except in R-1, R-2, R-3, RM and MHP districts, airports, landing strips and heliports are permitted if a use permit is issued. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Article II. - Uses Permitted with a Residence or in Selected Residential Districts 
 
17.88.120 - Generally. 
There are certain land uses which, because of their characteristics, are permitted in residential areas, provided they meet appropriate standards. The uses described in this article may be permitted in conjunction with residential uses, subject to the criteria and limitations specified herein. Affordable dwelling units are now found in Chapter 17.81. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.88.130 - Uses permitted in conjunction with residential use. 
The uses described in Sections 17.88.140 through 17.88.250 of this article are permitted in conjunction with a residential use. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.140 - Accessory buildings and uses. 
In any district which permits a residence, the following subordinate buildings or uses are also permitted, unless otherwise specified by a particular district; provided that in districts in which an administrative or use permit is required for a residence, the administrative or use permit is issued. This provision does not apply to accessory dwelling units (ADU) or any other buildings used for human habitation. 
A.  Private garages, carports, residential accessory buildings and greenhouses as provided in this subsection. 
1.  a.  An attached or detached private two-car garage or carport not exceeding five hundred fifty (550) square feet of floor area, plus 
b.  One thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area in the same or separate garage or carport or in a residential accessory building(s) or greenhouses or a combination thereof. Any building under one hundred twenty (120) square feet of roof area is not considered a part of the one thousand (1,000) square foot total. 
2.  Additional floor area that exceeds the totals in subsections (A)(1)(a) and (b) of this section may be permitted if an administrative permit is issued, subject to the provisions of Section 17.88.230. 
3.  Lots that meet the criteria established for the use of agricultural accessory buildings, as described in Section 17.88.060, shall be exempt from the residential accessory building size criteria described in subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section. 
B.  Small day care home. 
C.  Residential care facility. 
D.  Chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, rabbits or similar sized animals shall be permitted in any zone district provided they are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and the total number shall not exceed twenty-five (25) per one-half acre. Roosters over three months old shall not be permitted in the R-1 zone district. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.88.142 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-233, § I, adopted May 20, 2014, repealed former § 17.88.142 in its entirety which pertained to second dwelling units and derived from Ord. 04-164 § 1.  
17.88.145 - Garage and yard sales. 
A.  Purpose. Garage sales or yard sales are permitted in a residential zone subject to the restrictions hereinafter set forth designed to protect the character of residential zones and the peace, privacy, safety and general public welfare of persons within such zones. 
B.  Garage or Yard Sale Defined. A "garage, patio and yard sale" means a sale conducted by any occupant of a residence from any location on the premises in any kind of residential zone of personal property accumulated during the course of ordinary residential living by selling the same to the public. Premises of churches, charitable organizations, schools and other nonprofit organizations are not residences as defined herein and expressly are not subject to the restrictions applicable to a garage, patio or yard sale defined herein. 
C.  Restrictions. A garage, patio or yard sale as hereinabove defined may be conducted only as follows: 
1.  No more than three sales may be conducted on the same property during any period of twelve (12) consecutive months. 
2.  Each sale shall last no more than three consecutive days beginning each day no earlier than eight a.m. and ending no later than six p.m., and shall be held no sooner than ninety (90) calendar days after a prior sale. 
3.  Only one sign advertising the sale is allowed and must be placed on the same property where the sale is being held. No signs on utility poles, traffic control devices, or in the public right-of-way are allowed. The sign can be double-faced, not larger than six square feet, and no higher than four feet. The sign may be placed up to twenty-four (24) hours prior to the sale, and shall be removed immediately following the sale. 
4.  Personal property sold at a sale shall not include secondhand goods obtained for purposes of resale. 
D.  Enforcement. The procedure for enforcement is as follows: 
1.  Any person may submit a complaint to the development services director or his or her designee. 
2.  The development services director or his or her designee shall investigate each complaint and, if warranted, issue a citation or refer the matter to the city attorney for filing of a complaint; provided, however, that the enforcement official shall give only a warning for a first violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 04-161 § 1: Ord. 02-139 § 1)  
17.88.150 - Private stables. 
In districts which do not list livestock as a permitted use, horses and private stables may be permitted subject to the approval of an administrative permit, if the following criteria are met: 
A.  The minimum lot area upon which a horse may be kept is one acre and one horse may be kept for each one acre; 
B.  Stables and paddocks shall be located not less than twenty (20) feet from the side or rear property lines, not less than fifty (50) feet from the front property line and not less than forty (40) feet from any dwelling on the same or adjacent property. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.160 - Temporary trailer. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, a mobile home or travel trailer may be temporarily placed in any district for residential occupancy by the owner of the building site during construction of a one-family or two-family residence; provided the requirements of Section 16.04.110 of the Shasta County Code are met, and one-family or two-family residences are permitted in the district, or in districts in which a use permit is required for such a residence, the use permit is issued. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.165 - Temporary development sales office. 
A residence or model home may be temporarily used as a development sales office, for the sale of one-family residences and undeveloped lots in a new residential development, if it is located within the boundaries of the new residential development, and its use as a sales office ceases when all such residences and lots have been sold. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.170 - Uses requiring an administrative permit in districts permitting a residence. 
With an administrative permit, the uses described in Sections 17.88.220 through 17.88.250 of this chapter may be located in zone districts which permit them, subject to the criteria and limitations specified herein. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. No. 14-233, § I, 5-20-2014)  
17.88.180 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-233 repealed former § 17.88.180 in its entirety which pertained to family care residences and derived from Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part).  
17.88.190 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-233, § I, adopted May 20, 2014, repealed former § 17.88.190 in its entirety which pertained to senior citizen residences and derived from Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part).  
17.88.200 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-233, § I, adopted May 20, 2014, repealed former § 17.88.200 in its entirety which pertained to guest houses and derived from Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part).  
17.88.210 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-233, § I, adopted May 20, 2014, repealed former § 17.88.210 in its entirety which pertained to servant's quarters and derived from Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part).  
17.88.220 - Home occupation. 
A.  A home occupation may be established on a lot in addition to a permitted residential use provided: 
1.  There shall be no exterior evidence of the conduct of a home occupation, including, but not limited to, outside storage, electrical interference, dust, smoke, vibration, noise, odors, fumes or advertising signs of any kind; 
2.  It is conducted in the home, an attached garage or in a residential accessory building; 
3.  The floor space occupied by a home occupation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the floor space of the dwelling unit if located within the dwelling unit, or four hundred (400) square feet if in an attached garage or residential accessory building; 
4.  No items may be displayed or sold on the exterior of the residence or accessory building; 
5.  It shall be conducted only by persons residing at the dwelling unit in which the home occupation exists. No other persons may be engaged in or employed for purposes of a home occupation; 
6.  The number of customer vehicle trips generated by the home occupation is limited as follows: 
a.  If the lot is one acre or less in size, up to four customer vehicle trips may be permitted daily; 
b.  If the lot is larger than one acre in size, up to eight customer vehicle trips may be permitted daily; 
7.  Customer vehicle trips shall be limited to seven a.m. to eight p.m. Monday through Saturday, and eight a.m. to five p.m. Sundays; 
8.  If the home occupation generates more customer vehicle trips than allowed under subsection F of this section, a use permit must be secured in lieu of an administrative permit. 
B.  Staff has the discretion, per Section 17.92.050 of the zoning code, to refer any application for an administrative permit to the planning commission for a public hearing. For home occupation permits subject to a public hearing, the applicant will be charged the fee for a standard administrative permit. 
(Ord. 98-106 § 1: Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.230 - Large day care home. 
A large day care home may be established on a lot, in addition to a permitted residential use, provided: 
A.  The maximum number of children at any time shall be twelve (12). This includes the licensee's children and assistant's children under the age of ten and all other children under the age of eighteen (18); 
B.  It may be located in a one-family residence or mobile home; 
C.  It shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet driving distance of another large day care home; 
D.  No signs are permitted; 
E.  All fire safety requirements shall be met, including a fire safety clearance by the State Fire Marshal; 
F.  A parking and loading area shall be provided, as specified in Chapter 17.86 of this title, except the loading area may be located in a front or side yard that typically is used as a driveway that leads to a garage or parking area. The parking and loading area shall be improved with at least four inches of gravel or cinders; 
G.  It shall have frontage on, and access off of, a paved road. Roads that are constructed for this project shall meet adopted city standards. Existing paved roads, including public roads, shall meet all safety and capacity criteria. If determined to be deficient, improvements to the road may be required. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.240 - Residential accessory building(s) exceeding one thousand square feet. 
A residential accessory building(s) that exceeds combined total of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area may be constructed on a lot in addition to a one-family residence, provided the building(s) shall not be used for human habitation or for any commercial purposes, unless otherwise provided in this division. This provision, signed by the applicant, shall be recorded prior to issuance of this permit. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.250 - Mobile homes in an unclassified district. 
A mobile home, in lieu of the first one-family residence, may be placed on a lot located in an unclassified (U) district, provided: 
A.  The mobile home complies with all applicable provisions of the city development standards; 
B.  Considering all relevant evidence on the character of existing residential uses in the vicinity, the effect of topographic and other natural features on the visibility of the mobile home from these uses, and the distance between the proposed site of the mobile home and these uses, no substantially detrimental aesthetic impact will result from installation of the mobile home. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.260 - Uses requiring use permit in districts permitting a residence. 
If a use permit is issued, the uses described in Section 17.88.270 of this chapter may be located in districts which permit them, subject to the criteria and limitations specified herein. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.270 - Bed and breakfast guest facility. 
A bed and breakfast guest facility may utilize a portion of a one-family residence, provided: 
A.  If the lot is less than one acre, there shall be no more than two guest rooms. On lots over one acre, there shall not be more than four guest rooms; 
B.  There shall be no more than two adults per guest room; 
C.  The guest rooms may be in a detached accessory building if located in a district that permits guest houses. Such building shall be located behind the primary residence, shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height (unless it is existing), and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal residence; 
D.  Neither the principal residence nor the guest rooms shall be a mobile home; 
E.  The owner shall occupy the primary residence; 
F.  The guest rooms shall not have individual kitchen facilities; 
G.  Meals shall be limited to overnight guests; 
H.  One sign, not to exceed two square feet, shall be permitted; 
I.  Separate bed and breakfast guest facilities shall not be within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet driving distance of each other; 
J.  Off-street parking shall be provided, as specified by Chapter 17.86 of this title. The parking area shall be located in an inconspicuous area and shall be surfaced to city standards; 
K.  The facility shall not interfere with or adversely impact surrounding residential uses; 
L.  No employees are permitted other than those residing in the dwelling unit; 
M.  The requirements of the Division of Environmental Health shall be met. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.271 - Logging contractor's yard. 
A logging contractor's yard may be maintained provided: 
A.  A use permit is obtained; 
B.  The parcel size is at least five acres for logging contractor's yards established after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. Logging contractor's uses that existed prior to this section on smaller than five-acre parcels may continue with a use permit; 
C.  The parcel is located at or above one thousand (1,000) foot elevation, mean sea level; 
D.  All logging trucks and related heavy logging equipment are owned by the person or persons residing on the parcel; 
E.  The parcel is not used as a truck terminal, truck yard, contractor's yard or other similar industrial or commercial use; 
F.  A total of no more than five logging trucks are allowed. Related heavy logging equipment may also be allowed. The maximum number of trucks and pieces of equipment will be determined during the use permit process by the size and location of the parcel, the use's impact on surrounding roads, the visibility of the storage area to neighbors and the general public and the likelihood that smoke, dust, odors or fumes will interfere with the neighbor's use or enjoyment of their property; 
G.  Noise levels at the boundary of the parcel shall not exceed sixty-five (65) dba to avoid excessive disturbance to neighboring properties; 
H.  Motorized equipment and vehicles and pneumatic repair tools and equipment shall not be operated between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. provided, however, that this subsection shall not preclude the normal driving of the vehicles to and from the parcel; 
I.  Logging trucks may be kept on the parcel year round. Related logging equipment may be stored on the parcel no more than a total of six months per year; 
J.  The logging trucks and related heavy logging equipment shall not be stored or repaired within any required front or side yard setback area; 
K.  There shall be no storage, service, maintenance or repair of any logging truck or related logging equipment not owned or leased by the person or persons residing on the parcel; 
L.  No person shall be regularly employed on site for the purpose of maintaining any of the equipment or vehicles; 
M.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to equipment and vehicles normally used in bona fide agricultural operations. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Article III. - Other Special Uses 
 
17.88.280 - Storage of mobile homes and recreational vehicles. 
The following requirements apply to storage of mobile homes and recreational vehicles as special uses; 
A.  A mobile home shall not be placed on a lot until a mobile home installation permit is issued; 
B.  A recreational vehicle may be stored on a lot provided it is not used for human habitation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.88.290 - Adult entertainment businesses. 
A.  Purpose. The city council finds that "adult entertainment" businesses, because of their very nature, are recognized as having objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods. The primary purpose of the regulation is to prevent concentration or clustering of these businesses in any one area. For the purposes of this section, the definitions set out in subsections B through D of this section apply. 
B.  Adult Entertainment Businesses Defined. "Adult entertainment businesses" means any business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." "Adult entertainment businesses" includes the following defined terms: 
"Adult book store" means an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
"Adult mini motion picture theater" means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
"Adult motion picture arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
"Adult motion picture theater" means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depiction, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
"Cabaret" means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, "go-go" dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
"Massage parlor" means any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with "specified sexual activities" or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto exposes "specified anatomical areas." 
"Model studio" means any business where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display "specific anatomical areas" are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity. 
"Sexual encounter center" means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in "specified sexual activities" or exposing "specified anatomical areas." 
C.  Specified Sexual Activities. "Specified sexual activities" includes the following: 
1.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship; 
2.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
3.  Use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or ejaculation; 
4.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
5.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
6.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a human being; 
7.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
D.  Specified Anatomical Areas. "Specified anatomical areas" includes less than completely and opaquely covered: 
1.  Mature human genitals; 
2.  Mature human buttocks; 
3.  Mature human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
4.  Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
E.  Regulation of Location. 
1.  In those land use districts where the "adult entertainment" businesses regulated by this section would otherwise be permitted uses, it shall be unlawful to establish any such "adult entertainment" business if the location is: 
a.  Within five hundred (500) feet of any area zoned for residential use, or 
b.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other "adult entertainment" business, or 
c.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any public or private school, park, playground, public building, church, any noncommercial establishment operated by a bona fide religious organization or any establishment likely to be used by minors; 
2.  The "establishment" of any "adult entertainment" business shall include the opening of such a business as a new business, the relocation of such business or the conversion of an existing business location to any "adult entertainment" business use. 
F.  Waiver of Locational Provisions. 
1.  Any property owner or his authorized agent may apply to the planning commission for a waiver of any locational provisions contained in this chapter. The planning commission, after a hearing, may waive any locational provision, if all of the following findings are made: 
a.  The proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties, and the spirit and intent of this chapter will be observed, and 
b.  The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a "skid row" area, and 
c.  The establishment of an additional regulated use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation, and 
d.  All applicable regulations of this code will be observed; 
2.  The procedure for this hearing shall be the same as that provided in Section 17.92.020 of this title, with, among other matters, the same notice requirements, the same right of appeal to the city council and the same fees payable by the applicant. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.90 - NONCONFORMING USES 
Sections: 
 
17.90.010 - Generally. 
A.  Intent. Within the districts established by this title or amendments that may later be adopted, there exists structures, buildings, mobile homes and uses that were lawful when established, but which do not conform to subsequently established or amended districts. Such structures and uses are declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses in the districts and are, therefore, nonconforming. The intent of this chapter is to control and improve such nonconforming uses as long as they exist, until they are brought into conformity, or are removed or terminated. For the purpose of this chapter, any reference to a structure also includes any building; any reference to building permits includes mobile home installation permits. 
B.  Use Permit Required. Any structure or use for which a use permit is required by the terms of this title shall be considered nonconforming and shall not be enlarged, altered or extended to occupy a greater land or building area unless and until a use permit is obtained in accordance with Section 17.92.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.90.020 - Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
The following provisions apply to nonconforming buildings and structures in the city: 
A.  Health and Safety. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any additions or alterations to a nonconforming structure as may be reasonably necessary to comply with any lawful order of any public authority made in the interest of the public health, safety, welfare or morals. 
B.  Previously Approved Building Permits. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in plans, construction or designed use of any structure for which a building permit has been issued and upon which actual construction or preparation for placement was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of the ordinance or amended ordinance which makes the structure nonconforming. Actual construction is defined to be the actual placing of construction materials in their permanent position, fastened in a permanent manner; actual work in excavating a basement, or the demolition or removal of an existing structure begun preparatory to rebuilding; provided, in all cases, actual construction work shall be diligently carried on until the completion of the building or structure involved. 
C.  Maintenance and Repairs. Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be made to any nonconforming structure, provided no structural alterations are made, and provided the work does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the appraised value thereof, according to the assessor's records, in any one calendar year period. Other repairs or alterations may be permitted, provided a use permit shall first be obtained in each case. 
D.  Enlargements. A nonconforming structure may not be added to or enlarged unless the nonconforming structure, the additions or enlargements thereto, and the use thereof are all made to conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
E.  Relocation. A nonconforming structure shall not be moved to any other lot or to any other portion of the lot on which it is presently located unless, as a result of the move, the structure shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it will be located after the move. 
F.  Reconstruction. A nonconforming structure which is damaged or partially destroyed by any reason, to the extent of not more than seventy-five (75) percent of the appraised value at that time, may be restored and the occupancy or use of such structure or part thereof, which existed at the time of the partial destruction, may be continued or resumed, provided the total cost of such restoration does not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the appraised value of the structure at the time of such damage, and that the restoration is started within period of one year and is diligently carried on to completion. In the event the damage destruction exceeds seventy-five (75) percent the appraised value of the nonconforming structure, no repair or reconstruction shall be made unless every portion of such structure is made to conform to all of the regulations the district in which it is located. 
G.  Nonconforming Historic Structure. Repairs, alterations and additions necessary for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation or continued use of a nonconforming historic structure may be made when authorized to the development services director or his or her designee and building official (or designee), provided: 
1.  The structure has been designated by official action of the city council, state of California or United States Government as having special historical or architectural significance; 
2.  Any unsafe conditions are corrected; 
3.  The use(s) therein shall be in conformance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.90.030 - Nonconforming uses of buildings and structures. 
The following provisions apply to nonconforming use of buildings and structures in the city: 
A.  Change to a Conforming Use. The use of a nonconforming structure may be changed to any other use which is permitted in the district in which the structure is located, except as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Change to Same or More Restrictive Nonconforming Use. The nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to a use of the same or more restricted nature, provided a use permit is issued. 
C.  Expansion of a Nonconforming Use. The nonconforming use of a portion of a structure may not be expanded to other portions of the structure. 
D.  Abandonment. Any nonconforming structure for which a use is discontinued for a continuous period of more than six months shall not thereafter be occupied unless the nonconforming structure is brought into conformance with the district in which it is located and the new use conforms to the regulations for the district in which the structure is located. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.90.040 - Nonconforming uses of land. 
The following provisions apply to nonconforming use of land in the city: 
A.  Continuation. A nonconforming use of land may be continued, provided: 
1.  The use shall not be expanded or extended in any way on the same or adjoining land, 
2.  The use shall not be changed, except to a use which conforms to the regulations of the district in which said land is located, 
3.  If the use is discontinued for a period of six months or more, it shall not be reestablished thereafter. Any new use shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which said land is located; 
B.  Junk Yards and Wrecking Yards. In R-1, R-2, R-3, R-R, R-L, C-1, C-2 and C-M districts, nonconforming junk yards or wrecking yards shall be discontinued within one year after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or within one year from the date on which such use became nonconforming, whichever is later. Nonconforming junk yards or wrecking yards in all other districts shall be discontinued within two years after said effective date or within two years from the date on which the use became nonconforming, whichever is later. In any case, in lieu of discontinuance, nonconforming junk yards or wrecking yards existing on the effective date of this provision may be converted to screened junk yards or wrecking yards, even though the use is not otherwise permitted in that district, and may continue as a nonconforming use, subject to the rules applicable to nonconforming uses. Extensions of time, within which a nonconforming junk yard or wrecking yard may be terminated or converted, for a period commensurate with the investment involved, as shown by the owner, may be granted by the development services director or his or her designee. Applications for extensions of time shall be applied for and processed in the same manner as use permits. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.90.050 - Nonconforming off-street parking. 
Where off-street parking or loading facilities do not conform to the provisions of this title, or where no such facilities have been provided for structures constructed prior to the effective date of this title, the structure shall not be altered or enlarged to create additional dwelling units, seating capacity, floor area or guest rooms, nor may additional facilities be provided within the building, until after the requirements for off-street parking and loading space have been complied with. These provisions shall not apply to members of a duly formed parking district. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.92 - APPLICATIONS AND PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
17.92.010 - Variances. 
Variances from the terms of any regulations established by the zoning plan may be approved as set forth in this chapter. 
A.  An application for a variance shall be made to the planning division on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee, and shall be accompanied by a statement, plans or other evidence showing: 
1.  There are special circumstances applicable to the applicant's property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, and as a consequence of these circumstances, the strict application of the zoning regulations deprives the property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and in the same zone district; and 
2.  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights of the applicant; and 
3.  The variance will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, adversely affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of the applicant, and will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood. 
B.  No application shall be accepted as complete unless and until all fees, the application form and related information are filed with and accepted by the planning division. Failure of any applicant to respond, within thirty (30) days of mailing, to any notice that his application is incomplete or to any request to clarify, amplify, correct or otherwise supplement the application shall be deemed an abandonment of the variance application, and no further action shall be taken upon it. 
C.  All applications shall be reviewed pursuant to and for compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) under procedures established by the city council. 
D.  All applications shall be reviewed by city staff. The report of city staff, including any recommended conditions of approval, shall be forwarded to the planning commission prior to the hearing on the application. 
E.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each application after the application is accepted as complete. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, shall be given by publication, as required by Government Code Section 65090, and by mail, as required by Government Code Section 65091. Failure to receive the notice required by Government Code Section 65091 shall not invalidate any action on the application. The city council may, by resolution, provide for additional notice. Any hearing may be continued to a specific time, date and place without further public notice. 
F.  The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny approval of the application by resolution. A resolution approving a variance application shall clearly describe the variance, set forth all conditions of approval, and identify which conditions, if any, must be met prior to use of the variance. No variance shall be granted unless findings of fact are made that all of the criteria in subsection A of this section apply. The planning commission may require security it deems reasonably necessary to insure compliance with any conditions imposed. 
G.  The granting of any variance may be conditioned upon the dedication of land or the posting of a bond to guarantee the installation of public improvements, provided the dedication or public improvements are reasonably related to the use for which the variance is granted. No variance shall be granted unless conditions are imposed that assure that the variance will not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone district in which the subject property is located. No variance shall be granted which authorizes a use or activity which is not expressly authorized by the zone district regulations. Every variance granted under this section is revocable. 
H.  After the time for filing an appeal has expired, or if an appeal is timely filed, after the decision on the appeal, the development services director or his or her designee shall mail or deliver to the applicant or his agent a copy of the executed resolution on the decision. A resolution approving or affirming the approval of or reversing the disapproval of a variance application shall permit the applicant to vary from the applicable zoning regulations to the extent authorized in the resolution, provided any precedent conditions imposed under subsection F of this section or on appeal have first been met. 
I.  No building permit or mobile home installation permit for which a variance is required shall be issued until the time to appeal approval of the variance has expired, or in case of appeal, until the approval has been affirmed or the disapproval has been reversed by the city council. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.92.020 - Use permits. 
Use permits may be approved as set forth in this section for any of the uses or purposes for which use permits are required by this title. 
A.  An application for a use permit shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee, and shall be accompanied by a clear and concise description of the use and accompanying activities, and shall contain plans or maps showing the details of the proposed use, building or facilities. 
B.  No application shall be accepted as complete unless and until all fees, the application form and related information are filed with and accepted by the planning division. Failure of any applicant to respond, within thirty (30) days of mailing, to any notice that his application is incomplete or to any request to clarify, amplify, correct or otherwise supplement the application shall be deemed an abandonment of the use permit application and no further action shall be taken upon it. 
C.  All applications shall be reviewed pursuant to and for compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) under procedures established by the city council. 
D.  All applications shall be reviewed by city staff. The report of city staff, including any recommended conditions of approval, shall be forwarded to the planning commission prior to the hearing on the application. 
E.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each application after the application is accepted as complete. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, shall be given by publication, as required by Government Code Section 65090, and by mail, as required by Government Code Section 65091. Failure to receive the notice required by Government Code Section 65091 shall not invalidate any action on the application. The city council may, by resolution, provide for additional notice. Any hearing may be continued to a specific time, date and place without further public notice. 
F.  The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny approval of the application by resolution. A resolution approving a use permit application shall clearly describe the uses permitted, set forth all conditions of approval, and identify which conditions, if any, must be met prior to use of the use permit. No use permit shall be granted unless findings of fact are made that the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use, building or facilities applied for will not, under the circumstances of the particular use, be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city; provided, if any proposed use, building or facility is necessary for the public health, safety or general welfare, the findings shall so state. The planning commission may require security it deems reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with any conditions imposed. 
G.  The granting of any use permit may be conditioned upon the dedication of land or the posting of a bond to guarantee the installation of public improvements, provided the dedication or public improvements are reasonably related to the use for which the use permit is granted. Every use permit granted under this section is revocable. Any use permit granted under this section may be limited by the Planning Commission to a term set when the use permit is granted. The establishment, maintenance or operation of any use under this section shall cease at the end of the term, if any, of the use permit. No use permit granted under this section may be renewed, but a new use permit may be granted upon terms and conditions appropriate at the time of such grant. 
H.  After the time for filing an appeal has expired, or if an appeal is timely filed, after the decision on the appeal, the development services director or his or her designee shall mail or deliver to the applicant or his agent a copy of the executed resolution on the decision. A resolution approving or affirming the approval of or reversing the disapproval of a use permit application shall constitute the use permit and shall permit the applicant to engage in the use or undertake the activity described, provided any precedent conditions imposed under subsection E of this section or on appeal have first been met. 
I.  No building permit or mobile home installation permit for which a use permit is required shall be issued until the time to appeal approval of the use permit has expired, or in case of appeal, until the approval has been affirmed or the disapproval has been reversed by the city council. 
J.  Any use permit, including the term of the permit and conditions of approval, may be amended upon a showing of good cause by any interested party or by the planning commission on its own motion. The provisions of subsections A through F of this section shall apply to any amendments proposed by an interested person. The provisions of subsections C through F of this section shall apply to any amendment initiated by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.92.030 - Variance and use permit— Appeals. 
A.  Any interested person may appeal a decision of the planning commission to approve, conditionally approve or deny an application for a variance or use permit, or to amend or add conditions, or to revoke a variance or use permit by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within five calendar days of the decision. The notice of appeal shall identify, by application number, the variance or use permit which is the subject of the appeal; shall state the action, finding or determination, and the date thereof, from which the appeal is taken; and shall specifically set forth the grounds upon which the appeal is based. No appeal shall be deemed to be filed unless any required fee is submitted to the city clerk with the notice of appeal. 
B.  The city clerk shall furnish copies of the notice of appeal to each city council member, the development services director, city assistant planner, city attorney, and the applicant, permittee or holder of the affected variance or use permit. 
C.  The city council shall set the matter for public hearing and the city clerk shall give notice of the hearing in the same manner as notice of the hearing before the planning commission was given. The city clerk shall notify the appellant and all persons to whom the notice of appeal is to be furnished of the date, time and place of the hearing. Unless specifically authorized by the city council, any hearing shall be limited to the grounds specifically stated in the notice of appeal. 
D.  The record on appeal shall consist of a copy of the application and all related documents; the environmental assessment, including any environmental impact report, if one has been prepared; the city staff report and recommendations; the minutes of the hearing before the planning commission, including a fair summary of all testimony received; and all other documentary, pictorial or other physical evidence received at the hearing. 
E.  The city council shall review the record on appeal and any additional relevant information which may have been received at the hearing before it to determine whether the planning commission exceeded its authority, whether there was a fair hearing before it or whether it abused its discretion to the prejudice of the appellant. Whenever the evidence before the council supports any findings or determination which prohibits approval under Sections 17.92.010(F) or 17.92.020(F) of this chapter, the council shall not affirm the approval or reverse the disapproval of a variance or use permit unless appropriate conditions sufficient to overcome all such findings are included in the decision. The council may continue any hearing to a specific time, date and place without further public notice. The council may, in its discretion, refer any application back to the planning commission for further review and report. The council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, determination or condition appealed. The action of the council shall be final. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.92.040 - Variance and use permit— Revocation, expiration and surrender. 
A.  Whenever the development services director or his or her designee determines that one or more grounds exist for revocation of a variance or use permit, the planning commission may set the matter for hearing before it by resolution of intention to revoke the variance or use permit. The holder of the variance or the permittee shall be given notice by mail of the time and place of the hearing at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
B.  Grounds for revocation include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Noncompliance with conditions of approval; 
2.  Violation of any law in connection with the variance or use; 
3.  Expansion of the use or variance without a new variance or use permit or amendment to the existing variance or use permit; 
4.  Exercising the variance or conducting the use in a manner that threatens or is injurious to public health or safety or constitutes a nuisance; 
5.  False or erroneous information in the record as to a material matter or significant issue regarding the variance or use permit. 
C.  The planning commission may revoke or decline to revoke the variance or use permit. In lieu of revocation, the planning commission may amend existing conditions of approval or impose additional conditions, as appropriate. 
D.  Every variance or use permit expires and is null and void without further action by the city if the activity or the use for which the variance or use permit was granted has not been actively and substantially commenced within two years of the date of its approval, or the date the approval was affirmed or the disapproval was reversed on appeal. The development services director or his or her designee has the authority to declare, based on length of time and operation of law, the variance or use permit abandoned, and, therefore, null and void. 
E.  The planning commission may extend the time for commencement of the use or activity when the variance or use permit is approved, or during the two years following approval or affirmation of approval of the variance or use permit, if an application for an extension of time is made to the planning division prior to expiration of the variance or use permit. The decision on an application for an extension of time is ministerial and a public hearing on the application is not required. An extension of time shall be approved if the permittee shows reasonable cause for the extension. Reasonable cause exists if the applicant shows that circumstances beyond his control have prevented him from taking sufficient action. The decision on an application may be appealed to the city council under the provisions of Section 17.92.030 of this chapter, but a public hearing is not required on the appeal. 
F.  The time limitations imposed under subsections D and E of this section shall not include any period during which litigation is actively pursued challenging the validity of the approval of a variance or use permit. 
G.  The holder of a variance or use permit may surrender it to the planning division at any time and thereafter shall cease to engage in, operate or maintain the use. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.92.050 - Administrative permits. 
An administrative permit may be approved for any of the uses for which administrative permits are required by this division, as set forth herein. 
A.  An application for an administrative permit shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee, and shall be accompanied by the following: 
1.  A clear and concise description of the use and accompanying activities; 
2.  Plans, maps or other documents showing the details of the proposed use, building or facilities; and 
3.  Information demonstrating compliance with the criteria applicable to the proposed use. 
B.  No application shall be accepted as complete unless and until all fees, the application form and related information are filed with and accepted by the planning division. Failure of any applicant to respond, within thirty (30) days of mailing, to any notice that the application is incomplete or to any request to clarify, amplify, correct or otherwise supplement the application shall be deemed an abandonment of the administrative permit application and no further action shall be taken upon it. 
C.  All applications shall be reviewed by city staff. The report of city staff, including any recommended conditions of approval, shall be forwarded to the development services director or his or her designee prior to the director's decision on the application. 
D.  The development services director or his or her designee shall consider approval of the application after the application is accepted as complete. 
1.  If the director determines that the proposed use appears to meet all criteria applicable to the proposed use, the director shall provide notice of the proposed approval. The notice shall include a general explanation of the matter being considered, a general description of the area to be affected, and a deadline for submitting written comments on the application. The notice shall be given by publication, as required by Government Code Section 65090, and by mail, as required by Government Code Section 65091. Failure to receive the notice required by Government Code Section 65091 shall not invalidate any action on the application. The city council may, by resolution, provide for additional notice. The director shall consider any comments received in determining whether all applicable criteria are met. 
2.  If the development services director or his or her designee determines that the proposed use does not meet all criteria applicable to the proposed use, the director shall deny the application. 
3.  The development services director or his or her designee may refer any administrative permit proposal to the planning commission for a decision when it is determined that the nature of the project, or the existence of a policy question, requires such referral. If a decision to approve or deny the permit application requires the exercise of substantial discretion, then the application shall be referred to the planning commission for a decision following a noticed public hearing. The planning division may require the payment of an additional fee to cover the cost of such referral, as established by ordinance of the city council. 
E.  The granting of any administrative permit may be conditioned upon the dedication of land or the posting of a bond to guarantee the installation of public improvements, provided the dedication or public improvements are reasonable related to the use for which the administrative permit is granted. 
F.  Any administrative permit granted under this section may be limited to a term set when the administrative permit is granted. The establishment, maintenance or operation of any use under this section shall cease at the end of the term, if any, of the administrative permit. No administrative permit granted under this section may be renewed, but a new administrative permit may be granted upon terms and conditions appropriate at the time of such grant. 
G.  Any interested person may appeal the decision of the development services director or his or her designee to the planning commission. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. Such appeals shall follow the same procedures applicable to variance and use permit appeals. 
H.  Every administrative permit issued under this section is revocable. Whenever the development services director or his or her designee determines that one or more grounds exist for revocation of an administrative permit, the planning commission may set the matter for hearing before it by resolution of intention to revoke the administrative permit. The provisions of this title governing the revocation and abandonment of variances and use permits and all references to use permits in those provisions shall be deemed to be references to administrative permits. 
I.  Every administrative permit expires and is automatically null and void without further action by the city if the activity or use for which the administrative permit was granted has not been actively and substantially commenced within two years of the date of its approval, or the date the approval was affirmed or the disapproval was reversed on appeal. 
J.  The development services director or his or her designee may extend the time for commencement of the use or activity when the administrative permit is approved, or during the two years following approval or affirmation of approval of the administrative permit, if an application for an extension of time is made to the planning division prior to expiration of the administrative permit. The decision on an application for an extension of time is ministerial and a public hearing on the application is not required. An extension of time shall be approved if the permittee shows reasonable cause for the extension. Reasonable cause exists if the applicant shows that circumstances beyond his control have prevented him from taking sufficient action. The decision on an application may be appealed to the planning commission under the provisions of Section 17.92.030 of this chapter, but a public hearing is not required on the appeal. 
K.  The time limitations imposed under subsections I and J of this section shall not include any period during which litigation is actively pursued challenging the validity of the approval of an administrative permit. 
L.  The holder of an administrative permit may surrender it to the planning division at any time and thereafter shall cease to engage in, operate or maintain the use. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.92.070 - Plan lines. 
A.  Plan lines (i.e., future road width lines) shall be established in order to do the following: 
1.  Reduce damage to property values resulting from inadequate provisions for traffic thoroughfares; 
2.  Promote the public welfare and convenience; 
3.  Serve as a guide for the development of streets and highways; 
4.  Provide a guide for capital outlay of street and highway improvements to the city; 
5.  Provide a source of information for residents and developers in the city. 
B.  Plan lines shall be initiated by adoption of a resolution of intention by the city council. 
C.  Plan lines shall be designated on maps that show all property lines and buildings within and adjacent to the project area, and shall show all existing and proposed right-of-way widths, as well as a cross section of the proposed road. Plan lines shall define or show the land areas required for future streets, street extensions, realignments or street widening by lines dimensioned from existing right-of-way lines, actual or established street centerlines, or by ties to existing monuments, property lines or corners. 
D.  All proposed plan line maps shall be reviewed pursuant to and for compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act under procedures established by the city council. The planning division shall prepare an analysis of the consistency or inconsistency of the proposed plan line with the general plan. The planning division shall also prepare an analysis of the effect of the proposed plan line on any specific plan applicable to the real property to which the plan line is proposed to apply. 
E.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each plan line initiated under this section. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, shall be given by publication, as required by Government Code Section 65090, and by mail as prescribed by Government Code Section 65991. Failure to receive the notice required by Government Code Section 65091 shall not invalidate any action on the proposed plan line. Any hearing may be continued. If a hearing is continued to a specific time, date and place, no further notice of the hearing is required, unless the development services director or his or her designee determines otherwise. 
F.  Additional notice of any plan line map may be given if the development services director or his or her designee deems it necessary or desirable, and shall be given if the city council so directs. 
G.  After the hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision in the form of a written resolution which shall include a recommendation to the city council for action on the proposed plan line maps, the reasons for the recommendation, and the relationship of the proposed plan line maps to the general plan and any applicable specific plan. The development services director or his or her designee shall cause a copy of the resolution to be filed with the city clerk within ten working days after its adoption. 
H.  Following the planning commission's recommendation on a plan line map, the city council shall set the matter for a public hearing. The city council may adopt the proposed plan line map or any part thereof, in such a form or with such modifications as the city council may deem to be appropriate. 
I.  No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, altered, replaced or added to within adopted plan lines. Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and results inconsistent with the general purposes of this section may result from the strict application of this section, variances may be granted, as provided in Section 17.92.010 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.92.080 - Zoning plan amendments. 
A.  The regulations of any zone district established pursuant to this title may be amended by changing the boundaries of districts, reclassifying land from one district to another district or districts or combinations thereof, or by changing any other provisions thereof whenever the amendments would further the public necessity, convenience and general welfare. 
B.  An amendment is initiated by the city council or the planning commission by adoption of a resolution of intention to make the amendment or by an application for amendment made in writing on a form prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee. An application shall be accompanied by statements, plans or maps required to show the necessity for and scope of the proposed amendment as may be prescribed by the development services director or his or her designee. 
C.  No application shall be accepted as complete unless and until all fees, the application form and related information are filed with and accepted by the planning division. Failure of any applicant to respond, within thirty (30) days of mailing, to any notice that the application is incomplete or to any request to clarity, amplify, correct or otherwise supplement the application shall be deemed an abandonment of the amendment application, and no further action shall be taken upon it. 
D.  All applications shall be reviewed pursuant to and for compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) under procedures established by the city council. 
E.  All applications shall be reviewed by city staff. The report of city staff shall be forwarded to the planning commission prior to the hearing on the application. 
F.  The planning division shall prepare an analysis of the consistency or inconsistency of the proposed amendment with the general plan, and any applicable specific plan. 
G.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each proposed amendment. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, shall be given by publication, as required by Government Code Section 65090, and by mail as required by Government Code Section 65091. Failure to receive the notice required by Government Code Section 65091 shall not invalidate any action on the proposed amendment. Any hearing may be continued. If a hearing is continued to a specific time, date and place, no further notice of the hearing is required, unless the development services director or his or her designee determines otherwise. Additional notice of any amendment may be given if the development services director or his or her designee deems it necessary or desirable, and shall be given if the city council so directs. 
H.  After the hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision, in the form of a written resolution, which shall include a recommendation to the city council for action on the proposed amendment, the reasons for the recommendation, and the relationship of the proposed ordinance or amendment to the general plan and any applicable specific plan. The development services director or his or her designee shall cause a report of the planning commission's action to be filed with the city clerk within ten working days after the planning commission's decision. 
I.  If the planning commission has recommended approval of the proposed amendment, the city council shall set the matter for public hearing before it. If the proposed amendment would change property from one district to another, and the planning commission has recommended against adoption of the amendment, the council need take no further action on the amendment unless an interested person files a written request for a hearing with the city clerk within five days after the commission's recommendation is filed with the clerk. The notice provisions of subsection G of this section apply to hearings held under this subsection. 
J.  The city council may approve or disapprove any recommendation of the planning commission, provided any modification of the proposed ordinance or amendment by the council, which was not considered by the planning commission during its hearing, shall first be referred to the planning commission for its recommendation. The planning commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing on the proposed modification. If the planning commission fails to make its recommendation within forty (40) days after the council refers it to the planning commission, or any longer period the council may set, the modification shall be deemed approved by the planning commission. 
K.  The city council or the planning commission may, by resolution, abandon any proceedings for an amendment initiated by its own resolution of intention, provided the proposed amendment is then pending before it for consideration and provided that any public hearing on the amendment for which notice has been given is first held. An applicant may withdraw his application at any time, provided any public hearing on the amendment, for which notice has been given, is first held, and the amendment is not required as a condition of approval of a development project. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
Chapter 17.94 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
17.94.010 - General plan consistency. 
Where any regulations specified in this title and any portion of any element of the general plan are inconsistent, the general plan shall prevail. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.94.020 - Zone district boundary interpretation. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the zoning maps, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines, such lines shall be construed to follow the center of the street or alley or along the lot line if the lot line is not also a street boundary; 
B.  Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverts shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street or alley; 
C.  For property described by a district boundary, the locations of such boundaries, unless indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map; 
D.  In all other cases where any uncertainty exists, the planning commission shall determine the location of boundaries. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.94.030 - Zone district land use interpretation. 
A.  Where a proposed land use is not specifically listed by the applicable zone district within which the property proposed for the use is located, the development services director or his or her designee may determine that the use is a permitted use, or the use is permitted if a use permit is first secured, if the following findings are made: 
1.  The proposed unlisted use is similar in character and impact to a listed use; and 
2.  The proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use including determining where it is allowed, what permits are required, and what standards affect its establishment. 
B.  The decision of the development services director or his or her designee may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with subsection C of Section 17.94.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.94.040 - Combining uses. 
More than one permitted use may be permitted on one lot in any zone district, provided there is no conflict between the uses, and further provided that the applicable zone requirements and city development standards are met. Each use must meet the lot area requirements without using the lot area requirements of another use. For lots for which a use permit has been approved, the only uses allowed are those specifically described by the use permit. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.94.050 - Exemption from solar energy and shade control. 
Pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 25985, the city declares itself exempt from the provisions of Chapter 12 (commencing with Section 25908) to Division 15 of the Public Resources Code (Solar Shade Control Act) relating to solar energy and shade control. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.94.060 - Administrative enforcement. 
A.  General Prohibitions. No person shall use any real property in violation of the regulations of this division that are applicable to the property. The erection, construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, movement, maintenance, establishment or operation of any building, structure, premises or use contrary to the provisions of this title is unlawful and a violation of this code. 
B.  Administrative Limitations. All city officers, departments and employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits, licenses or other entitlement shall do so subject to the requirements of this title. No permit, license or other entitlement shall be issued or approved for any purpose or in any manner which conflicts with the provisions of this title. Any permit, license or other entitlement issued in conflict with any provision of this title is null and void as of the date of issuance or approval. 
C.  Enforcement Authority. 
1.  The development services director or his or her designee is the enforcing officer for the provisions of this title. 
2.  Any administrative decision of the development services director or his or her designee regarding the interpretation of the provisions of this title or any condition of approval imposed pursuant to this division shall be made in writing whenever requested by any person interested in the interpretation. The written interpretation shall be delivered personally or by mail to that person. 
3.  The director's decision may be appealed to the planning commission within ten days of the date of delivery or mailing of the decision by filing a written appeal with the planning division. The appeal shall specifically set forth the grounds upon which it is based. The commission shall hear the appeal and the appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard and to present evidence at the hearing. The commission shall render its decision in writing to the development services director or his or her designee and shall concurrently mail a copy of its decision to the appellant. A public hearing is not required for any appeal heard under this subsection. Pendency of an appeal under this subsection shall not affect the filing of any legal action or pursuit of any other remedy to enforce the provisions of this title or any condition imposed pursuant to this title. 
D.  Violations as an Infraction or Misdemeanor. 
1.  A violation of any regulatory or prohibitory provision of this title is an infraction, unless any provision of law establishes the violation as a misdemeanor, or the district attorney files a complaint charging the violation as a misdemeanor. 
2.  A separate offense is committed for each and every transaction, event or occurrence in violation of any regulatory or prohibitory provision of this division. A separate offense is committed for each and every day or part of a day during which any such violation is caused, committed, continued or permitted. Each offense is punishable separately from every other offense. Every violation of any regulatory or prohibitory provision of this title is expressly declared to be a public nuisance. 
E.  Enforcement Procedure. 
1.  Every enforcing officer may use administrative processes, such as notices of noncompliance, warning letters, stop orders or cease and desist orders, in lieu of or prior to enforcing any provision of this code, if the officer determines that the process may result in compliance with this code at less expense to the city. 
2.  Pursuant to Penal Code Section 19d and the provisions of Section 836.5 and Chapter 5c (commencing with Section 853.5) of Title 3 of part 2 of the Penal Code, every enforcing officer may cite any person for violation of this code whenever the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has caused, committed, continued or permitted any violation of this code. 
F.  Right of Entry. In the performance of their functions, planning agency personnel may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys, provided that the entries, examinations and surveys do not interfere with the lawful use of the land by those persons lawfully entitled to the possession thereof. 
G.  Enforcement Costs. Whenever a judicial action or proceeding is brought to abate or enjoin any violation of this title, the city may recover in that action or proceeding all costs and expenses incurred in detecting, investigating, abating and prosecuting the violation. 
(Ord. 97-99 § 1 (part))  
17.94.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-237, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 2014, repealed former § 17.94.070 in its entirety which pertained to temporary construction activities for public works and derived from Ord. No. 97-99, § 1. 
